
          Tribute to Gwendolyn Cherry
                  By StaffStaff
          Vol. 1, No. 6, 1979, pp. 2-3
          
           On February 7, Gwen Cherry, the Vice-President of the Southern
Regional Council, died in an automobile accident in Tallahassee,
Florida. Her death leaves the Council without one of its valued
officers and a dear close friend.
          As a state leader in Florida, Gwen Cherry set new standards and
precedents for the discussion of issues in government relating to
Blacks, other minorities, women and poor of her state. As a national
leader, Gwen inspired many with her singular devotion and joyful
energy. She raised issues, took positions, and conducted the business
of justice without fear of personal loss or concern for monetary
reward.
          As an officer and member of the Council, Gwen led the organization
from a time of increasing despair and disbelief to a beginning period
of hard work, faith in human nature

and potential, and no-nonsense judgment tempered by humor and
tolerance.
          While often overworked, under-regarded and too often unseen, Gwen
Cherry was an example of accomplishment and belief in principled
equality which many Blacks and women immediately emulated and
admired. Yet for everyone of any race or sex--Black or White, male
or female--she represented the virtue of patience untouched by hate,
the belief in freedom unbridled by cynicism, and a very unique insight
into the tragic-humor of people who resist the call for action.
          As a lawyer, Gwen Cherry represented the interest of clients and
causes in court. Still, she spent as much time developing the
potential of cooperation as exercising the art of an adversary.
          As the first Black woman in the Florida Legislature, she was the
spokeswoman at home and elsewhere for feminism and equal
rights. Yet, she was much more to many more. Gwen Cherry stood alone to
say "nay" when the lynching mob of the Florida Legislature pushed
through the death penalty. She stood alone in saying "nay" when boards
and commissions were filled without Blacks and women. She stood alone
and said "nay" when the state rushed helter skelter to push Black and
poor students out of the schools in the name of competency. Gwen
Cherry stood alone when she proposed numerous pieces of legislation to
aid the afflicted, the aged, the poor, and the uninfluential.
           Like most of us, Gwen Cherry lost too many of the battles which
she fought as a state leader, an officer of the Council, a lawyer, and
a national figure. Her victories were too few. So long as she took
breath, however, she continued her struggle believing that people of
good will would someday, somehow act.
          The most fitting and lovely tribute that we as her friends and
companions can pay to Gwen Cherry will be to endure beyond the
conditions against which she fought and to take her life and
friendship as a special gift which enables us to be more wise, loving,
and devoted to the just and humane world of which she gave us a clear
vision.

        
