
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 4, Number 6,
	       1982
        
          The Germ of Laziness: Rockefeller Philanthropy and Public
Health in the New South. by John Ettling, Harvard University
Press, 1981.
          By 
            Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, pp. 15-17
          
          Toward the end of his study of the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission
for the Eradication of Hookworm Disease, John Ettling writes that "so
large a hand has the [Rockefeller] Foundation had in shaping the
features of our society that any wholesale indictment of its
operational philosophy or potential consequences usually reflects the
individual critic's disenchantment with that society itself." Whether
or not Rockefeller philanthropy has indeed had such a large hand, as
compared with, say, Rockefeller capitalism, Ettling seems more than a
bit enchanted. His dramatic, many stranded narrative of the 1909--1914
Southern hookworm campaign reveals how a parade of lives are saved
through scientific evangelism, ill gained boodle is well spent, good
will accrues to the lords of Standard Oil and encouragement is given
to public health professionalization. The South, long the nation's
sick and sinful section, takes its medicine, begins to throw off its
wormy ways and is restored. No mere intestinal tract, Ettling's
analysis is mesmerizing. What then, can be said for the breaking of
spells?
          Reflecting upon the beginning of decades of international health
projects which the Rockefeller Foundation has carried out in the
twentieth century, a former staffer 

with the Foundation once told me,
"Tropical medicine grew largely from concern with the diseases that
white men found when they were making tropical countries into safe
places to do business." So does charity's irony begin at home. For the
hookworm, that prototypical Rockefeller parasite from which a global
do-good was elaborated, was a creature of (at first unsuspected)
tropical origin that attracted attention when it was discovered in
Southern whites and thought to be their "germ of laziness."
          Having reached what Ettling aptly calls an "ecological detent" with
its native African hosts, the hookworm was a stowaway on the ship of
slavery. Brought to the American South, it found a barefooted welcome
between the toes and, circuitously, a new home within the intestinal
walls of farm folk living on the sandy Coastal Plain and on
Appalachian hillsides. Heavy infections were devastating, especially
among the malnourished victims of the cotton economy. The hookworm
sapped the blood and took lives outright or left its hosts weakened
and susceptible to death from other diseases. Sallow, puff-bellied and
easily exhausted, hookworm victims knew nothing of their plight or of
how they contaminated the privyless ground around their houses with
the shit which carried the eggs and larvae to infect and re-infect.
          Then, along came Dr. Charles W. Stiles, son and grandson of Yankee
Methodist ministers, well-stooled student in German methods of
helminthology, discoverer of the hookworm's abundance in the
South. Stiles' specialized training and his obsession with this
particular parasite (he called it Necator
americanus, the American killer, before its African origins were
discovered), allowed him to exaggerate its importance as an historical
force. Between Stiles and a number of newspaper popularizers, the
hookworm was made to explain everything from the loss of the Civil
War, to the section's backwardness and poor whiles' alleged lack of
energy. Stiles blamed the fatigue, paleness and small size of cotton
mill workers not on their long hours, exploited circumstances and
young age, but on the hookworm. He estimated, and Ettling accepts
without sufficient evidence, the proposition that forty percent of the
Southern population had hookworm infection in 1910 so severe as to
keep the South from full incorporation within bustling, modern
America.
          Ettling interprets the hookworm campaign upon a theme of
turn-of-the-century public health philanthropy as secularized
missionary work. Parasites substitute for nineteenth century sin in an
evangelical crusade carried into the bowels of the New South by John
D. Rockefeller (the Father), his son--John Jr., Dr. Stiles (the
Prophet) and a host of Northern and Southern preachers' boys. Yet,
although Ettling's insight is valuable in explaining zeal and method,
its over-emphasis in The Germ of Laziness deflects
understanding away from a sufficient inquiry into the false gods
served by the missionaries.
          Central to the story is Frederick Gates, son of a New York Baptist
minister and architect of the Rockefeller philanthropic
bureaucracy. Like Dr. Stiles, Gates nurtured obsessions, but of a
grander scale: the getting and spending of fortunes. Even while
helping the elder Rockefeller systematize and deploy his charity,
Gates also helped him corner the Mesabi ore region of Minnesota.
          Under Gates, Rockefeller philanthropy, following from Rockefeller
money making, had shifted from a baronial manner into the
rationalized, deliberative mode of corporate modern. As Gates saw it,
the largesse through which a Protestant God had signified
Rockefeller's spiritual election demanded as much manly stewardship
and close accounting in its disbursal as in its
acquisition. Philanthropy ought not prop up those whose obvious lack
of will and work had caused their failure in life's competitions. But
one could give another chance to those whose weaknesses and debilities
grew from causes beyond their control. "Disease," offered Gates, "is
the supreme ill of human life, and it is the main source of almost all
other human ills, poverty, crime, ignorance, vice, inefficiency,
hereditary taint, and many other evils."
          It was Walter Hines Page, who, while a member of Teddy Roosevelt's
Commission on Country Life, had introduced Dr. Stiles to Gates. North
Carolina's Page was a New South publicist with a New York address, a
cheerleader for the section's reunion into an America which had set
itself the World's Work (the name of Page's magazine)
to do. So, in 1909, an eager alliance was struck between a
parasitologist who held a hookworm determinist theory of history (and
had been looking for a patron since 1902) and a philanthropy ordained
by the laying-on of quite visible hands.
          The high tone of the mobilization against the hookworm was set by
Wickliffe Rose, chosen to be the South-wide administrator of the
Sanitary Commission. Rose (Dean of George Peabody College and the
University of Nashville, General Agent of the Peabody Fund, Executive
Secretary of the Southern Education Board and member of the Slater
Fund) had buried his origins as the son of a cotton farming
fundamentalist Tennessee preacher under a meticulous persona, giving
shape to one of the South's first bureaucratic personalities. Ettling
writes that Rose "stood out from his colleagues most noticeably for
his deep-seated reluctance to stand out at all. Unlike many of the men
with whom he worked, Rose seemed to take genuine satisfaction in
anonymity."
          The gentlemanly Rose spun newspaper articles and a propaganda
campaign, determined the spending of the million dollar budget, chose
the physicians to direct each state's organization and sought the
alliances he felt were most necessary: with boards of education,
public school teachers, women's clubs, doctors' associations. That
public health work was needed in the South, there can be no
doubt. That the South's first major health campaign was dependent upon
private capital and a remotely controlled chain of command had both
immediate and ultimate consequences.
          The hookworm campaign must also be seen, and this is an Ettling
omission, in relation to the emerging bourgeois society of the
Piedmont South in the 1890's and 1900's. Here, some oral history,
courthouse research or a few afternoons in the local library reveal
the particulars of the rise of town elites, shifting patterns of land
ownership and mercantile wealth and the enmity between town and
country or mill village folk. The builders of those fine Victorian
houses which, even now, sit turreted and asymmetrical behind the
oak-lined streets of most every city with a railroad to its name were
a powerful and rising force in their country's and region's
affairs.
          These merchants, bankers, lawyers, editors, doctors 

and preachers
were not only attuned to strictly local matters, but more and more
they were involved with and imitative of national standards and market
practices. If a mill owner sponsored community musicians, a uniformed
Sousa band, not a hillbilly group, most likely won his nod. Campaigns
such as those for hookworm eradication, privy budding, free white
public schooling or even mandatory innoculations have to be seen not
only as worthy causes of betterment, but as events through which
elites influenced appetities, stirred needs, showed condescension,
expressed control and re-arranged accustomed patterns of feeling. Such
campaigns reflected, even as they attempted to foster and extend, the
domains and contentions of social and economic powerholders. With the
breaking of Populist resistance, with blacks as well as many poor
white males disfranchised by recent state constitutional conventions
and with Jim Crow established as the scapegoat for all seasons, New
Southerners and their Northern allies could at last settle down to
some serious profit taking. As they did, they elaborated only such
necessary institutions of the modern state as their laissez faire attitudes begrudged or as an
occasionally aroused citizenry could effectively demand. Often, the
most persistent elements of this citizenry turned out to be wives or
unmarried female kin of these same New South "men of affairs."
          When the Rockefeller hookworm crusaders called upon the forms of
Southern ritual to shake out converts, the results are not clear to
read. In several communities hookworm circuit riders organized camp
meeting style gatherings with dinner on the ground, music,
speechifying, an instructive sermon and the dispensing of doses of
medicine. Yet it seems that much of this was show. Administrator Rose
needed to record a large number of "cases treated" in order to please
administrator Gates and Rockefellers. Ettling points out that Rose
pitted "doctor against doctor in a kind of frenzied competition to
roll up the numbers." Dr. Stiles, sidelined by Rose for his lack of
organizational diplomacy, estimated that more than half of the folk to
whom the medicine was dispensed took it home and threw it away.
          In the end, after four years of work, no Southern community could
honestly claim that the Sanitary Commission had eliminated the
hookworm from its bailiwick. Yet the Rockefellers decided that it was
time to move their medicine show to a wider audience. When Gates
ordered the tents struck and the stakes pulled, Rose grumbled a bit
but complied. In May, 1913, the Rockefeller Foundation set out "to
promote the wellbeing of mankind throughout the world." Its first
project, eased by the new British ambassador Walter Page, was to carry
the hookworm campaign into the colonial territories of Great
Britain.
          As the Rockefeller Foundation's Hookworm Commission departed the
South, the section's poverty remained. It, and not the hookworm, had
been the real problem all along. Yet to have faced the origins of New
South poverty required an introspection that the hookworm evangelists,
busy with their attempts to chase the demons out of dispossessed poor
whites, could not allow.
        
        
          Fifty Years With Highlander
          By Thrasher, SueSue Thrasher
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, pp. 4-9
          
          At Christmas time in 1931 in Copenhagen, Denmark, a young man off
an East Tennessee farm made a note to himself:
          
            I can't sleep but there are dreams: a school where young men and
women can come and he inspired . . . expressing themselves through
teaching history, literature, song and music, arts, weaving, and a
life lived together. .. A school where young men and women living in
close personal contact with teachers will learn how to take their
place intelligently in a changing world, which at present presents so
many baffling problems. It its hoped that the students will he able to
make decisions for themselves on the basis of an enlightened
judgment.
          
          Myles Horton returned from Denmark and in November of 19832, he
started his Southern mountain school soon named the Highlander Folk
School. This year, the celebration of the Highlander Research and
Education Center's fiftieth anniversary prompts an about of its
three major periods of work: the Southern labor movement of the 1930's
and 40's, the civil rights movement, and the struggle for Appalachian
self-determination. The fiftieth anniversary also offers an
opportunity to reflect upon Highlander's impact as a regional institution and to ponder its role over the
coming few years.
          Myles Horton's dream did not start in Copenhagen in 1931, but much
earlier in the town of Ozone on the Cumberland Plateau in
Tennessee. While a student at Cumberland College, Myles had been
teaching Vacation Bible School for the Presbyterian Church. The third
summer of teaching he arrived in Ozone and decided to 

try an
experiment--getting adults together as well as the children.
          In evening discussions at the church the adults would talk about
their community. He was amazed at the response he got. Some of the
people walked miles to the meetings. They wanted to know how to test
wells for typhoid or hor to test their farmland. They also wanted to
know about the possibility of getting jobs in textile mills.
          One of the things Myles learned from these meetings was to trust
his own ability as a group leader who didn't have all of the
answers. As he said later,
          
            To my amazement my inability to answer questions didn't bother
them. That was probably the biggest discovery I ever made. You don't
have to know the answers! You raise the questions, sharpen the
questions, get people to discussing them. We found that in that group
of mountain people a lot of the answers were available if they pooled
their knowledge.
          
          That discovery triggered in Myles Horton the notion of a Southern
mountain school. First, however, he returned to graduate from
Cumberland University. After spending a year working with the YMCA in
Tennessee, in 1929 he followed his dream to Union Seminary where he
studied under Reinhold Niebuhr and Harry F. Ward. He then went on to
the University of Chicago to study with sociologist Robert Park. More
importantly, Myles met a Danish minister named Aage Moller who told
him about the Danish folk high school movement. At the end of his year
in Chicago, and still not ready to "begin" his new school, Horton
decided to travel to Denmark to see firsthand the Danish folks
schools.
          During all of this time Myles wrote innumerable notes to
himself. He was never quite sure exactly when it was time to
begin. From Union he had gone to Chicago, thinking that he still
needed to know more, but his uncertainty after a year there had
prompted him to search for more answers in Denmark. But, he still
didn't have all the answers. Finally one night in Denmark, he decided
it was time to come home and find himself a situation and a place. As
he wrote later,
          
            All at once I told myself, "All you do is get a place and move
in. You are there. The situation its there. You start with this and
let it grow. You have your idea; you know your goal. It will build its
own structure and take its own form. Find the place, the people, the
situation. Use your ideas as your lodestone and move into the thing
and start."
          
          With the help of Reinhold Niebuhr, Myles began making plans to
start his school for adults. Niebuhr signed the school's first
fundraising letter which was perhaps more specific than Horton himself
would have stated it: "Our project is the organization of a southern
mountain school for the training of labor leaders in southern
industrial areas."
          Will Alexander, Director of the Commission on Interracial
Cooperation in Atlanta, encouraged Myles to contact a young man named
Don West, who also had the notion of starting a folk school. He met
Don at the Blue Ridge Assembly in North Carolina and the two of them
agreed to start this venture together.
          From a friend Myles fondly remembers as Preacher Nightingale of
Crossville, Tennessee, they learned about Dr. Lillian Johnson, an
educator, who owned a home and property in the small community of
Summerfield, Tennessee, on the Cumberland Plateau. Disappointed by her
own efforts at cooperative-building, she agreed to turn her property
and her house over to them for one year, to try this experimental
school. A graduate of Wellesley, and former President of Western
College for Women, Dr. Johnson had moved to Summerfield to establish a
community school, but her plans of using the school as the focal point
of cooperative efforts had not succeeded and she was anxious to see
what the two young men could do with their notion of a folk school.
          The place that Myles and Don found themselves
in the fall of 1932 was Grundy County, one of the ten poorest counties
in the United States at the time. the situation they found themselves
in was one of desperate poverty. Grundy County had once been rich in
coal and timber but as Aimee Horton says in her dissertation on
Highlander:
          
            Those resources were exploited in classic 19th century style,
and the economy there had begun to collapse decades before the
depression. The only thing left in Grundy County at the time was
cut-over timber, mined-out fields, and unemployed workers.
          
          Most of the people had turned to farming for a living--subsistence
farming--they were desperately poor.
          The first phase of Highlander's work began to center around Grundy
County and the small community of Summerfield. During the first three
years that they were there, the Highlander staff helped establish a
union for WPA workers and a community cannery. Mom Horton, Myles'
mother, helped set up a quilting cooperative. Later staff members
helped establish a community nursery school. At the same time,
however, the staff was beginning to look towards regional
issues. Myles had 

never intended that Highlander be just a community
school.
          *   *   *   *
          By the time the CIO was formed in 1936, Highlander was in the thick
of labor education. Myles helped select many of the Southern CIO
organizers. And from then until the late 1940's, Highlander was
predominantly a labor school working very closely with the CIO and
with some of the AFL unions. Unions from across the South sent members
to Highlander to be trained in sessions ranging from one week to five
weeks. Workers learned to put out a local union newspaper, to speak in
public and to produce leaflets. They participated in courses on labor
history, the history of social change and economics. Sessions were
taught by Highlander staff members and by CIO and other union
officials in the South.
          By the late 1940's however, Highlander's role as a labor school was
headed for an end. At issue was its relationship with unions who had
been kicked out of the CIO for refusing to sign the anticommunist oath
called for by the Taft-Hartley Act. More fundamental was the question
of the independence of the school--whether it would be run by the CIO
or whether it would maintain itself as an independent institution. The
papers of Highlander for this particular period show how hard it
fought to work with the unions, battling on the issue of race,
subsidizing many of the union sessions--while also striving (naively
in retrospect) for union support of the school.
          Highlander did not espouse any particular ideology nor did it
refuse to work with anyone because of ideology. Highlander did not
apply a loyalty test to people who came to the school. At the same
time. it had been very careful not to align with the Socialist Party,
from which many of its early staff members had come. However, as
political debate heated up within the unions, especially over the
anti-communist provisions of the Taft-Hartley Act, political debate
heated up around Highlander. By 1949, it was apparent to both the CIO
and Highlander that the uneasy truce that had existed for the past few
years could no longer go one. The CIO did not attack Highlander, it
simply dropped it from its list of approved institutions to hold its
schools.
          One of the most controversial issues, one that continued to arise
throughout Highlander's period of working with the unions, was the
matter of race. Although Highlander had had a policy of being an
integrated institution from the time it opened in 1932, the unions had
been very reluctant to actually sponsor integrated schools. It was not
until 1944, when the United Auto Workers held an integrated session at
the school, that a residential session involved both black and white
members. Eating at a table together, sleeping in the same dormitory
rooms, using the same bathrooms were very emotional subjects during
this time. Some of the members went away feeling that they had been
changed by their living experience while at Highlander, but others
were not convinced about a place that openly condoned white and black
living--and especially one that had as many "Yankee" visitors.
          Its union experience forced the Highlander staff to think more
clearly about the issue of race and its meaning for the future of the
South. This was one of the turning points in Highlander's history.
           *  *  *  *
          In the early 1950's Highlander hosted small meetings to talk about
the coming of school integration in the South. It was quite apparent
to the staff and others who were concerned about social issues during
that time, that a Supreme Court decision on school desegration would
be handed down by the Warren Court.
          In the summer of 1953, Highlander held three meetings on the issue
of school desegregation. Community leaders came from across the
South. Neither the staff nor the people they invited there knew
exactly what would happen when people got there.
          Here it is critical to understand Highlander's role as an
educational institution for developing leadership. Rather than go into
communities and organize around a particular issue, Highlander's goal
was to pull out, train and help develop leaders from communities. This
is seen most clearly in the civil rights period when people from
across the South came to the residential setting of Highlander, talked
about the issues at hand and then returned to their communities.
          For fifteen years Highlander played an integral role in the civil
rights movement. Until the passage of the first civil rights bill in
1964, it remained one of the few places available for interracial
meetings. From tentative efforts with community leaders on school
desegregation, the school moved to establish a major literacy and
voting 

rights project in the Sea Islands of South Carolina, held
workshops with students participating in the sit-in movement, actively
participated in the training of civil rights workers for Freedom
Summer of 1964, and continued following up on all of these efforts
until the time of the Poor Peoples March in Washington in 1967.
          *   *    *    *
          From its early days in 1932, Highlander had enjoyed a warm
relationship with the surrounding community of Grundy County. Square
dances held at the school, volleyball games, and community suppers
were commonplace. In addition, Highlander operated a community nursery
school, first organized by Claudia Lewis, who later wrote about her
experiences in a book entitled Children of the
Cumberlands. She was followed by Joie Willimetz, a graduate of
Wellesley, who used her own personal contracts to raise money and
supplies for the school. The Folk School also published a small
community newsletter called the Summerfield News, the
work of an Antioch student, Elaine Van Brink, who spent four years at
Highlander. She toured the community on her bicycle gathering news for
the paper, typed and mimeographed it at Highlander, then later
distributed it with the help of local newsboys and girls. The
newsletter featured poetry, community news items, and a gossip
column.
          Despite indications of good reciprocal community relations,
however, there was always some opposition t o the school and its
ideas. In the early 1940's Highlander had come under attack by a local
group called The Grundy County Crusaders, who had threatened to march
on the school. Residents of the area who liked the school simply
ringed the area, and no harm was done.
          As Highlander made the crucial turn toward involvement in the civil
rights movement, and its students were drawn from predominantly black
communities, the Folk School lost its strong community ties. It was
not the antagonism of the local community however, that succeeded
eventually in closing the school, but the antagonism of the state.
          In 1957, Highlander held its twenty-fifth anniversary.
          One of its major speakers that year was Dr. Martin Luther King,
Jr. King had just finished a year of leading the Montgomery Bus
Boycott and had recently moved to Atlanta to help set up the Southern
Christian Leadership Conference.
          The governor of Georgia, Marvin Griffin, wanted to discredit King,
and the state legislature of Tennessee wanted to discredit
Highlander. When Dr. King spoke at Highlander, Governor Griffin sent a
reporter and a photographer. A few months later a four page tabloid
began circulating about the "communist training school in East
Tennessee where Martin Luther King had been." There were two
billboards across the South during that time--"Martin Luther King at
Communist Training School" and "Impeach Earl Warren."
          In 1959, Highlander was raided during a weekend workshop, two staff
members were carted off to jail, and several counts were leveled
against the school: operating a school for the profit of the director,
selling beer without a license, and operating an integrated
school. Selling beer without a license was the technicality that
closed the school.
          It took two years, until 1961, for the state of Tennessee to
actually shut Highlander. Finally, the state confiscated and sold at
auction approximately two hundred acres of land and several buildings,
including a nursery, a community building, a library and staff
houses. To this day, Highlander has never received any
remuneration.
          As soon as they could, the staff rechartered, reorganized and
opened again under the name of the Highlander Research and Education
Center.
          *  *  *  * 
          Through its participation in the 1967 Poor Peoples' March on
Washington and in Resurrection City, the encampment of poor people on
the Mall, Highlander began another major shift of emphasis. Many
people who gathered in Washington that summer believed that there was
a possibility of realizing King's dream of a multiracial poor peoples'
coalition. Several groups at Resurrection City encouraged Highlander
to come back home and work in the Appalachian coalfields. Already it
had begun making contacts in the mountains and had established strong
ties with urban Appalachian groups such as the JOIN Community Union in
uptown Chicago.
          Highlander did come back to the mountains and began working more
intensely with strands of a developing poor peoples' movement in the
Appalachians; included were anti-stripmine activists and various
community action groups that were aided and abetted by the OEO (Office
of Economic Opportunity) language calling for one-third representation
of the poor. The staff during this time changed dramatically. It was
much younger and more reflective of its new constituency.
          The Appalachian period of Highlander is more difficult to
categorize than the labor or civil rights periods. Even though there
were very active groups in the 

mountains throughout this time, the
movement in Appalachia never developed into the kind of mass
mobilization that the Highlander staff hoped for. Perhaps, in order to
succeed, it would have had to emerge with a mass movement of poor
people from all over the country. On the other hand, perhaps
Highlander attempted to expand too quickly during the late 1960's, as
it established a Highlander-West to work with Chicanos in the
Southwest and set up extension programs in the uptown area of
Chicago.
          In 1971, urban renewed out of Knoxville, the school moved
physically back to the mountains. It is located now near New Market,
Tennessee on a 110 acre farm overlooking the Smokes. The Appalachian
emphasis has evolved into current projects: a health program which
works with clinics in the mountains and with the providers of basic
human services; a resource and education center established in 1976;
and a cultural program. More recently Highlander has developed a labor
education program which came from work with the Amalgamated Clothing
and Textile Workers Union and the United Furniture Workers Union.
          *   *   *   *   
          Highlander started out as a Southern/Mountain school and during its
fifty year history it has been both of those things. The term
Appalachian was not in vogue in 1932 when Myles and Don settled on the
Cumberland Plateau, but Highlander was a well-known term, thus the
Highlander Folk School. During its first two decades, Highlander
worked with people from the mountains and with people from other parts
of the South.
          The school's identification during those early years was much like
the Cumberland Plateau where it was located — perched both
figuratively and literally between the coalfields to the north and the
agricultural regions to the south. Until the early 1950's it was able
to maintain itself successfully as both a Southern school and a
Mountain school. During the period of the civil rights movement,
however, Highlander became almost totally a Southern institution. Then
during the late 1960's and early 70's it became a strictly Appalachian
institute.
          Much of Highlander's work in the coalfields reflected the
assumption that Appalachia is a colony. Currently Highlander is in
still another stage of development and thinking about its region and
about other regions. The distinctiveness of both the Appalachian
coalfields and the South has eroded as they have both become more
Americanized. The fact that each remains a colony--wealth from their
natural resources is spirited away to absentee owners--makes them in
one sense no more distinctive than the Indian lands of the Southwest
or any of the Latin American, African or Asian nations plundered for
their natural and human resources by trans-national corporations.
          For the last five years, Highlander has neither called itself an
Appalachian institution nor a Southern institution. As it once was in
the early days on the Cumberland Plateau, it is again perched between
two worlds. Its recent work with the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile
Workers Union and the Furniture Workers. Union has placed Highlander
once again in the position of working with black people from the
South. Yet the work in Appalachia has continued and in many cases has
grown and expanded. This is perhaps best exemplified by the land
ownership study recently concluded, and by other work coming out of
Highlander's resource center.
          Two years ago when Highlander started talking about celebrating its
fiftieth anniversary, there was a commitment on the part of the board
members and the staff to use this occasion to explore the future--to
celebrate and affirm the past, but more importantly, to look as
unflinchingly as possible into the future, and what may be expected in
time to come.
          In the 1930's and 40's, Highlander had a very clear cut decision to
make: to work with the labor movement or not to work with the labor
movement. In the 1950's and 60's, it had the same kind of decision to
make regarding the civil rights movement. In the 1960's and early
70's, it found a natural place working in the Appalachian
coalfields. The question arises in 1982: What is now Highlanders situation and place? 
          Its place now can neither be defined by a
county or a regional line and its situation is
one shared with all the people of the world--tottering on the brink of
nuclear disaster.
          While Highlander must take its cues from the place where it works
most closely, both the Appalachians and the Deep South, and focus on
the issues that affect the people of these areas, it is quite clear
that the issues affecting Highlander and the people it works with are

also issues that affect people all over the world. We cannot talk to
people in one Appalachian community about toxic wastes without
understanding that toxic waste has to be buried somewhere, and if not
here then perhaps in someone else's community. We cannot talk to
people about absentee ownership of land without understanding that the
same thing holds true in the Southwest and other parts of the
country. We cannot talk about occupational health and safety as it
relates to industries in this area and not understand that it affects
workers all over the United States and all over the world. We cannot
simply talk about the environmental health of the Tennessee Valley,
lest our Canadian friends remind us about the effects of acid rain.
          We feel poised on the edge of a new era at Highlander--an era which
may see us working more again on issues that relate to minorities in
the Deep South, and maintaining our ties with the communities of
Appalachia.
          The problem before us will be to keep our focus and understand
always the strength and knowledge that comes from our own people. But
we must also begin to see ourselves as part of a larger
community. What is it that our Southern/Appalachian communities have
in common with the Indian communities of the Southwest--especially as
it regards the rape of the land and the theft of natural resources?
What is it that we have in common with workers from Latin America as
they battle the same trans-national corporations that affect us? And
what do we have to teach other people?
          Highlander doesn't know the answers to all of these questions. The
lesson we can learn from Highlander's past is really the same as it
was in 1932 as articulated by Myles Horton in the small community of
Ozone.
          
            You don't have to know the answers. You raise the questions,
sharpen the questions, get people to discussing them.
          
          If anything is different now, it is that we must not only raise and
sharpen the questions within our own community and region, but in the
larger world community--anywhere that people are fighting for
justice.
          Illustrators: Malcolm Chisolm, artist and blacksmith, was on the
Highlander staff in 1933. He left Highlander to fight with the Abraham
Lincoln Brigade and died in the Spanish Civil War.
          Candie Carawan its currently on the Highlander staff.
          
            Sue Thrasher is on the program staff at
Highlander.
          
        
        
          Local Color Defaulting On Justice
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, pp. 1-3
          
          Long lines at the Supreme Court building in Washington are
commonplace as tourists and school kids come daily to walk the halls
and rummage the displays along its vacuous ground floor. Yet, many who
lined up on the Court's concrete plaza shortly after dawn on Monday,
October 12 were congressional aides, lawyers and civil rights
activists. They had come to hear arguments that would decide whether
federal law now prohibits Bob Jones University of Greenville, South
Carolina. and other segregation academies in the South, from enjoying
a tax-exempt status.
          The Court's day began in usual fashion as the crier slammed his
gavel and announced "O Ye, O Ye, the Supreme Court of the United
States is now in session and may God save this honorable Court." One
of the lawyers who had stood in line cracked the joke, adapted to
every Court: "It will take divine intervention to save the Burger
Court."
          Here is a case where the issue of law is routine, even simple: can
federal regulations that prohibit tax-exempt status for discriminatory
schools and organizations be justified under provisions of a federal
act. With such a narrow, almost technical issue at its heart, the Bob
Jones case does not invoke the sweeping questions which another Court
once faced in deciding if civil rights statutes and voting rights laws
were permitted by the Constitution. Rather. this is a question of
interpreting a federal statute which Congress has passed and can amend
before or after the Court rules. As a legal matter then, it is not the
sort of case for which lawyers and congressional aides usually stand
in line.
          The case did have an enticing mixed parentage. It was born out of
that embarrassing moment of political insensitivity when Treasure
Department officials, with the approval of the Reagan White House,
decided to stop enforcing the federal regulation adopted originally
under the Nixon Administration and observed under Ford and
Carter. Coming on the heels of the President's opposition to a strong
version of the Voting Rights Act, the controversy contributed to a
shifting public opinion which had already begun to cast Reagan as
callous 

towards the poor and racial minorities.
          This was also one of the first controversies for which the Reagan
Administration had to build a rationale after the fact. Once it was
clear that the White House would have to own up to the decision, the
Justice Department issued a statement laying out the Administration's
view that Congress had not intended to permit such federal regulations
when changes in the Internal Revenue Code were made. The President
believed in the separation of powers and, if Congress wanted such a
regulation, Congress would have to authorize it.
          When the White House realized that its rationale failed to assert
any presidential commitment to civil rights, it proposed some
face-saving legislation. At the same time, when civil rights lawyers
resurrected old, but pending, cases on the issue of tax exempt status
for segregated schools, Reagan's Justice Department stuck with its
immobilized position, insisting on legislation from Congress.
          Reagan's position required the Court to adopt unusual procedures to
bring the Bob Jones arguments before it. After the Justice Department
switched sides, the Court found itself having to assign a lawyer to
argue Justice's rightful case. Their choice was William P. Coleman, a
successful lawyer, former Republican Secretary of the Department of
Transportation, and the first black Supreme Court clerk.
          When asked why they stood in line to hear Coleman's argument, a few
leading civil rights lawyers and congressional aides seemed puzzled by
the question. "It's a big case," was one response, hardly an answer to
stand up under cross-examination. Another came closer, "I want to see
how the Burger Court thinks it can worm out of this one."
          The importance of the case may have befuddled people because it
cannot be gleaned from the questions of law which Coleman argued on
one side and William Bradford Reynolds, the Assistant Attorney General
for Civil Rights, argued on the other. Its significance lies in its
unspoken statement about the changing role of the federal government
in promoting civil rights and in the practical role that segregated
academies play in obstructing integrated public education, especially
in the rural South.
          Although it was never mentioned during the Court argument, this
controversy reveals that, within the federal government, the
initiative for enforcement of civil rights may have fallen once again
solely to--perhaps for the first time since the late 1950's--the
judiciary as the other branches default. The case would never be
before the Supreme Court if, simply, the President had decided to
enforce the federal regulation. Congress also could have prevented the
case by, simply, restating its intent. The passage of a resolution or
additional legislation would have served notice that federal law
authorizes the denial of tax-exempt status to segregation
academies. Instead of settling the controversy, both Congress and the
President stayed their hands.
          Thus, the case becomes the first true test of this Court's will to
follow the law in the face of hostility and indecision from the
President and Congress and to repeat the role on issues of civil
rights which the Warren Court began three decades ago.
          The case is also important because the Court's opinion will touch
the fate of public education in many Southern rural areas. In the
eleven states of the South, the enrollment of students in private
schools with discriminatory practices has reached substantial
proportions. From 1965, when less than 100,000 children went to
segregation academies, the enrollment grew to almost 700,000 by
1975. Notably, such growth of enrollment appears to have leveled in
the last five to eight years, corresponding with the time of the
adoption and enforcement of the Treasury's policy against
tax-exemption.
          In the heart of the South's Black Belt, public education survives
precariously because private segregation academies thrive. Most of
these academies depended originally on donations of buildings and land
from a few individuals, and most have continued to rely heavily upon
rich benefactors. It is one of the supreme ironies of the Black Belt
that many of the white members of the boards of education for public
schools continue to send their own children to segregation
academies.
          If the Supreme Court decides in favor of Bob Jones University, and
Congress and the President continue to disavow responsibility, public
integrated education in the rural Deep South could be lost for several
more decades.
          An opinion by the Court against Bob Jones University, however, may
not serve much better. As a test of the mettle of a President who says
he will enforce constitutional rights at the point of a bayonet if
necessary, the decision will place President Reagan in a position
where his own personal opinions come in open conflict with a Court
opinion which he had strongly opposed. In keeping with the change in
the federal role, the situation could come to resemble the time when
President Eisenhower's conspicuous silence on Supreme Court 

decisions
of school integration were read by Southern states officials as an
implicit endorsement of massive resistance.
          Other practical problems could arise. If the Court overrules the
Justice Department, it is the President's own Treasury agents who will
decide if the regulation is enforced vigorously. So, even after a
decision the actions of the President will speak as loud as the words
of the Court opinion, in deciding to fate of public integrated
education.
          When the October 12 argument concluded, most civil rights lawyers
who were there agreed on the outcome of the case: in one way or
another, the Court will sustain the regulation. Some even speculated
that the opinion might have the support of seven or eight
Justices. They may be right. But, if the protection of civil rights
and integrated public education now depends largely on the initiatives
of the Burger Court, in the fact of a hostile president and an
immobile Congress, O Ye, O Ye, God save this country.
        
        
          Reapportionment Roundup
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, pp. 20-24
          
          Reapportionment moved into the courtrooms across the South during
the summer as federal judges were deluged with petitions and prayers
for relief from lawyers of civil rights groups attempting to halt
primary elections which they charged were to be held under
discriminatory districts. Despite the lawyers' complete lack of
success, November elections bring a bumper crop of new minority
elected officials in the state legislatures and promise the election
of two additional black members of Congress from the South--doubling
the present number--by the middle of the decade.
          In six Southern states, federal courts have jurisdiction over
congressional or state legislative reapportionment which will be
decided finally by the end of 1983. In some instances, such as Alabama
and Texas, the courts may order early elections if the plans which the
Justice Department and the courts approve differ substantially from
those which were implemented temporarily for the 1982 elections. In
other states such as Virginia and Georgia the dust is settled and the
district lines have now been set in place for the remainder of the
decade.
          While a federal court has reviewed reapportionment plans in every
Southern state, the impetus for improvements in representation for
blacks and Hispanics has come from the Voting Rights Act and its
provision that all voting changes including redistricting be examined
by the Justice Department to decide if they have a discriminatory
effect or purpose. Incumbent minority legislators have also played a
critical role in creating districts where black or Hispanic voters
have a controlling vote.
          In Georgia, for example, a sixty-five percent black district would
never have been created were it not for the wily politicking of state
senator Jul fan Bond who in acts of political horsetrading was able to
convince his colleagues to adopt a sixty-nine percent black district
in Atlanta. It was the senate's adoption of the Bond plan and the
plan's subsequent rejection by the state house which led to the
confrontation that evidenced the racial intent of 

legislators such as
Joe Mack Wilson, Chairman of the House Reapportionment Committee, who
observed that "the only thing worse than a 'nigger' district is a
Republican district."
          In Florida, the push for single-member districts did not even have
the threat of rejection by the Justice Department or the courts. Aided
by others, including the Florida Governor, black and Hispanic members
of the legislature worked at building a coalition of support for a
single-member district plan for both the house and the senate. In
South Carol in a the legislative black caucus was instrumental in
securing the addition of two majority black districts in that state's
plan, and in Alabama most of the changes which prompted the election
of new black members were required by the Justice Department only
after they had been proposed in special legislative sessions by
members of the black caucus.
          So far the federal courts have not been very hospitable to the
claims of black plaintiffs, especially when proposed plans have
cleared the administrative review of the Justice Department. In
Virginia, the federal court found only that the legislative plans
violated the principle of one-person, one-vote and did not hold that
the plans diluted black voting strength in an unlawful manner. In
South Carolina the three-judge federal court has turned away the
claims of black plaintiffs and in Mississippi none of the
congressional districts ordered by the court have a majority of black
voters. To date the federal court in Alabama has not required a plan
providing for increased black voting strength beyond what the Justice
Department has demanded. The only federal court that has required the
creation of a voting district for congressional or legislative races
in the South with a majority of black voters has been the federal
court in Washington which in effect sustained the decisions of the
Justice Department.
          In the first six monthsofl983,mostofthependingcases on state
reapportionment will be decided by the court. Then, probably, only
appeals to the Supreme Court will remain. The following summaries set
the state for that final chapter and provide an outline on the effects
of reapportionment of state legislatures and congressional seats in
the South.
          
            Alabama
          
          Under a temporary redistricting plan ordered by a federal court,
the September primaries in Alabama fueled hopes of gains for blacks in
the state legislature. Among the significant victories were house
seats in Jefferson, Tuscaloosa, Perry, and Dallas counties. A black
woman, Pat Davis was elected to a fifty-three percent black house seat
in Birmingham; James Thomas and Jenkins Bryant, Sr., were the victors
of the Democratic primary for the house seats in the Black Belt; and
Bryant Melton won a house seat in Tuscaloosa.
          All but two black incumbents in the Alabama House were
reelected. In one race the victory of a black challenger, John Rogers,
is presently under court challenge by incumbent black Rep. Ronald
Jackson who lost by thirty-three votes in an election where absentee
ballots were found two to three days later in a car trunk and in the
office of the Jefferson County sheriff. All three incumbent black
senators were reelected.
          The reapportionment issue in Alabama remains in
controversy. Negotiations continue between the plaintiffs and the
state's lawyers working on the law suit challenging Alabama's plan in
federal court. By court mandate the legislature will be required to
redistrict by March, 1983, and another election for state legislators
could follow as early as the fall of 1983. The new plan will have to
meet approval with both the Justice Department and three federal
judges sitting in Montgomery.
          
            Florida
          
          In a Southern state where the courts have not been involved in
state reapportionment, minorities in Florida may make major gains in
the next decade in the state legislature as a result of this year's
redistricting. For the first time in the state's history, the
legislature adopted single-member districts and the results of the
October 5th primary showed several victories for black and Hispanic
candidates.
          For the first time in this century blacks will be represented in
the Florida Senate. Carrie Meeks, a black legislator from Miami has
been elected, without opposition, in a district with more than
sixty-five percent black population and state Rep. Arnett Girardeau, a
black from Jacksonville, won over a white opponent to become the
Democratic nominee for another senate seat. Girardeau's district is
forty-nine percent black. Blacks also were winners in eleven house
seats in Democratic primaries and in two Republican primaries around
the state in October. Seven of the black Democrats who won had no
opposition on November 2 Jefferson Reaves, James Burke, and Willie
Logan from Miami; James Hargrave of Tampa; Al Lawson of Tallahassee;
Corrine Brown and incumbent John Thomas of Jacksonville. Only five
blacks now sit in the Florida legislature.
          Redistricting has caused some major shifts as well as gains in
Florida's black state legislative delegation. Of the present black
house members, only one, John Thomas of Jacksonville, will be
returning. While Girardeau and Meeks are likely to move to the senate,
the two remaining incumbent black legislators were defeated in primary
battles. Longtime Democratic representative Joe Lang Kershaw and John
Plummer, the first black Republican to serve in the Florida
legislature since Reconstruction, were defeated by political
newcomers--one a black and the other a white Republican woman.
          Other house primary victories by black Democrats include Doug
Jamison, who defeated longtime NAACP activist Morris Melton in
St. Petersburg; Alzo Reddick in Orlando, Bill Clark in Fort
Lauderdale, and David Anderson a black in North Palm Beach area won a
surprise victory in a district that is ninety-five percent white. A
former Martin County school board member, Anderson faced white
Republican opposition on November 2.

          Gains for Hispanics will be decided after ail the votes are counted
from the November 2 elections; most are from Dade County and are
viewed as conservative Republicans. Seven Hispanics are running for
the house and one has been nominated for the state senate.
          
            Georgia
          
          Working against a court-ordered deadline, the Georgia Legislature
approved a sixty-five percent black congressional district for the
Atlanta metropolitan area in early August. The decision followed a
week of lengthy debate which included a
Saturdaysessionthatmetuntil4:30a.m. Sunday. The result was a plan, for
use in the November election, that gained quick approval from the
Justice Department and the federal court.
          The state had appealed the Justice Department's April
decision. Justice had held that the drawing of a fifty-seven percent
black, Atlanta-based, district was racially motivated in light of the
earlier refusal of the state house of representatives to adopt a
sixty-nine percent black district. Sponsored by Georgia Senator Julian
Bond, the sixty-nine percent plan had passed the state senate.
          After several days of hearings in June, a three-judge federal court
in Washington issued an order upholding Justice's decision. The court
found "overt racial statements. the conscious minimizing of black
voting strength, historical discrimination and the absence of a
legitimate non-racial reason for adoption of the plan at issue." When
an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court was rejected, the August special
session was called and the General Assembly faced the task of
improving on a proposed district which had a fifty-seven percent black
population but only a forty-five percent black registered voter
population.
          Initial proposals by the legislative black caucus were introduced
by Senator Bond and black Representative Billy McKinney, of
Atlanta. They called for the creation of a 68.3% black district. House
Speaker Tom Murphy countered with a proposed 60.9% plan and Rep. Al
Scott, a black legislator from Savannah, introduced a compromise
proposal of 64.7% black.
          From the start, few capital politicos differed in predicting the
likelihood of a black Fifth Congressional District, although Murphy
publicly vowed his unyielding opposition to a sixty-five percent black
district. One of the problems that faced Murphy and others was how to
create districts that met the Justice Department's requirements and
assured the election of Democratic incumbents. This desire to protect
Fourth District Congressman Elliott Levitas was especially evident
when Murphy remarked that "we'd like to help Elliott if we can."
          For Levitas, the demographics of Fulton and DeKalb counties
produced a threatening situation. A heavily black Fifth District, as
proposed in the Bond-McKinney plan, would stretch across the southern
portion of the two counties leaving the Fourth District holding the
northern portions where high income whites are creating a Republican
stronghold.
          Throughout the session, Levitas and Fifth District Congressman
Wyche Fowler worked the hallways and backrooms at the state capital
attempting to hang on to as much friendly political geography as
possible. In the end, as a former state legislator, Levitas was
clearly more influential and Fowler's Fifth District lost a sizable
chunk of central Atlanta's biracial Democratic community, much of the
core of his support. To the new Fifth went a large portion of north
Atlanta and north Fulton County; the Justice Department got a 65.02%
black populated district. In the Fourth District, the outcome was
suitably low in Republican character for Congressman Levitas.
          Ironically, in early discussions in the 1981 special sessions and
with the Justice Department, the legislative leadership had criticized
Sen. Bond's initial effort to create a black congressional district
because it would split Atlanta. That issue turned moot when the goal
became the prevention of a Republican challenge to Levitas.
          While the plan won the narrow approval of the Justice Department
and the state intervenors, the state's proposed timetables, which
called for a forty-eight hour filing period and primary elections
within two weeks of the end of the special session, were
unacceptable. The final timetable approved by the courts for election
in the Fifth and Fourth included a primary date of November 2 and a
general election date of November 30.
          With so little campaign time left, two prospective black
candidates, Sen. Julian Bond and Fulton County Commissioner Regionald
Eaves, decided against battling the incumbent Fowler over the new
district. Both noted that the timetable provided little opportunity to
raise sufficient funds and plan a campaign. State Rep. McKinney,
however, entered the race as an independent, McKinney (who is a
Democrat in the state legislature received the endorsement of the
legislative black caucus, Senator Bond and Atlanta Mayor Andrew
Young. Yet, Fowler's reelection was never in doubt.
          In state legislative races, blacks appear to have made several
gains in both the Georgia House and Georgia Senate. In the senate,
Rep. Al Scott and Rep. David Scott of Atlanta appear to have secured
seats. Frank Redding has been elected to a new house seat in suburban
DeKalb County; former city commissioner Mary Young in Albany; George
Brown in Augusta. Estimates show at least twenty-five blacks will
serve in the legislature when the General Assembly meets in January--a
gain of at least three seats.
          
            Louisiana
          
          The September primary elections in Louisiana confirmed that its six
incumbent congressional members will return to Washington. So ended a
protracted dispute which began late last year when a Democratic state
legislature created a majority-black congressional seat in New Orleans
only to recant at the urging of Republican Governor David
Treen. Seeing the promise of the [unclear] Louisiana black in Congress in this
century fade away, black leaders and civil rights lawyers fought
unsuccess-

fully before the Justice Department and the courts to stop
the plan.
          Louisiana has an open primary which puts all candidates, regardless
of party, on the ballot. Among the incumbents, two Democrats, Billy
Tauzin and Buddy Roemer, had no opposition, and the other four
received a majority of the votes in the primary.
          Since a full hearing on the court challenge by black plaintiffs has
not yet been held, the existing congressional districts could be
changed before the 1984 elections. During the summer the federal court
in New Orleans refused to overturn the legislative plan before this
year's elections although it indicated that a final decision on
district lines beyond 1982 would be decided only after full discovery
and hearing. The success of the black plaintiffs' challenge is
uncertain at best since the Justice Department did approve the plan
under its authorized voting rights review. Federal courts seldom, if
ever, disapprove of redistricting plans on the same issues which the
Justice Department has considered and approved under its
administrative review.
          The possibility of a majority-black district in New Orleans
appeared strong last November when the legislature adopted a plan
creating just such a district. Never a favorite of many black leaders,
Gov. Treen opposed the bill strongly, in pert because the black
district would jeopardize the reelection of an incumbent Republican,
Bob Livingston. After jawboning and threatening a veto, Treen had his
way and the legislature recanted.
          With such a clear record of racial intent, civil rights lawyers and
members of the state legislative black caucus went to the Justice
Department confident that they had a strong case. At the time, one of
the lawyers, Bill Quigley, remarked: "This case presents the acid test
of whether a Republican governor's influence at the Republican Justice
Department is stronger than the law." After heavy lobbying from
Gov. Treen, Justice approved the plan. It held that the state had
shown the plan to be unmotivated by race and without discriminatory
effort. The results of the acid test were in.
          
            Mississippi
          
          After a three-judge panel in Greenville, Mississippi turned away
the pleas of black plaintiff Owen Brooks and others that the court
create a congressional district with a sixty-five percent black
population in the Delta, civil rights lawyers raced to the
U.S. Supreme Court. It refused to disturb the lower court's order to
permit congressional elections in August with the court-ordered
fifty-three percent black district.
          Because the voting-age population and the registration rate of
blacks are considerably below the level of the black population in
general, the Court's decision appeared to doom hopes of a district in
which black voters would elect a candidate. Yet, news of the Supreme
Court's decision was followed quickly by the announcement of
Mississippi Delta Congressman David Bowen that he would not seek
reelection, and a field of six candidates, including black state
Representative Robert Clark of Holmes County was sowed.
          Almost every political analyst and writer in the state gave Clark
very little chance of winning the nomination on August 17, although a
few ventured that he might make it into a runoff. State labor leader
Claude Ramsey however, was more optimistic and very supportive,
especially since the state AFL-CIO had supported the fifty-three
percent plan in court. Ramsey contended theta good candidate--black or
white--could be elected in the Delta with such a plan and that the
larger black majority plan would only "help Republicans elsewhere in
the state."
          When the votes were counted in August, Clark had defeated his four
white opponents and received fifty-six percent of the vote--enough to
avoid a runoff. Despite lingering doubts that the white Republicans
had voted for Clark in order to give their own candidates an easy
target in November, Clark appeared to be on the road to Washington.
          While Clark's strong showing was, a victory for the almost forty
percent black population in Mississippi who had not seen a black
congressman go to Washington in their lifetime, the election results
presented a real problem for Frank Parker, the lawyer who represented
the black plaintiffs in the Greenville court. Whie the court will
consider again the question of the district lines for elections after
1982, the judges will no doubt look with skepticism on Parker's
premise that racial bloc voting in the Delta by whites will keep black
voters' candidates from public office. Whie he may be able to call
upon eighty-one years of Mississippi history to support his case,
Parker will have to figure out how to convince the judges that this
exception in Mississippi ought not set the rule in law.
          
            South Carolina
          
          In the face of challenges from the NAACP to congressional and state
house reapportionments, South Carolina lawmakers now appear confident
that their new district lines, used in this year' selections, will be
sustained by the federal courts. Adopted in early summer, the
congressional plan avoided the creation of a majority black district
near the coast. Nonetheless, it was approved by the three-judge
federal panel, one of whose members characterized the NAACP's
arguments as "frivolous."
          The state house plan adds two new majority-black districts. It has
also been approved by the courts and the Justice Department.
          The state senate has not yet reapportioned, and a bitter fight
looms as incumbents in the all-white chamber try to avoid
single-member districts. Elections for the state senate in South
Carolina are not held this year, and
senators have until mid-1984 to develop their strategy.The black leadership,
including the legislative black caucus in Columbia, are deciding how
to present their best case before the legislature, the Justice
Department, and ultimately the courts.

          
            Texas
          
          When the Texas legislature returns to Austin in early 1983, they
face once more the task of reapportioning both chambers of the state
house, and, at the least, the congressional districts in the Dallas
area. In June, federal courts ordered temporary plans for the
elections but required that the state redo the plans in the 1983
legislative session.
          A flood of paperwork was filed by lawyers for Democrats,
Republicans and Mexican-Americans in June and July as they attempted
to overturn lower court opinions for the primary elections. The first
plan adopted by the Democratic state legislature generally protected
incumbents although it appeared to offer more safety to incumbent
conservatives, Republican or Democrat, than to the liberal
Democrats. The highly partisan elections of November 2 should help all
Texas Democratic congressmen win a more sympathetic ear from the state
lawmakers.
          Because of increased population, the Texas legislature had to
create three new congressional districts this year. In this
rearrangement the Hispanic caucus hopes to create one or two majority
Hispanic congressional seats: in the state's southwest and around
Dallas. If the legislature fails, as seems likely, the effort will
probably be continued in court by the Mexican-American Legal Defense &
Education Fund. The Justice Department and thc federal courts will
likely decide if the failure to create such districts has a racially
discriminatory effect or purpose.
          Generating in court "enough paper to patch Houston's freeway," the
temporary congressional districts appear to have helped no one more
than the incumbents. When the final votes arc official in Texas, their
composition will remain much the same.
          In the state legislature. the number of Mexican-American
legislators in the lower house may increase by four or five for a
total of twenty-two as a result of the. November elections although no
gains are expected in the state senate.
          
            Virginia
          
          After a year of special sessions and court litigation costing the
state as much as a million dollars, the Virginia legislature created a
single-member district plan for both houses which added five
majority-black districts to the existing four. As the election results
are being tallied in that state, some politicians and political
observers are wondering what all the shouting was about.
          Although the concepts of both single-member districts and
majority-black districts were at the heart of the fears of many
incumbent Virginia Assembly members, the "dreaded effect" that
Democratic majority leader Thomas Moss of Norfolk predicted appears
illusory six months after thc legislature acceded to the objections of
the Justice Department and the courts. Forecasting earlier that
single-member districts would cause an invasion of Republicans like
Grant's march through Richmond, the lawmakers' predictions have not
been borne out by election returns. Democrats will remain in firm
control. At the same time. the four blacks in the Virginia legislature
may not have their ranks doubled until at least the late 1980's when
voter registration and turnout are higher.
          "When put in perspective. the fight in the legislature for over a
year to keep out a total of three black lawmakers is absolutely
incredible," remarks Jack Gravely, the head of the NAACP.
          
            This report was prepared by the staff of the Southern
Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Denton and Helms: The Enemies Within.  Patriotism in Peace
          
            
              Arkansas GazetteFrom the Arkansas Gazette
            
          
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, p. 9
          
          Betty Bumpers' Peace Links may draw from a remarkable episode in
the United States Senate impressive reassurance that it is gaining in
effectiveness and influence. The Senate, only hours before adjourning,
not only adopted a resolution asking President Reagan to declare
October 10 Peace Day under Peace Links' auspices but also rose to put
down a budding resurgence of McCarthyism.
          The touch of McCarthyism was provided by Senator Jeremiah Denton of
Alabama, who told the Senate after the resolution was passed that
"Four organizations on the Peace Links advisory board are either
Soviet controlled or openly sympathetic with, and advocates for,
Communist foreign policy objectives."
          Courtly rules usually apply during open Senate session, but Senator
Denton's outrageous remark appropriately justified an exception to the
rule, and senator after senator rose to reject the accusation. Among
those rejecting Denton's remark as nonsense were Mrs. Bumper's
husband, Senator Dale Bumpers, and Senator Gary Hart of Colorado.
          There is absolutely no evidence that Peace Links has any degree of
control by or association with Communists, and Senator Denton himself
offers no basis for his accusation other than the fact that he said
it. (Another demagogic political figure in these parts was fond of
remarking that "just because I said it doesn't make it so" but Senator
Denton apparently sticks to what he asserts, without aopology.)
Denton's staunchest defender during the exchange on the Senate floor,
some will say appropriately, was his fellow compatriot of the New
Right, Senate Jesse Helms of North Carolina. Even Helms didn't say
that Denton knew what he was talking about, but instead criticized
those senators who criticized Denton.
          Now that Senator Denton's flirtation with McCathysism has been
answered on the Senate floor, the episode may turn out to be helpful
to Peace Links and to Peace Day for it has called a good deal of
attention to both. Peace Links was born out of the purest of motives
end it remains guided by the purest of motives by Mrs. Bumpers and
others who see it as a way to dampen the growing dangers of a nuclear
conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union.
          Peace Links will not be discredited by such outrageous attacks as
that made by Senator Denton. It is one of many grass-roots
organizations that are demanding that steps be taken at the highest
political levels to prevent a nuclear war. Peace Links and other like
groups are practicing patriotism of a high order.
        
        
          North Carolina Pays the Price
          By Sitton, ClaudeClaude Sitton
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, pp. 9-11
          
          Americans don't ask much of
those whom they send to the U.S. Senate. A senator can usually pass
muster at the polls if he tips the pork barrel toward home
occasionally, votes his constitutents' pocketbook interests and keeps
enough goodwill among his colleagues to avoid becoming an
embarrassment to his state. Sen. Jesse Helms will leave Washington
shortly it appears on two of those three counts.
          Helms has offended the tobacco industry by switching his vote to
assure passage of a tax bill that doubled the 

levy on cigarettes. He
has drawn the contempt and ridicule of other senators by threatening
political retribution against those who opposed his proposals on
abortion and prayer in the schools. And, now, he has suffered two
stunning defeats on these very issues in as many weeks.
          Not even Helmsites can deny that the session soon to recess has
raised more critical questions about his ability than any other in his
ten years in the Congress. There's much irony in this. Helms could not
have asked for a brighter political prospect than that which faced him
in the Senate two years ago.
          The apparent political mood was conservative, if not
reactionary. Ronald Reagan, the Tar Heel senator's own choice, had
assumed the presidency. Republicans had taken control of the Senate,
thanks in some measure to the PACman blitz against moderates and
liberals financed by Helms' National Congressional Club. And hot-eyed
disciples of the moral majority were flooding Capitol Hill to demand
that congressmen and senators toe their radical, right-wing
line. Given those odds, success was a certainty.
          But Helms managed to blow it. All manner of excuses come to
mind. Post-election polls indicated that the conservatism read into
the defeat of former President Carter was more apparent than real and
was by no means the radicalism espoused by the Helms' camp. Further,
the single-issue factions of the right are a contentious lot. Helms,
who compromises grudingly at best, soon found himself feuding with
them. This same rigidity added to the senator's troubles with
others.
          Republican control of the Senate had given Helms the chairmanship
of the Agriculture Committee, which once carried the obligatory prefix
"powerful" before its name. One of the chairman's important
responsibilities, perhaps his most important, is shepherding the farm
bill through the Senate. But Helms flunked his test as a legislative
quarterback and Sen. Robert J. Dole, the Finance Committee chairman
had to assume floor management of the bill to save it from defeat.
          It's possible that newfound fame had led Helms to feel he was above
compromise. After all, had he not graced the cover of
Time? But news magazine cover stories have hexed far
greater figures than Helms. And, as observed by Lauch Faircloth, the
canny state commerce secretary, "The higher the monkey climbs up the
flagpole, the better you can see his rear."
          There's a double irony in the recent twin defeats suffered by Helms
under circumstances that once seemed so promising. He did not take a
truly conservative position on either of the issues he chose for his
fight-and-die stand in the Senate. Remember that the conservative
theme sounded again and again in the 1980 campaign was "Let's get
government off our backs."

          Instead of halting government intervention, Helms sought
legislation interposing government between a woman and her doctor in
that most private of decisions--whether to end a pregnancy. He
endorsed interventionism again with an amendment to a debt ceiling
bill, an amendment that would have permitted states to order prayers
in the public schools, a blatant contravention of the Constitution's
pledge of religious freedom.
          That latter piece of mischief also would have stripped the Supreme
Court of authority to review state prayer laws. This raised the
specter of constitutional amendments voted by the legislative majority
of the moment. That and other aspects of the two Helms proposals
proved too much for even some conservatives.
          Sen. Barry Goldwater, the Arizona Republican whom Helms
acknowledges as the father of conservatism, was among the
naysayers. Goldwater said Helms had damaged the conservative cause
with his radical measures and bullyboy tactics. And it was Goldwater
who gave the coup de grace to the Helms prayer amendment with a motion
to send the debt ceiling bill to committee with instructions to rid it
of all riders.
          Some other senators thought that Helms was less interested in
government-imposed morality than in whipping up emotions that would
generate contributions to his National Congressional
Club. Undoubtedly, those Helms apponents standing for re-election will
feel the club's lash. But whether Helms' objectives are ideological or
monetary, his actions leave no doubt that he ranks them ahead of
everything else. That means that even his constituents' economic
welfare and the goodwill of his colleagues, without which no senator
can be effective, come second.
          This session, then, poses a question that only North Carolinians
can answer. That is whether the state wants to go on paying the price
of keeping this true believer of radical stripe in the Senate.
          
            Claude Sitton its the editor of the Raleigh News
and Observer.
          
        
        
          Killing Our Own: The Disaster of America's Experience
with Atomic Radiation. By Harvey Wasserman and Norman Solomon
with Robert Alverez and Eleanor Walters, New York: Dell Publishing
Co., 1982, $12.95.
          By Northrop, JohnJohn Northrop
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, pp. 19-20
          
          Hiroshima proved that the atomic bomb could wipe out cities, but it
was years later before many people began paying much attention to the
possible side effects of radiation. Big mistake.
          Evidently, Americans have paid an extraordinary price for nuclear
technology from almost the very beginning. Immediately after the war,
American G.I.'s were assigned to help sweep up the rubble in Hiroshima
and Nagasaki. A few years later the veterans were dying from cancer in
unusual numbers. Soldiers who had served as observer/guinea pigs near
subsequent bomb tests also fell victim to cancer at an unusually high
rate. Adding insult to injury, the Veterans Administration has denied
most claims, refusing to acknowledge the apparent connection between
radiation and the atomic veterans' diseases.
          True enough, it's nearly impossible to prove exactly what has
caused any given individual's cancer, but statistics and common sense
should tell us something. When men are dropping dead of the disease at
rates of up to ten times greater than the rest of us, and the obvious
common denominator is uncommon radiation exposure, we at least should
give them the benefit of the doubt.
          But there, precisely, is the problem. From the beginning, the
burden of proof has fallen on those who believe that atomic radiation
is dangerous, not on those who would have us think it safe. As a
watchdog, the federal government has shown a feeble bark and a more
feeble bite, proving most attentive to safety claims by pro-nuclear
radiation authorities. Official radiation standards have tightened
only as embarassing evidence has mounted that no amount of radiation
can be considered "safe."
          Killing Our Own surveys the damage. Chapters discuss
a host of radiation issues, including the use and misuse of medical
X-rays, the hazards of occupational radiation exposure, and the health
threat of routine releases from nuclear power plants. One of the
worrisome problems with even low-level radiation is its potential
impact on later generations. Genetic damage to a few individuals now
can show up as widespread birth defects a few decades down the
road.
          Not that we'll have to wait for other damage. In 1976, the
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commisssion admitted that the nation's nuclear
power program will cause 1,1001,300 cancer deaths and 2,100-2,400
genetic defects by the year 2000. This may seem a piddling sum
compared with annual U.S. traffic deaths of up to fifty thousand each
year. However, the NRC figures fall low in the range of atomic
casualty estimates, and they don't consider the consequences of an
accident.
          Like at Three Mile Island. In a chapter entitled "People Died at
Three Mile Island"--an ironic reference to bumper stickers claiming
otherwise--the authors point to official Pennsylvania state health
statistics which show a sudden rise in neo-natal and infant deaths in
the TMI area shortly after the 1979 power plant accident. The authors
also show how Pennsylvania health officials have been playing games
with the same statistics, trying to prove their own figures lie.
          The authors don't guess why, but one reason is plain enough. The
state was a bit slow to order an evacuation of young chidren and
pregnant women during the TMI crisis. If TMI radiation did kill those
babies, who deserves at least some of the blame . . . ?
          Which brings to mind a story from a quarter-century earlier than
TMI. Atom bombs and reactors have much in common, as would any parent
and child. Certainly their 

radioactive by-products are similar, as
well as the health effects of these substances. For years, the bomb
people freely polluted the atmosphere and wide areas of the American
west with weapons test fallout. Until the 1960's, the old Atomic
Energy Commission, now broken up into the NRC and other agencies,
steadfastly held that the fallout was almost harmless, despite a
growing clamor by knowledgeable scientists that thousands of human
beings would die from radiation effects.
          In 1954, a Hollywood movie crew came to St. George, Utah, a bit
downrange from the government's Nevada bomb test site. The crew stayed
three months filming The Conqueror, featuring John
Wayne. By 1979, ninety-one of the crew's 220 members had developed
cancer, and half of those had died of the disease. Among the victims
were the film's stars--Susan Hayward, Agnes Moorehead, Dick Powell and
Wayne himself.
          When People magazine put it all together in 1980,
the implications were embarassing. "Please, God," a Pentagon official
was quoted, "don't let us have killed John Wayne."
          The Duke is dead, but nuclear energy lives on. Every section of the
nation has its share of nuclear facilities. In the South, Mississippi
was the site of two underground bomb tests in the
mid-1960's. Tennessee Valley Authority electricity has powered uranium
enrichment facilities since the beginning of the A-bomb program. Even
with recent cutbacks, TVA's nuclear power plant program is one of the
largest in the world: South Carolina hosts one of the nation's two
major high level waste dumps. There's even uranium mining in
Florida.
          As the nation's poor (and everyone else) struggle through our new
era of limitations, at least one industry maintains its favored status
at the government trough. Big federal bucks still go to nuclear
research and development despite ham-fisted cutbacks in alternative
energy programs. Indirect nuclear subsidies also continue, like the
legal monstrosity known as the Price-Anderson Act. Price-Anderson
limits government and industry liability to a mere fraction of the
multibillion dollar costs possible in an all-out nuclear power plant
disaster. This means that if your neighborhood nuke goes haywire and
your property is rendered uninhabitable for centuries, you'll have to
swallow most of those losses.
          One suspects there won't be much change soon in federal performance
where radiation and health are concerned. Over the years, federal
officials have ignored and even suppressed evidence that radiation is
far more dangerous than atomic promoters would like.
          Much of this is not particularly new. Killing Our
Own consolidates a wealth of information from Peter Metzger's
The Atomic Establishment and other sources, all
carefully noted. Indeed, this is one of the book's strong points; it
is an efficient about of radiation information from a perspective
not backed by industry money or government promotion.
          The book's other strong point is people. The authors have
incorporated the personal stories of a good many radiation
victims. Confronted by their anguish, the reader sees beyond the
statistics and finds human faces. Individual agony speaks more
directly to our sympathies and reinforces the impression that
government and industry have behaved with insensitivity, even
criminality.
          Critics already have accused Killing Our Own of
trafficking in hearsay. That's a bit much, although it's fair to
concede that some of the evidence against the radiation establishment
seems circumstantial. No matter. Convictions are won--and conviction
shaped when circumstantial evidence is cogent. Killing Our
Own probably won't be the last word on its subject, but it
will help shift the burden of proof in the court of public opinion. As
the public grows more aware of the real and potential threats of
atomic radiation, the nuclear establishment--including cooperative
federal and state "regulatory" agencies--will be forced to admit the
danger of its wares.
          At last we'll get to the real issue: Is nuclear energy really worth
its high human costs?
          
            John Northrop is a member of the Conservation Committee
of the Birmingham Audubon Society.
          
        
        
          Beaufort Academy--"None Ever Applied"
          By Mcmillan, GeorgeGeorge Mcmillan
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, pp. 3-4
          
          If Congress wants to know how a typical tax exempt segregated
school works in a typical Southern town it should look at Beaufort
Academy in this South Carolina Low Country community.
          Beaufort Academy is a flourishing place. It's not in the least like
one of those barren campuses plopped down on the rim of some Southern
rural community, and presided over by a sweaty, panting,
fundamentalist zealot.
          Instead it is an attractive place with a country club air about
it. It has 125 acres in the midst of pleasant suburbs, six buildings,
including a library, gym, a music room, and twenty-four class
rooms. It has an annual budget of $750,000, and 475 students in grades
one through twelve.
          These students would rather been seen dead than without their Izod
shirts and Bass Weejuns. And the chairman of its Board of Trustees has
been Henry Chambers, the mayor of Beaufort, one of the town's
best-dressed businessmen.
          Beaufort Academy has been in the education business continuously
since 1966, and it has never had a black student. Or, as its officials
insist, "no black student has ever applied to us." And yet it has
complied with present IRS regulations and has tax exempt status. It
does not pay any property tax, either. For one period it refused to
pay social security taxes for its teachers.
          It would seem that Beaufort Academy, having the best of both
worlds, being both lily-white in fact and paying no taxes (except
sales tax), would be content with its status of relative immunity and
that its history as an institution in this town, in its relationships
with other institutions, and especially the public schools, would be
that of a benign one.
          The opposite is true, and Beaufort Academy, and the private school
forces which support it, have worked aggressively against public
schools, and at one time came close to destroying the public school
system here.
          The lesson for Congress in Beaufort Academy's story is that schools
like Beaufort Academy enmesh themselves deeply in the social,
economic, political and educational life of the town. They claim the
allegiance of community leaders just when they are badly needed to
help the public schools through the worst crisis in Southern public
school history.
          The affluent, influential, parents of Beaufort Academy students
found themselves under pressure in the past decade to commit
themselves to private education as a cause and not simply as an
educational option.
          In fact, the wounds have not healed yet from the bitter,
destructive, fight that took place here between public school and
private school forces in the years from 1974 until 1980. The battle
eventually involved the Governor of South Carolina, and required a
legislative act to bring the fight to a temporary compromise.
          "You would almost be driven to the conclusion that a private school
just can't peacefully coexist with public schools," is the moral one
public school official drew from the battle.
          In 1974, public school officials, "having weathered the worse of
our integration troubles," began to feel the pinch of a "dilapidated
and unsafe," school plant, and had some studies made of the needed
improvements, one of which was done by a blue ribbon and apparently
non-partisan committee of local people, some of whom had children in
Beaufort Academy. A bond issue of $24.5 million was decided upon.
          "Everything changed when better public education had a price tag on
it," says Nancy Thomas, one of those who got into the fight. She was
one of a group of women who had worked together in the League of Women
Voters in Beaufort and who became the nucleus of the side which fought
for the public schools. The group included a former nun, a black woman
who created and runs an organization of child care centers in the Low
Country, a former high school teacher--most of these women were in
their thirties and had small children in the public schools. They were
guided by Robert Salisbury, the county superintendent of schools, a
tough, aggressive and politically astute administrator.
          The most determined and the most forthrightly belligerent
opposition seemed to come from just one man. He is Charles Stockell, a
retired Army colonel, executive director of the Beaufort Chamber of
Commerce, and an 

instructor in international relations in the
University of South Carolina (Beaufort). Stockell had previously been
a spokesman for conservative causes locally. In the school issue, he
announced that he was spokesman for the Committee for Accountable
Schools. He spoke and he appeared on TV, radio, at civic groups.
          No officers of his committee were ever announced, and no membership
list was ever published. No public accounting of the monies spent in
Stockell's fight was ever made.
          The Board of Education announced that it was going to advertise for
bids on its bond issue on December 19, 1979. On December 14, two men
and Stockell's committee sued to prevent the bond sale.
          This effectively stopped the bond sale, a local state senator
settled the dispute by offering a compromise which was incorporated in
a bill he introduced in the state legislature which gave the schools
the right to sell bonds for $14.5 million.
          The bonds were finally sold in 1980. New school buildings are being
built but the cost in inflation and from increased interest rates
caused by the delay is high if difficult to figure. When the bonds
were first being talked about the interest rate was fi.5 percent; when
they were sold it was 10.6 percent.
          Stockell, even today, will not reveal the names of the Committee
for Accountable Schools, except to reply to a questioner: "None of
your damned business." The lawyer who filed the suit says he "attended
a couple of meetings where there were about fifteen men." Charles
Fraser, the original developer of Hilton Head Island and Chairman of
the Board, Sea Pines Plantation Company, says that he was not a member
but "I did attend a couple of meetings."
          One of the ironies of Beaufort Academy is that there is at least
some part of the parental group who probably would not put racial
segregation as the paramount reason for sending their children
there. They would insist they want their children to have "a better
education." Another reason about which they would not be explicit is
that they are part of a new class in the South, well-heeled young
doctors and dentists and lawyers, mostly from less well-to-do rural or
small town farm families in the South, who are ardently determined to
fix a social class for themselves and their children--to put behind
them all the allegations of being red-necked and bigots. In Beaufort
it is, as they call it, "the Academy" which is the institution that
performs that social function.
          It may be that Beaufort Academy is not better than the public
Beaufort High School or Battery Creek. There is really no way to know
because Beaufort Academy is not certified by any of the
usually-recognized certifying agencies--not by the state department of
education, nor by the Southern Association of Schools and
Colleges. "Just remember" said one state official, "they don't have to
meet any standards of any kind if they don't want to or cants."
          The black community in Beaufort county has members on most of the
public governing agencies in the county, and feels "relief," and not
frustration at being either able or unable to attend Beaufort
Academy. "The worst thing to me," said one of them, "is that it is
training another generation of white Southern leaders in the myths,
the stereotypes and the taboos of a segregated society."
          To the coalition of conservatives who apparently are seeking
broader ideological objectives Beaufort Academy is a symbol of
achievement and the embodiment of their ideology.
          One of these is Charles Aimar, a local pharmacist, who founded
Beaufort Academy. He is still an active and influential member of the
board, and he served for some years as president of the South Carolina
Independent Schools Association.
          "I don't believe in government-operated schools at all, not for
anybody, not in any grade, high or low," Aimar said the other day. "I
think the free enterprise system can run education in this country and
do a good job if it's given a chance."
          Mr. Aimar says that he was "a contributor to" a "Freedom Library,"
in Beaufort which was being run by the local John Birch Society at the
time he organized Beaufort Academy. He says he would "rather not
answer" on whether he was a John Birch member.
          
            George McMillan its a freelance writer who lives in
Frogmore, South Carolina.
          
        
        
          Worker Owned: Some Southern Beginnings
          By Connette, WoodyWoody Connette
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, pp. 11-15
          
          In September 1979, a small group of Windsor, North Carolina
residents transformed a vacant automobile showroom into a garment cut
and sew operation. They chose a name that desribes exactly what they
are: The Workers' Owned Sewing Company. There were no Chamber of
Commerce ribbon cuttings, no features or accolades in the local papers
and no beaming bankers congratulating themselves on this new business
in the community.
          Three years later, though, WOSCO is thriving, and praise for its
quiet achievement is beginning to trickle in. I was surprised when I
visited WOSCO in September 1982 because the company looks like any
other cut-and-sew operation. A small, front bookkeeping office is
dwarfed by the large sewing room where workers hem pieces of fabric
into clothing. The industrial buzz is nothing like the comforting hum
of a home sewing machine. Thread whips from large cones through the
machine and into the fabric. Over to one side, other workers cut
panels of fabric from large bolts of cloth with electric knives. At
the far end of the room, workers inspect finished clothing before
bagging, tagging and boxing items for shipment.
          Unlike other cut-and-sew operations, however, all who come to work
at WOSCO come with the understanding that they will become
shareholders in the corporation. After three years of continuous
operation, forty workers have bought into the company by purchasing
one share of stock at a cost of one hundred dollars. These workers
have elected a board of directors which in turn has selected Tim
Bazemore to manage the business. Bazemore, a Bertie County native, had
years of experience with another cut-and-sew business and was one of
the leaders in establishing WOSCO. According to him, one of the
principal differences between the worker owned business and any other
business is that "there is a family-like atmosphere here. There is a
feeling for other workers."
          All of the workers meet periodically to discuss the progress of
their business, production and contract problems, and other
matters. Cut-and-sew is a highly competitive industry. When I visited
WOSCO, I was struck by the workers' zeal. Yet there was no sense of
apprehension in their speed and efficiency. They were not working to
please a boss; they were working for themselves. Company profits mean
profits to them personally, and profit is directly tied to their own
productivity.
          WOSCO started on a financial shoestring. At times, Tim Bazemore had
to sell corn, soybeans or hogs from his farm to cover the payroll. No
banks or other commercial lenders were interested. Twin Streams
Educational Center, a Chapel Hill based organization that provides
assistance to worker owned businesses, loaned WOSCO fifteen thousand
dollars.
          In the beginning, each pay day was viewed as a milestone. In recent
months, the business has been showing a profit after meeting the
payroll and other expenses, so that only $2,700 remains to be paid on
their original Twin Streams loan. Suprisingly, WOSCO's immediate
problems come from being too successful. WOSCO makes blue jeans which
are sold to a company which in turn sells them to K-Mart. The
middleman with which it contracts has apparently heard of WOSCO's
earnings and is attempting to reduce the contract price. So far, the
workers have refused to buckle under to pressure to renegotiate and
may face layoffs. Bazemore and WOSCO Vice-President Lila Dudly regard
this as typical of the problems faced by any cut-and-sew
operation. They remain confident that WOSCO will continue to show
profit and to grow. According to Dudly, "We're going to have to prove
workers' owned to everyone in this area, because we're the first. When
we succeed, there will be more worker owned businesses here than
anything else."
          The individuals who started WOSCO needed work, 

and took matters
into their own hands. But WOSCO workers are not unique. Around the
country, others are coming to realize that to save or preserve their
jobs they too will have to take charge of their futures. Increasingly,
employees are cooperatively taking ownership of plants that are
threatened with closure. In a September 6, 1982 New York Times
article, the Episcopal Urban Bishops' Coalition said, "We suggest that
the disarray now spreading through economic arrangements in America
today may have its roots in the longstanding practice of workplace
inequality and the lack of dignity through shared ownership." Further,
"We note that where cooperatively owned enterprises have existed in
this country, and elsewhere in the world, productivity has been
high."
          In Weirtown, West Virginia, workers are negotiating the purchase of
a steel mill from their employer, National Steel Corproation, in the
face of National's plan to close the operation. At stake are the jobs
of approximately 8,800 workers and the economic future of the
community.
          In northeastern South Dakota, the 180 members of Dakota Handcrafts,
Inc. sew earthtone quilts and home furnishings sold in retail stores
throughout the country.
          In Oregon and Washington, several worker owner plywood companies,
ranging in size from eighty to 450 workers, have been in business for
as long as forty years.
          
            Loaves and Zippers
          
          Shortly after midnight, six nights a week, Percy White turns on the
lights at the New Bern Bakery and begins mixing, kneading, rolling and
cutting dough for the goodies that will fill the display counters in
the morning. Around 2 a.m., his wife, Elnora, and other worker,
Ernestine Patrick, arrive. The three of them work steadily, and by 5
a.m. open their doors to the public.
          Fresh doughnuts, twists, long-johns and poorboys are ready when the
customers come in. Cakes are baked to customers' specifications in a
dozen-odd flavors ranging from German chocolate to tutti-frutti. The
Whites and Ms. Patrick remain behind the counter all day. If the work
is slow, they may take turns dozing or minding the bakery while the
others go out for fresh air. At 7 p.m. the bakery closes and its
workers go home for a few hours of rest before starting the routine
again.
          Elnora and Percy White and Ernestine Patrick have been working at
the New Bern Bakery since it opened in December 1981. Why do they work
so hard? As with WOSCO, the bakery belongs to them. They started it
from scratch with little more than hope. Its success will be their
success.
          It may never have occurred to the Whites' and Ms. Patrick to open
their own business had they not been among the five hundred employees
who were abruptly thrown out of work by the Texfi plant in New Bern in
July 1980. None of the Texfi employees received any advance notice of
the plant's closing. Elnora White had worked there for eight
years. "Ernestine called and told me that Texfi was going to close,"
Ms. White recalls, "I said, 'It can't be true. We just left there this
morning.' then the telephone just started ringing. Everyone was
calling each other."
          For the Whites and Ms. Patrick, finding work in New Bern proved
impossible. Local unemployment was already high, and they were
competing with the other 497 Texfi ex-employees for the few available
jobs. All three are middle-aged and black, and they watched as jobs
went to younger and white workers. They realized that they must take
matters into their own hands.
          First, the Whites and Ms. Patrick met with several other former
employees to consider reopening the plant themselves. They had heard
of similar efforts in other parts of the country. A bit of study
quickly showed them that the cost of retooling the plant was too
great. Texfi had anticipated the closing and had done nothing to
modernize production equipment.
          Then, the idea of starting the bakery arose. Percy White had been a
baker in New Jersey and the two women had years of experience cooking
at home. With the assistance of the Center For Community Self-Help, a
Durham, North Carolina nonprofit organization that offers technical
and financial assistance to emerging worker owned businesses, the
Whites' and Ms. Patrick began a feasibility study. According to
Ms. White, "We went door to door talking to people and businesses."
They finished their study convinced that a bakery would work.
          Next came the long and difficult task of preparing a business plan
and finding the money to lease a budding and purchase equipment and
supplies. Banks and other commercial lenders in New Bern quickly
turned down their loan applications. Again, the Center for Community
Self-Help and Twin Streams Educational Center in Chapel Hill came to
their assistance in arranging for loans. With this borrowed money and
cash earned through yard sales, the Whites' and Ms. Patrick opened
their baked in December 1981.
          So far, the bakery is breaking even, but to show a real profit it
will need additional equipment and employees. The City of New Bern has
applied for twenty thousand dollars from the North Carolina Small
Cities Community Development Block Grant Progrm to enable the bakery
to expand. If the state grants the money, the bakery will be able to
begin a marketing campaign to raise customer demand to the bakery's
full potential. When that day comes, perhaps the Whites' and
Ms. Patrick will be able to cut back on their fourteen to nineteen
hour days. For the present, however, none of the three workers
compalins too much about the long hours. "You work for someone else
all your life," explains Ernestine Patrick, "Now you are working for
yourself. This is a foundation."
          "We've got to work together to accomplish anything," Ms. White
adds. And to those who would follow their example, she warns, "Don't
go into it if you are not going to work together."

          A few miles from the WOSCO plant in Windsor, North Carolina, a
Talon zipper factory, located in Woodland, North Carolina, closed in
February 1982, throwing over two hundred skilled workers into the
depressed job market of Northhampton County. Eight of these former
employees are now trying to start a worker owned factory called United
Zipper Company. At first, they approached Talon to discuss buying the
closed plant or its equipment. Talon, fearing further competition,
refused to talk. Rather than sell, company agents destroyed the zipper
machinery and let it go for scrap.
          According to one worker, Beulah Sharpe, the cost of building a
plant and purchasing equipment will amount to $700,000. The city of
Murfreesboro has applied for $325,000 from the North Carolina Small
Cities Community Development Block Grant Program to be used for this
purpose. The balance will come from other lending sources. When the
business begins, by late fall of 1982, there will be ten worker
owners. Their plans project eventual growth to a work force of
thirty-seven.
          "At Talon," says Ms. Sharp, "we were never involved in making
decisions. Now we have to learn how to make decisions for
ourselves. We've made mistakes along the way, but we have learned from
them."
          Another worker, Doris Davis, adds that the learning will be
important for them all in the future. "Instead of having high paid
experts standing around telling us how to do things, we need to know
how to do them ourselves. The more worker owned businesses there are
in the state, the more business there will be to stay. They will not
be as likely to jump and move somewhere else. We would like to set an
example that would give other people courage to try the same
thing."
          
            ESOP's Fable and Workplace Democracy
          
          "Worker ownership" means many things to different people. Many
so-called worker owned businesses are in fact only partially owned by
the employees under the provisions of an employee stock ownership plan
(ESOP), which in most cases is designed by company management to take
advantage of tax benefits. In a typical ESOP, employees who
participate buy company stock through payroll deductions. Depending on
the size of the company, the employees may come to own anything from a
tiny outstanding stock to complete equitable ownership of the
company.
          Workers participating in an ESOP may or may not participate
democratically in the management of the company, depending upon the
particular provisions of the ESOP. Rarely do all workers own an equal
share of the business under ESOP provisions. Employers like ESOPs
because they have significant tax advantages. They have learned that
employees are more productive when they own a piece of the action. The
Washington-based National Center for Employee Ownership is the leading
organization promoting worker ownership through ESOPs.
          Every fable contains a bittersweet lesson, and ESOP is no
exception. While ESOPs may be applauded for allowing employees the
opportunity to purchase equitable ownership in the companies that
employ them, much of the gain is illusory. One problem is that many
companies tie employee ownership with a vesting scheme based on
employee tenure. Thus, the employee who stays with the company the
longest ends up with the largest share of the ownership. In a low
paying, unskilled company with high employee turnover, the company
management stays with the company the longest and ends up owning the
stock.
          Another problem with ESOPs is the emphasis they place on property
ownership of company stock, with no real concern for democratic
management of the business. Under an ESOP, stock is held in a trust,
and through various schemes upper management can retain control over
the voting rights that go along with the stock. For many worker
owners, management is vastly more important than ownership. Thus, many
worker owners and experts in the field question ESOPs as an option for
worker ownership.
          Among those who question the value of ESOPs are individuals like
Steve Dawson, executive director of the Industrial Cooperative
Association in Cambridge, Massachusetts, who asserts that effective
employee ownership must involve more than having employees' names on
the rolls of stockholders. For these individuals, workplace
democracy--the individual worker's right to manage the workplace and
share in the benefits of management--is paramount. For them, workplace
democracy has little to do with property rights. Since democratic
management rather than ownership is the key, the business becomes
something of a vessel for the workers' collective labor. Wages and job
quality are the principal rewards. While the business itself may be a
valuable asset, it is regarded as a legacy to be held intact for
themselves and for future generations of workers.
          In the best definition that I can offer, a worker owned business is
one in which all workers own some share in the business, with each
worker owner having one vote in the basic management of the business
affairs and workplace.
          
          Why worker ownership? Worker owned businesses can save existing
jobs that are jeopardized by plant closings and relocations and can
also create new jobs. This was one of the driving forces behind all
three worker owned business ventures in eastern North Carolina. None

of the eight individuals involved in United Zipper, for instance, has
found a job in the seven months since Talon closed its doors.
          Unemployment is especially high among minorities, the very young,
and the older individuals. By September 1982, seven months after
J.P. Stevens closed its Rock Hill, South Carolina plant, a Charlotte
Observer survey showed that only thirty-seven percent of the former
employees had found full time jobs. Only twenty -seven percent of the
women employees had found jobs. The average age of those who found
work was forty-one, and none contacted in the survey was below the age
of twenty-six. The average age of those without jobs was
forty-five.
          Worker owned businesses can also operate more profitably than
traditional corporations since a small portion of the gross revenue of
a worker owned business is subject to taxation on the corporate
level. Further, studies have shown that worker owners are generally
far more productive than their counterparts in other
businesses. Engineers who have timed WOSCO workers found that they
work at greater speed than employees in other cut-and-sew
operations.
          A worker owned business is often willing to settle for a lower
profit margin. Large corporations or conglomerates frequently cast off
plants that are not as profitable as their other operations. They show
little regard for the livelihood of those who may have served in the
local plant for their etire working careers. To explain such a plant
closing, a GAP Corporation vice-president once said, "We are a big
company and this is a small division that we acquired twelve years ago
in a merger."
          For the local employees of such a plant, operating the business as
worker owners may be profitable enough to preserve their jobs and pay
their wages. If they own the business themselves, there is no need to
worry about earning excess profits to distribute to shareholders
living outside the community with no real interest in the business. If
they are able to show a profit it goes into their own pockets as
salary dividends or stock equity appreciation.
          Local business leaders and politicians have generally been
skeptical or even hostile at the first suggestion of the creation of a
worker owned business in their communities. Upon reflection, however,
they have generally realized the positive effect that the business
with its jobs will have in their communities. In the case of all three
worker owned ventures I have described, local business and civic
officials, in recent days, have been quick to offer suport and
assistance. By and large, however, commercial lenders remain reluctant
to extend credit because of their lack of experience in lending to
anything but traditional businesses.
          Among the greatest advantages of worker owned business are those
which cannot be measured on a balance sheet. Worker owners must learn
how to work together, how the entire business operates, how their
individual responsibilities fit into the total business and how their
business fits into the total economy. The worker is at once a student
and a teacher. Taking charge of their work lives also better equips
workers to take control of their personal lives and to participate in
their communities. All of the worker owners I interviewed were proud
of their struggles to make the businesses work and of how much they
have learned in the process.
          
            From A&P to 0&0
          
          Despite the attractions, all is not rosy in the world of worker
ownership. Problems abound. The success stories can be countered with
stories of failures. In Lincolnton, North Carolina, 210 textile
workers lost their jobs and three weeks pay when their former employer
quietly filed for bankruptcy and closed the plant in February 1981. I
lived less than a block from that plant at that time and watched with
anguish as the employees struggled through seven months of exhausting
work trying to reopen the plant as a worker owned business. Obtaining
financing, developing a business plan, negotiating with purchasers and
suppliers and planning for democratic plant management was simply more
than the core group of ten workers could endure. Today, the plant
stands idle, and many of the former employees remain jobless.
          One of the major problems facing worker owned business ventures is
financing. Traditional lending sources have been extremely reluctant
to extend credit. In partial recognition of this problem, Congress
created the National Consumer Cooperative Bank (NCCB) to offer loans
and loan guarantees to worker owned businesses and other
cooperatives. To date, however, most of the credit extended by the
NCCB has gone to well established consumer and producer coops rather
than to emerging worker owned businesses. In addition, the turnaround
time on processing loan applications, together with personal
guarantees and collateral requirements, have frustrated worker
owners. NCCB has proved virtually useless in the worker ownership'
movement.
          In North Carolina, a handful of organizations have consciously
developed a technical assistance system to support worker owned
businesses. Twin Streams Educational Center assists worker owners in
learning to make cooperative management decisions. Twin Streams
director Wes Hare says, "We are committed to offering close, active
educational support to workers as they learn to fill new business
roles. We work with them to learn decision making, board of director
functions, officer responsibilities, and other questions of
policy--where decisions are made and by whom. We also conduct
residential workshops of workers and technicians. We are constantly
supporting education based on the ideas at hand, built on a foundation
of political and community action, with concern for worker
empowerment."
          Another organization, the Center for Community Self-Help in Durham,
offers nuts and bolts assistance with feasibility studies, business
plans, management, production, and marketing plans. The Center also
offers legal assistance with incorporation and other
matters. Recently, it has been instrumental in establishing the
Corporation for Democratic Business to extend loans to worker owned
businesses and in establishing a credit union. According to the
Center's director, Martin Eakes, response to the emerging credit union
has been very promising, suggesting that it may well become one of the
best available sources of financing for worker owner businesses.
          Church organizations have been among the most promising funding
sources. WOSCO, for example, 

received a sixty-thousand dollar loan
from the United Presbyterian Church at below market interest
rates. The Washington based Catholic Campaign for Human Development
has also shown interest in financing worker owned businesses and had
agreed to extend credit to the Lincolnton venture.
          Worker ownership is also suffering an identity crisis. In the
public mind, it is frequently associated with union concessions in
failing industries. Around the country, savvy business managers are
offering illusory ESOPs and other employee stock options in union
contract negotiations in exchange for wage and benefit
concessions. When labor refuses these offers, management criticizes
them for wanting all of the benefits with none of the burdens that
come with ownership. Although touted as employee ownership, these
schemes are generally a far cry from the type of worker ownership
described in this article. In Clark, New Jersey, the employees in a GM
plant were given ESOP participation in exchange for a twenty-five
percent cut in wages. While the employees acceptes this as part of a
package, it is not the "worker owned business" that it has been
trumped up to be.
          In a similar vein, worker ownership has also been associated with
traditional businesses offering ESOPs or other profit-sharing plans
and token participation in workplace management. "Worker ownership"
has been used to describe a confusing array of stock participation
schemes. In a recent article discussing this identity problem,
Industrial Cooperative Association Director Steve Dawson speculated
that unless worker ownership can be distinguished from other business
structures in the public mind, it "will become just another high-risk
profit sharing scheme. Just one more shell in corporate America's
productivity game."
          To further complicate this identity problem, worker ownership has
frequently been shunned by unions who could offer alternative image of
worker ownership to that posed by corporate managers. While twenty
percent of America's union members belong to internationals that have
taken affirmative positions on workplace democracy and employee
ownership, many of the remaining eighty percent belong to unions that
are hostile to the idea of worker-ownership. The United Zipper
workers, for example, were all members of a local ILGWU while employed
at Talon. When Talon announced its plans to close the plant, the
national union officers offered no assistance when they were
approached by the workers, all of whom were leaders of the union
local, with their proposals to open a new plant.
          In the Philadelphia area, the United Food and Commercial Workers
Union has been instrumental in establishing worker owned supermarkets
in the wake of many supermarket closings in recent years. According to
Wendell Young, President of UFCW Local 1357, his union began
negotiations with A&P management in April 1982 for the lease of
five former A&P stores to be opened as worker owner
supermarkets. On October 13, 1982 the first worker owned retail
supermarket in the country opened under his union's leadership in
Philadelphia. The store, known as "O&O"--short for Worker Owned
and Operated--is completely owned by twenty-four full time worker
owners who are also UFCW members. These worker owners have hired a
professional manager who has no ownership interest in the
business. The union is the bargaining agent between this manager and
the worker owners. According to Mr. Young, "Our UFCW local supports
the concept of worker ownership. Based on our experience here in
Philadelphia and elsewhere, we believe that worker ownership is a way
of saving jobs for UFCW members."
          
            Seeds of Hope
          
          The worker owned businesses that I have seen are all relatively
small. In every case, the workers have struggled against desperate
odds to get started. In an economy that measures success by size--the
size of the labor force, the value of corporate assets, the margin of
profit--these businesses may appear insignificant. I live in that
economy, and I have become adept at using its yardsticks for measuring
success. Yet in these worker owned businesses, I see hope. They are
rooted in the community as no other business can be. By not having to
satisfy external shareholders or the growth expectations of a parent
corporation somewhere else, they can survive wide fluctuations in the
economy. They provide decent, stable jobs and give workers the chance
to manage their own affairs. Around the country, workers like Elnora
and Percy White, and small towns like Woodland and Windsor, are being
ravaged by the drastic changes that we are seeing in the industrial
production sector of the economy. There are welcome seeds of hope in
these worker owned businesses.
          
            Woody Connette is managing attorney at Legal Services of
Southern Piedmont, Inc., in Concord, North Carolina.
          
        
        
          Bad Blood: The Tuskegee Syphilis Experiment. By James
H. Jones. New York: The Free Press, 1981. $14.95.
          By Beatty, BessBess Beatty
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, pp. 17-19
          
          In 1972 the Associated Press broke the story of the Tuskegee
experiment, a forty-year study of the effect of syphilis on six
hundred Macon County, Alabama, black men. Nine years later James Jones
published Bad Blood, a history of what he describes as
"The scandalous story of the Tuskegee experiment--when government
doctors played God and science went mad." Jones' book is a thoroughly
researched and dispassionate, although indicting, account of this
experiment.
          The story has a background imbeded in centuries of "racial
medicine." By the twentieth century syphilis had come to be considered
by many physicians as "the quintessential black disease," and, despite
the insights of modern medicine, some continued to believe that it
affected blacks differently than whites. Ironically the Tuskegee study
grew out of changing attitudes, at least among public health
officials, toward black health generally and syphilis particularly. By
the 1920s contempt and neglect were beginning to give way to
realization that scientific and medical insights should be applied
equally to all races.
          In 1929 the Julius Rosenwald Fund, renowned for its efforts on
behalf of black education, began funding Public Health Service
programs for blacks. The pilot program, planned to demonstrate control
of veneral 

disease in five Southern rural counties, included Macon
County, Alabama, which was eighty-two percent black and which had,
despite the presence of famed Tuskegee Institute, the highest syphilis
rate uncovered by the study. Although of short duration, the Rosenwald
program eventually inspired a nationwide campaign to test and treat
syphilis--an effort that excluded six hundred Macon County men who
were involved in the original study.
          The Tuskegee experiment, in which they were now involved, grew out
of frustration at the termination of Rosenwald funding. Director
Taliaferro Clark, who "would have preferred to . . . treat rather than
to study syphilitic blacks," settled for a less expensive project, The
Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male, which was to
become "the longest nontherapeutic experiment on human beings in
medical history." Dr. Clark planned to study empirically the long held
notion that syphilis affected blacks differently than whites by
comparing his findings to a study of untreated syphilis in white males
in Oslo, Norway. Clark expressed no ethical qualms as he prepared for
the "unparalleled opportunity," but neither did he envision that the
men would go untreated longer than the six months he expected the
experiment to last. To assure local black support, the Tuskegee
Institute was made partner of the Public Health Service and its name
was applied to the study. Dr. Raymond Vonderlehr was selected to be in
charge of field work and Eunice Rivers, a black nurse, was appointed
to assist him. Initially some minimal treatment was included which
would eventually evoke the scientific criticism that the experiment
was invalid as a study of untreated syphilis.
          But it was the ethical dimension that would eventually condemn the
Tuskegee study as the most infamous episode in the history of
government medicine in the United States. The program was couched in
deceit from the beginning. Patients were told that they had "bad
blood," not that they suffered from a particular disease that was
contagious and transmitted sexually. Those brought in for painful and
dangerous lumbar punctures which were strictly diagnostic were told
that they were receiving "special treatment."
          When Dr. Vonderlehr, who was making a career out of the Tuskegee
work, was named to replace Clark, the decision was made to continue
the study indefinitely. His plan entailed low-cost examination of each
man, facilitated by Nurse River's personal contact, until each could
be "brought to autopsy." Their efforts to keep the men involved in the
study were facilitated by continued deceit, non-effective medication
such as asprin, burial stipends, and occasional certificates and cash
awards. The support- of the Tuskegee Institute and area physicians,
both eager to participate in a national scientific study, assured the
experiment's survival. Although poor blacks in Macon County could
rarely afford to see a doctor, the cooperation of area physicians was
still profoundly significant because men who were "potential patients"
were made "perpetual subjects . . . placed beneath a microscope for
scientific observation." How callous the Public Health Service became
toward these subjects is indicated by a letter from Dr. John Heller,
field director of the study, complaining of the availability of Civil
Works Administration jobs for blacks because it "disrupted the
Ethiopian population as regards staying in one place very long."
Heller later recalled, "No one questioned whether the experiment was
ethical; no one even came close to doing so."
          Initially, denial of treatment was rationalized (by those who
bothered to rationalize at all) on the grounds that the treatment
available for syphilis could be as hazardous as the disease. This
justification was rendered more difficult in the 1940s when the
discovery of penicilin offered a safe, effective syphilis treatment,
but by then the study had acquired a bureacratic momentum, a
self-perpetuation, that made it immune from challenge. Leadership
continued to come from within, and no one involved considered ending
the work.
          It was not until 1966 that Peter Buxton, a venereal disease
interviewer in San Francisco, learned about the study and
protested. Officials, still convinced of the experiment's scientific
merit and moral intergrity, rejected Buxton's criticism and vowed to
continue. Finally in 1972 they were overruled when the Associated
Press, proded by Buxton, told the story. A nine-member and it was
disbanded. Out of court settlement awarded the surviving syphilitics
$37,500, with lesser amounts to their heirs and to those in the
control group.
          Beyond the specific appalling story it tells, Jones' book is
important for offering insight into power relationships in American
society. Despite the repeated denials of the officials involved, the
experiment serves as an example of the power of racism and elitism and
as an indictment of the limits to the paternalism and liberalism which
have allegedly served to temper these prejudices. Jones describes the
health officials who originated the study as paternalistic compared to
"the real black-baiters of the day." They were of the progressive or
liberal wing in American society which counseled government sponsored
improvement of the environment for blacks and the poor. But the book
reveals the stark limits to a liberalism and paternalism which views
the dispossessed as more subject than human.
          Bad Blood also demonstrates the dangerous potential

of a science without ethics. The Tuskegee experiment had almost
complete support from scientists within the Public Health Service, and
was not challenged from within even after the Nuremberg trials
sensitized the world to the potential of science gone mad. When the
study was uncovered in 1972, the scientific community was most vocal
in its defense.
          This example of "moral astigmatism" within the medical and science
professions make a strong case for closer government supervision of
medical activity, but the question remains--who will supervise the
government? Most appalling to many people was the revelation that a
federal agency had conducted the experiment. It was, the Providence
Sunday Journal charged, "flagrant immorality
. . . under the auspices of the United States Government."
          Jones also questions why none of the hundreds of individuals
involved protested. Sidney Milgram, in his study Obedience to
Authority, claims that "Pure moral autonomy in the form of
lone resistance to an apparently benign authority is very rare." His
conclusion is upheld by the example of scores of people who could have
protested medical experimentation but did not. Jones makes the
frightening comparison of the Public Health bureaucracy to the
military hierarchy of Nazi Germany which "reduced the sense of
personal responsibility and ethical concern." He is particularly
interested in why so many blacks cooperated with the Tuskegee work and
conjectures that black professionals were responding to "the dilemma
of black middle-class professionals who wanted to succeed in a society
dominated by whites." This was clearly true of Nurse Rivers, the most
poignant figure in the book and the one official involved who had
genuine concern for the welfare of the men involved. She was bound by
forces of race and class as well as a professional hierarchy that
demanded obedience to doctors and sex roles that "reinforced her
ethical passivity."
          Jones' book can be criticized for leaving the men involved as
lifeless as they were considered by the experimenters. Nevertheless,
he has told their story well: "a forty-year saga of lies and deceit,
of unlettered men who had trusted and been betrayed by educated men."
As the major indictment of "the scandalous story of the Tuskegee
experiment," this important book deserves to be widely read.
          
            Bess Beatty is an assistant professor of history at
Shorter College, Rome, Georgia.
          
        
      
    
  
