
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 4, Number 2,
	       1982
        
          Notes of a Klanwatcher
          By Williams, RandallRandall Williams
          Vol. 4, No. 2, 1982, pp. 11-13
          
          It's easy and relatively safe, in 1982, to hate the KKK, but
explaining why an anti-Klan movement is necessary, and getting those
in that movement to agree with the explanation, is less simple. After
a year Klanwatching (a friend still calls us occasionally, asks, "Have
you spotted any today?" then bursts into hysterical laughter), we
taped a favorite photo to a door in the office. The picture depicts a
serious young man, a member of a Canadian anti-Klan group, in mid-leap
from the roof of a car, placard stick raised on high, about to smash
the head of an equally serious young man who is a member of another
anti-racist group. The supporting parts in the photo are played by
several dozen members of these two groups, battling in a melee
apparently provoked by a difference of opinion on how best to oppose
the racism and violence of the Ku Klux Klan in British Columbia.
          Looking at that photograph, we at Klanwatch
are apt to burst into hysterical laughter.
          Part of the problem is that there are so many contradictions
involved; many questions about what author Stetson Kennedy calls the
Bedsheet Brigade can be truthfully answered both "yes" and "no." We
will look at other parts of the problem, but first, consider some of
the contradictions.
          No, there aren't enough Klansmen and they aren't well enough
organized, right now, to pose the country any serious threat. Yes, you
can still get hurt, killed or otherwise terrorized by the Klan if
you're the "wrong" color or doing the "wrong" thing. Or if you happen
to be married to California Klan leader Michael Mendonsa, who recently
ended his wife's budding career in organized racism by blowing her
apart with a shotgun.
          Still another contradiction involves the recently widely publicized
Klan recruitment of youth. No, the Klan Youth Corps is not
experiencing a membership explosion similar to that of the Hitler
Youth in the 1930s. Yes, the Klan today deliberately seeks out youth
and involves them in rallies, demonstrations and training. And a
startlingly high percentage of contemporary racist violence and
harassment is committed by youngsters. Klan literature does show up in
schools around the country. The stuff is available for the writing
from three or four Klan publications and is advertised in gun and
adventure magazines available at most grocery and drug stores.
          Where Klan chapters exist, it should not surprise anyone when the
sons and daughters of Klansmen say or do racist things or pass around
literature in school. However, the Klan youth camps which were seen on
television in 1980 and written about in Rolling Stone
and other publications were largely spontaneous creations for the
benefit of the press, and the kids in them were almost all the
children of adult Klan members.
          I think the Klan has definite allure for certain types of white
children. Kids dwell on mystery, violence and sensationalism, and the
Klan has all of that, especially as portrayed by much of the reporting
on the subject today. Some kids--perhaps most of them, really--are
raised with racism. Take a kid who already has all of that stuff
running around in his head, who is at the age of rebellion, and who
can't make the debate team (or; equally likely, is never encouraged to
try), gets beat out by black kids on the basketball team, and sits
sullenly in the back of the classroom--that kid is ripe for
recruitment.
          But even the strength of the adult Klan is a contradiction. It is
not true that the Klan's membership is currently growing by leaps and
bounds, through reporter after reporter dutifully licks his pencil
point and records it when the local head cone confides, "Well, son, we
don't discuss numbers, but we've got klaverns now in every country in
this state and three new ones started last week." It is true that Klan
membership today is the highest since the mid1960s and that the growth
was dramatic between 1975 and 1980. We at Klanwatch believe the Klan's
membership leveled off in 1981, though there is potential for more
growth. Clearly, this potential is aggravated by the mean mood of the
nation as a whole. It should be remembered that there are plenty of
people in Washington doing more harm with ink pens than the Klan is
with axe handles. Elsewhere, racist violence, whether committed by
actual Klan members or not, is at a sickeningly high level, as is
religious bigotry.
          There is genuine reason to be concerned about these turns of
events, all condradictions notwithstanding, especially when the
leaders of the nation seem blind to the existence of the problems and
the causes.
          Which brings us to today's sermon topic. We can cuss, meet, march,
legislate and litigate until the proverbial freezing over of hell, but
until we start thinking about Klansmen as people and consider how it
is that we still have a society which spawns them we're not going to
whip the problem. This is not to say that the current educational
campaigns against the Klan are no good, or that the 

prosecutions and
civil lawsuits against criminal Klansmen do not deter other racist
violence, or that outspoken stands against the Klan philosophy have no
effect. All of these are vital and are largely responsible for the
current disarray within the Klan ranks.
          But one of the obvious similarities of most Klansmen is an
overwhelming ignorance and a complete alienation from our society and
its institutions. It's a tough concept to sell the "Death of the Klan"
crowd, but I think most Klansmen, the rank and file, are victimized
almost as much as the targets of their hatred. It may not have been as
true in the Klan's prior incarnations, when thousands of otherwise
solid citizens were members, but most Klansmen today are pretty sad
characters. As a class, they are powerless people on the fringes of
social and economic life. They almost always have serious
psychological problems, with so-much anger and hate that they are
slowly burning up from the inside. They go through their lives being
manipulated by their employers, by the finance company, by the
landlord, by George Wallace and Jim Eastland and the like, and finally
by smooth-talking salesmen like Bill Wilkinson (head of the Invisible
Empire), David Duke (National Association for the Advancement of White
People), and Don Black (Knights of the KKK).
          Having been ignored for so long, many of them are attracted by the
aroma of power which surrounds Klan leaders. It must be power, the
prospective Kluxer reasons, because people like Wilkinson get on the
Phil Donahue and Tom Snyder shows; they can go to city hall and
attract half the police and all the press in town; they aren't afraid
to call (chuckle) a spade a spade; they've got big cars, bodyguards
and can even wear a suit without looking as if it was bought that
morning. Once he joins, the new Kluxer can get on the evening news
himself, just for standing on the street corner in his robe.
          In addition to power, the social aspect of the Klan, the sense of
belonging to something, should not be overlooked. Most Klansmen have
never belonged to anything. Surprisingly few of them, considering the
Klan's lip service to Christianity, even attend church, according to
testimony in connection with a recent civil lawsuit against a splinter
Klan group in Chattanooga, Tenn. One of the defendants in that suit, a
participant in the shooting incident which injured five black women,
testified that he had joined the Klan for reasons which included
having a group of guys to drink beer with, and because he wanted to
"help people." (Some 32 percent of white Chattanoogans, according to
survey data, were favorable to some aspect of the Klan, mostly to the
old vigilante notion that the Klan keeps in line not only black people
but also would-be wife deserters, wanton women, etc.) Under
questioning, the Klansmen admitted that the only other organization he
had ever joined was the French club in his high school.
          He is not atypical. Frequently, Klan meetings and rallies have an
atmosphere which for all its perverse weirdness can only be described
as like a country social. There may be music and speeches, children
playing in the grass, mama and daddy dressed in their robes, grandma
sitting in her folding lawn chair, and plenty of fish and beer.
          In such situations, an interested onlooker who can detach himself
for a moment from his feelings of contempt and hatred for what the
organization before him represents, will be swept by a sense of
sadness and pity.
          Or sometimes humor, because in its benign moments the Klan often
makes me wonder: If I'm supposed to be so scared, why do I feel like
laughing? Last summer, Mike Vahala (also a Klanwatch staffer) and I
attended a Klan recruitment rally in a public park on the outskirts of
Columbus, Ga. First the movie "Birth of a Nation" was shown, then
there was the usual incoherent discussion of how the government and
especially the courts had abandoned white people, then the meeting
broke up so the Klansmen could go burn a cross, which was not
permitted in the public park.
          On impulse, Mike and I got in line in the caravan which formed, and
we drove 10 or 12 miles out in the country, turned off the main road
onto a side road, then off that onto a private road which went across
a pasture and into some woods. It was dark and mighty lonely, and the
60 people who had been at the park had dwindled to 15 or 20. Except
for Mike and myself and two guys we thought (and hoped) were
undercover cops, the rest appeared to be Klan members, some robed and
some not, or at least strong sympathizers. There had been no weapons
in the public park, but suddenly everyone was wearing them.
          It was a slightly anxious moment, but then it became obvious that
no one was paying attention to us. Instead, there was a serious
problem with the cross-burning equipment. In an achievement of
high-tech Klankraft, the local boys had built themselves a reusable
cross from sections of steel pipe. Wrapped with burlap and soaked with
diesel fuel, the 30-foot cross was simply too heavy to lift. For a
half-hour or so, an awful lot of grunting and sweating went on, and
some mighty nice white robes got soiled with dirt and diesel fuel. By
this time it was getting late, and Mike and I faced a long drive and
were ready to start home.
          We eased into the crowd and made a few suggestions, directed a
couple of guys to get up on a pickup truck for leverage, had others
tie a chain to the cross and pull, and finally the cross stood up,
though by now the pipe had bent and throughout the ceremony which
followed one Klansman had to brace the cross by holding to the
chain. The ceremony itself was similar to an ROTC drill, with a lot of
marching, about-facing, saluting and so forth. The leader couldn't
remember his lines and had to get out his Klan manual and read his
piece. We couldn't understand what he said anyway, because he read
with his face down and through his mask. It didn't seem to matter. The
cross lit up the sky and the non-robed spectators made photographs,
and the night air was enlivened by a few "White Power" chants. Then we
all went home.
          My point is not that ineptitude makes the Klan less dangerous, but
that its members are merely human beings who happen to be united in a
destructive cause. United also by ignorance, by their station in life,
by their utter inability to comprehend the world around them.
          In this case, ignorance is not bliss, but blindness. While visiting
the national office (a one-room masonry building) of the Knights of
the Ku Klux Klan in Tuscumbia to serve a subpoena, I had a long,
casual conversation with Charlie Thomas, who works in the
office. Among other things, he insisted to me that the black man who
was given Allan Bakke's medical school seat (in the famous affirmative
action case) had an I.Q. of 39. "You can't be serious," I responded,
"Why, a person with an I.Q. of 39 can hardly talk." "Yeah," Thomas
replied. "Aint it a damn shame." When he saw that I was unconvinced,
Thomas searched for a few minutes for the "proof" of his claim, an
article he had read somewhere in one of the Klan newspapers. Thomas
also insisted that the racial turmoil in Decatur, Ala., in 1979, when
the Klan had attacked peaceful black demonstrators, had come about
because the blacks were marching in celebration of the anniversary of
the rape of a white woman. When I told him he was 

wrong, that the
march had been to protest what the demonstrators perceived as the
unjust prosecution and conviction of a retarded black man for that
crime, he was unmoved.
          Charlie Thomas did not strike me as a particularly evil man. He
doesn't seem too smart and he clearly is angry about a lot of things,
though he has difficulty explaining just what. My guess is that if a
good union had gotten to Charlie Thomas first, he would be just as
dedicated to the brotherhood of workers as he currently is to the
KKK.
          We should think about that when we next start chanting, "Death to
the Klan."
          
            Randall Williams is an Alabama writer who its currently
serving as director of the KLANWATCH project of the Southern Poverty
Law Center.
          
        
        
          'Fair Representation is Essential to Democracy'
          By Wheeler, RaymondRaymond Wheeler
          Vol. 4, No. 2, 1982, p. 10
          
          I am a physician, a native of North Carolina, practicing in
Charlotte. I speak today as a citizen of the state interested in fair
and open government and equal opportunity for all people in the
state. I speak also as a member of the Southern Regional Council, a
group of Southerners both black and white which, for nearly 40 years,
has pursued similar goals for all of the Southern region. The Council
has done important research into patterns of citizen participation in
the governing of North Carolina.
          Since the turn of the century, when it was one of three Southern
states that refused to hold a constitutional convention to
disenfranchise blacks, North Carolina has maintained a separate
identity in the Southern history of race relations and an almost
singular reputation for fair dealings with its black citizens. We have
a reputation for moderation and we deserve full credit for the
accomplishment of self-restraint during the long years of turmoil and
violence that marked the times before and during the Civil Rights
Movement and during the painful period of adjustment to
desegregation.
          This reminds me of a statement made several years ago by John
Seigenthaler, editor and publisher of the Nashville
Tennessean at a meeting on Southern politics. "For
decades," he said, "Southerners of good will have pleaded for
moderation. And, finally, it has arrived. Now that we have got it, God
save us from it." While allowing for a little Southern hyperbole, the
sentiment is appropriate to the paradox of North Carolina's moderation
in race relations while we have been most effective in belittling the
voting strength of a sizable black population.
          It is certainly no surprise that the Justice Department has
disapproved the plans of North Carolina for redrawing both
congressional and legislative districts. All three plans have
contained the same obvious flaw and they dilute the voting strength of
North Carolina's black residents by assuring them minority status in
almost every district.
          According to the 1980 census, of the 15 states with the highest
percentage of black population, North Carolina has the smallest
percentage of blacks in the legislature. Thirteen of those states
elected at least one house of their legislatures entirely from single
member districts. Twenty-two percent of all North Carolinians are
black. The membership of this general assembly is 2.3 percent
black!
          North Carolina has the lowest percentage of black legislators of
the seven states with black populations of 20 percent or greater. The
national average per state is 12 percent black population and 4.2
percent black legislators.
          Among the Southern states covered by the Voting Rights Act, North
Carolina is second from the bottom in the percentage of all black
elected officials. Statewide, 4.7 percent of our elected officials are
black. For the record, in 1968 the percentage was 0.18.
          I do not report these figures in order to argue that the percentage
of black elected officials or black legislators should necessarily
correspond precisely with the percentage of black population. However,
the comparison is a bench mark of black participation in government
and an indicator of how much progress is yet to be made.
          The unavoidable conclusion is that in spite of a steady increase in
black registration and voting in North Carolina, there is widespread
and massive under-representation of black voters in the political
affairs of the state. Whether by the design of political leadership or
by prejudice of white voters, blacks have been denied the opportunity
to participate in the process which determines how we are governed. So
long as that is true, there can be little accountability or fair, open
decision making in government.
          Representative government for blacks is also important for
whites. Unless the primary obstacles to full participation in the
electoral process are removed, public confidence in government,
citizen access to government, and public accountability of government
officials will be unreached goals for both black and white
citizens.
          I am asking the General Assembly to face squarely and honestly the
notion that a fair system of representation is essential to
democracy. If you do that, you must agree that blacks need more
representation in government and you must come down unequivocally in
support of an electoral system based on single member districts
throughout our state.
          Legislatures in thirty states are already elected from single
member districts including Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee and
Louisiana.
          Single member districts provide a wider diversity of interests in
the legislature. Voters have clearer choices. Legislators have more
responsive and loyal constituencies while at the same time the
legislator is required to be more accountable.
          Single member districts provide each of us with a sense of a
greater stake in the responsibilities of government. There is no way
that North Carolina can fail to emerge from such a process except as a
stronger, more unified state in which needs will be met and problems
will be solved.
          
            The late Raymond Wheeler, a former president of the
Southern Regional Council, made these comments to a North Carolina
legislative committee on redistricting on Feb. 4, 1982.
          
        
        
          Protest and Survive. Edited by E.P. Thompson and
Dan Smith, New York: Monthly Review Press, 1981 $4.95.
          By Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 4, No. 2, 1982, p. 4
          
          Protest and Survive is a powerful gift from European
Nuclear Disarmament (END) to the growing American movement. The book
originated as a reaction to "Protect and Survive." a take-cover
pamphlet prepared in 1980 by British civil defense. The U.S. version
contains historian E.P. Thompson's "A Letter to America," and 11 other
essays exploring the current arms race, nuclear war, military
bureaucracy and the prospects for peacemaking.
          The introduction by Daniel Ellsberg details the secret history of
U.S. nuclear threats against other governments since the 1945 bombing
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The instances include Korea, Berlin, Cuba,
Vietnam and Iran. "Every president," writes Ellsberg, "from Truman to
Reagan, with the possible exception of Ford, has felt compelled to
consider or direct serious preparations for possible imminent
U.S. initiation of tactical or strategic nuclear warfare, in the midst
of an ongoing, intense, non-nuclear conflict or crisis." Most
recently, the threats have appeared as public policy in the Carter
Doctrine endorsed by the present administration, which would start
World War III to protect Western oil interests in the Persian Gulf.
          Emma Rothschild opens her essay with the observation that "the
United States may buy itself two things with its $1 trillion defense
budget of 1981 to 1985. The first is an economic decline of the sort
that comes about once or twice in a century. The second is a nuclear
war." She examines the destructive costs of the American arms boom.
          A former U.S. War Department analyst, Henry T. Nash, writes about
his job with the Air Targets Division of the Air Force in the 1950s
and 60s. He tells of the secrecy and professional competition existing
in the bureaucratic preparation for mass homicide. Ambitious young
analysts select and justify targets in the Soviet Union appropriate
for receiving our nuclear warheads. If an analyst's proposed target is
selected for the official "Bombing Encyclopedia," he may merit
promotion and entree into even deadlier, more classified
information.
          Having left the Air Force project and become a teacher, Nash is now
visited by "haunting memories of his work." "What," he asks, "enabled
us calmly to plan to incinerate vast numbers of unknown human beings
without any sense of moral revulsion?" He describes some of the
"forces within the system that work against such self-examination."
          Amid insane circumstances worthy of all despair, the present
disarmament movement now stirs on an international
level. Protest and Survive is one sign that there is
still a chance to save ourselves from ourselves. That the chance is
genuine we can believe from the history of one of the nuclear threats
which Dan Ellsberg recounts. In November of 1969, Henry Kissinger
conveyed the warning to the Vietnamese at Hanoi "that Nixon would
escalate the war massively, including the possible use of nuclear
weapons, if they did not accept his terms." Hanoi didn't accept the
terms and Nixon didn't carry out his nuclear threat. Why not? As Nixon
himself records in his memoirs, there were already too many Americans
in the streets protesting the U.S. war policy.
          
            Allen Tullos is a native Alabamian who is now completing
his doctoral dissertation in history at Yale University.
          
        
        
          The Reagan Impact On the South's Poor
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 4, No. 2, 1982, pp. 15-16
          
          More than three decades ago, after the country had climbed up from
the Deep Depression, President Franklin Roosevelt said that the South
was the "nation's number one economic problem." A few years
ago. facing a sluggish national economy, the president of Westinghouse
declared that the South is now "the number one economic opportunity
for business." The changes have been remarkable. In the last decade
the region experienced the most rapid economic activity in its
recorded history, and in population and gross income it exceeded the
nation's growth.
          Yet, other statistics tell us that Southerners remain the country's
poorest people and the poorest paid workers. Only in Texas among the
Southern states does the per capita income equal the national
average. In Mississippi, per capita personal income is only 69 percent
of the nation's, and the average Alabamian has only three-fourths of
the income of the average American. In the Deep South, industrial jobs
pay only about 68 percent of the wages for the same jobs outside the
region.
          The incomes of Southern families, especially black families, remain
very limited. In 1976, in the census South, 25 percent of white
families earned less than $8,000, and one in three families earned
less than $10.000. Of the nearly three million black families in the
same region, 49 percent earned less than $8.000, and more than 60
percent earned less than $10,000. Nearly one in three of all black
families in the region were below the poverty level in 1976.
          As this distribution of income suggests, the heads of Southern
families--and most of them do work--are poorly paid, and black wage
earners are disproportionately concentrated in low-paying
jobs. Indeed, the gap between the incomes of black and white families
in the South remains comparable to that of 30 years ago, when the
region had legal segregation. For every dollar the white family earned
in 1950 in the nation, the black family earned 51 cents. In the South
in 1950, the black family had 56 cents for every dollar available to
the white family. By 1975 the income of black families had risen in
the region and the nation to 61 percent of white families' income. But
by 1980 black families" income in the South had dropped to nearer 57
percent of white income.
          Perhaps most disturbing, black males' income in 1950 was 58 percent
of white males' income. By 1975 black males' income had dropped to 57
percent of white male income, and in 1980 it was nearer 55
percent. Really not surprising, the 11 Southern states remain the home
of one-third of the nation's poor and one-half of the nation's black
poor.
          Into this era of simultaneously accelerating economic activity and
sinking personal reward came Ronald Reagan, who interpreted his
victory margin of less than 5 percent as a "mandate" for major changes
in the role of the federal government and the allocations of the
federal budget. These changes presume the existence of a wasteful,
bloated bureaucracy of excessive benefits to a huge lot of undeserving
and a small number of deserving, truly needy individuals. The reality
is very different.
          Though similar contrasts can be shown for housing, Medicaid and
employment training, a brief look at food stamps and Aid to Families
with Dependent Children (AFDC) shows how Reagan is cutting away our
promise to the poor before it began to be truly fulfilled.

          There are wide variations in the level of AFDC benefits for
families across the country, although the composition of the family
may be the same. For example, before Oct. 1,1981, the maximum monthly
benefit to a family of three with no additional income was only $96 in
Mississippi and $122 in Tennessee. In New York it has been more than
$200.
          Even before October 1981, AFDC payments have been received by a
relatively small percentage of the South's population. Less than 7
percent of Mississippi's population received support from this
program, and in no other Southern state was the percentage as high. In
Texas, for example, only three percent of the state's population were
recipients of AFDC.
          When compared to the number of poor in the South today. these
statistics belie the notion that the welfare rolls. before the budget
cuts, included many who weren't needy. The numbers of poor among the
total population in most Southern states were three or four times
larger than the numbers of those on AFDC. In Alabama, 16.4 percent of
the population was poor, while only 4.6 percent received welfare
benefits. In Mississippi, the 7 percent of the population on AF DC was
dwarfed by the 26 percent of the population in poverty.
          These comparisons add up to one important fact about the welfare
program that existed before Oct. 1, 1981: many more poor children in
the South were in families without AFDC support than with it. In
Florida, less than 40 percent of the children in poverty received
benefits from the government's major cash assistance program for the
poor. In the 11 Southern states, only 3.5 percent of the population
receives cash assistance from AFDC while more than 10 percent of the
families within the South had incomes below 75 percent of the poverty
level.
          In the program which provides food stamps to the poor and the
poorly paid, the number of poor who have actually received benefits in
the South is considerably below the total poor population of the
region. At the beginning of 1980, nearly two out of five poor families
in the South did not receive anv food stamps.
          Benefits provided under the Food Stamp Program are determined
largely by the amount of money needed to obtain an adequate,
nutritional diet. A family of three in Arkansas receiving the maximum
AFDC payment of $161 before Oct. 1 could have received $160 in food
stamps. An AFDC mother in Arkansas probably spent more than $23 of her
AFDC payment on food, leaving less than $138 a month for rent,
utilities, transportation, clothing, and other essential expenses of
herself and two children.
          Life with both AFDC benefits and food stamps has been no easy ride
for the poor in the South. Combined benefits provided by AFDC and food
stamps were extremely low even before cutbacks. Few states provided
combined benefits equal to the official poverty level. As of May,
1981, nine states--all in the South--provided combined benefits which
were less than 65 percent of the poverty level.
          These numbers do not deny that programs aimed at reducing poverty
have been at times poorly administered or even ill-conceived. Much of
the government's efforts in the area have probably been
ineffective. Nonetheless, the national government's commitment to
ending poverty has not been what it is portrayed to be by this
Administration. By no analysis can the programs in the South be shown
as overly generous to the unneedy.
          Yet the truly needy of the South are being abandoned by the present
and anticipated policies of the national government. This
Administration has offered nothing that signals an attempt to rethink
any misjudgments of the last 15 years in the war against poverty, nor
to redirect or reshape the government's role in helping poor citizens
become productive, tax-paying citizens. To date, this Administration
offers hardly more than a dedicated, official effort to remove any
form of government aid from the poor. While appeals to volunteerism
and the magic of the private sector are presented as alternatives,
cold facts suggest that the national government has now transformed
the war on poverty of 15 years ago to a war on the I poor today. If
this effort continues, the South's poor--both those who now work and
those who do not--shall face a future of crippled opportunities and
the nation will have surrendered the truest, most selfless element of
the American character.
          
            Steve Suitts is the executive director of the Southern
Regional Council. This article is adapted from remarks at the Southern
Labor Institute in December.
          
        
        
          An Update on Voting Changes in the South
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 4, No. 2, 1982, pp. 5-11
          
          Since last summer, when legislative committees began meeting
quietly and computers started humming, reapportionment in the South
has charged into the political thicket like a herd of . . . well,
elephants, some white Southern Democrats are now claiming, creating
thunderous noise along ancient paths. Even as the campaigns approach,
Southern legislative leaders hold fast to the belief that
redistricting plans must protect incumbents and cap, if not minimize,
minority voting strength.
          An unexpected obstacle in the path of Southern reapportionment has
been the Justice Department, which reviews all voting
changes--including redistricting--in eight Southern states. Empowered
by the Voting Rights Act, the Attorney General (in practice, the
Assistant Attorney General and the staff of the voting rights section)
is required to disapprove a voting change if the local or state
government fails to prove that its plan is not racially discriminatory
in purpose or effect.
          The surprising fact is that the Reagan Administration's Justice
Department has enforced this provision and disapproved of statewide
redistricting plans in Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina,
Virginia, and Texas. While approving a congressional district plan in
Alabama, Justice is expected by inside observers to object to
statewide plans in Alabama and Louisiana. It hasn't acted in
Mississippi yet.
          In the face of the Reagan Administration's weakening position on
renewal of the Voting Rights Act, tax laws for segregation academies,
and other civil rights issues, this string of objections is unique, if
not miraculous. While civil rights lawyers are cautious in commenting
on the pattern, Southern Democrats in the state Legislatures say the
motivation is an opportunity for Republican political gains.
          For example, some white North Carolina Democrats from Charlotte,
Raleigh, and Greensboro charge that Justice's interest in
single-member districts stems from a political awareness that
Republican candidates in suburban areas will be helped by the creation
of majority black districts in urban areas, leaving white Democrats
with out a majority in much of the metropolitan area.
          Some white Democrats in Georgia echo that sentiment as they now
protest Justice's objection to a 57 percent majority black
congressional district which the state legislature passed as it turned
down a 69 percent district. "The Republican Administration is
interested in getting rid of two white Democrats," an administrative
assistant to a Georgia congressman said, "and replacing them with a
black and a Republican."
          Southern black state legislators (who are without exception also
Democrats) counter these arguments with a string of facts about
specific redistricting plans. They note that while objecting to
several Southern redistricting plans, Justice often stops short of
disapproving of most of the districts which were drawn to cancel or
reduce black voting strength. In Georgia the legislature adopted a
plan that will reduce by one the number of majority black districts in
Atlanta and failed to draw several majority black districts in the
rural Black Belt. In its objection to the plan, Justice did not
disapprove of these districts but focused on three districts
elsewhere. "It's more of an approval than a disapproval of
discriminatory districts," says State Rep. Tyrone Brooks about
Justice's actions-in Georgia.
          Moreover, despite possible Republican gains in some redistricting,
white Democratic legislators have diluted black voting strength in
places where Democrats would be replaced not by Republicans, but by
other Democrats. Here the winning Democrat would, however, be a
black. And there lies the rub.
          From Virginia to Texas, legislatures have drawn districts in rural,
heavily black or Hispanic areas that reduce or maintain at a low level
the voting strength of a majority of non-whites. This pattern appears
throughout the South's Black Belt despite the fact that the population
of this rural, predominantly black area has increased in several
states. The Alabama legislature's plan shaved off enough percentages
in five existing districts with at least 60 percent black population
so that blacks in the proposed districts do not have a voting
majority. Almost every Southern state adheres to similar practice.
          In recent weeks the federal courts have begun to intervene in state
reapportionment, usually issuing orders for new plans where the state
is unable to adopt a lawful plan in time to get the 1982 elections
underway. While the 

courts have been seen as a major protection for
black voting interests in the past, the early court orders in Southern
reapportionment show no substantial promise that the courts will offer
sweeping remedies for black voters. In South Carolina, a federal court
has adopted the congressional plan which the lower chamber of the
South Carolina legislature had passed over the objections of the
legislative black caucus. In Texas, the two court orders for
congressional and state house redistricting offer a mixture of
improvements and disappointments for minority voters. Lawsuits asking
for court orders in other states are pending in Virginia, North
Carolina, South Carolina, and Alabama.
          Below is a summary of the reapportionment efforts in the 11
Southern states.
          
            Alabama
          
          Air traffic between Montgomery and Washington D.C., has been heavy
in the last few weeks with several confabs between legislators and
Justice Department officials. Legislators and attorneys representing
the state have met with U.S. Assistant Attorney General William
Bradford Reynolds and his staff several times, and legislative black
caucus members as well as civil rights lawyers and community leaders
have also journeyed to Washington to urge objections to the
reapportionment plans for the state house and senate.
          The groups voicing opposition to the state plan include the NAACP,
ACLU, Common Cause, Alabama Democratic Conference and the League of
Women Voters. These groups opposed the plans during the special
session last fall and have protested both the plans and the
closed-door decisions that developed them.
          Recent data from the Alabama legislative staff indicate the state
plan proposes to reduce black voting strength at the polls not only in
the Black Belt but in districts presently held by black incumbents
elsewhere. In the Black Belt, white State Rep. Bill Edwards's district
is reduced from a 70 percent black majority to 50 percent. Rep. Rick
Manley's district is reduced to 59 percent and Rep. Leigh Pegue's
district drops to 55 percent black. Both are presently above 65
percent. Manley served as chairman of the reapportionment committee
and has been one of the principal lawmakers visiting Washington.
          In urban areas the black percentages in some districts are also
significantly reduced. Rep. Yvonne Kennedy, chairwoman of the
legislative black caucus, saw her Mobile district go from 80 percent
to 69 percent black and black State Rep. Bill Clark's district in the
Mobile area was also reduced from 90 to 68 percent black. In the
Birmingham area, the reapportionment plan goes even further. It
eliminates a black district--thus pitting two black incumbents against
each other. Another district previously more than 60 percent black
will be only 53 percent black. All told, the proposed plan would
eliminate as many as five districts where black voters could elect
responsive candidates.
          A group of Alabama citizens has filed a federal court suit in
Montgomery, alleging the plan violates "one person - one vote" and
the voting rights of blacks. Meanwhile, Justice has granted the state
an extension until April 15 to explain its plans. Capitol insiders
suggest that legislative leaders are ready to compromise and are
developing plans which they hope will appease Justice and minority
objections.
          The Justice Department recently approved the Alabama Congressional
plan which was not the subject of controversy.
          
            Arkansas
          
          Declaring that the plan violated the constitutional doctrine of
"one person - one vote," a federal court struck down the Arkansas
congressional reapportionment plan which had proposed hardly any
changes from the 1970 plan. The court is forcing the legislature to
try again to hold the differences between the populations of each
district to reasonable limits.
          But it is legislative, not congressional reapportionment that
continues to be the subject of talk by activists in Little Rock. Civil
rights advocates still hope to challenge the state legislative
redistricting plan which is a mixture of single and multi-member
districts. For the last several years the Arkansas legislature has had
only three or four black members.
          "It's that damn 'purpose'," explains the head of a biracial
lobbying group in Little Rock. "We know one of the primary purposes of
the plan was to minimize the black vote in legislative races, but proving it was the purpose has us stumped for now."
Arkansas is not covered under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act and
the congressional and state plans need not be submitted to Justice for
approval. In court, plaintiffs are required to prove both the purpose
and effects of racial discrimination in voting cases.
          
            Georgia
          
          In early March, the Justice Department notified Georgia officials
that it was maintaining its original objection to Georgia's
congressional plan, where the dispute centers around a majority black
district in the Atlanta metropolitan area. State officials promptly
challenged Justice's objection in federal court in Washington.
          The plan submitted to Justice unsuccessfully includes a fifth
district that is 57 percent black. This was adopted during the special
session last summer only after the state house refused twice to accept
a congressional plan passed by the Georgia senate that included a 69
percent black district. Black legislators vehemently objected to the
compromise plan which passed the senate by only a few votes and over
the objections of Georgia's two black senators, Horace Tate and Julian
Bond, as well as the senate minority and majority leaders.
          Justice objected also to parts of the state house and senate
plans. The General Assembly then changed the house and senate plan to
meet the requirement from Washington.
          In the senate, Justice's objection included two districts, one in
metropolitan Atlanta (DeKalb County) and the other in Augusta. The
legislators changed the DeKalb district to increase the black
percentage to nearly 70. The Augusta district was drawn to increase
the black population to 53 percent. The latter district is the seat of
Senate majority leader Tom Allgood.
          In the house Justice's objection was to the Dougherty County house
seats in southwest Georgia. Though the 

county's black population has
grown by nearly 10 percent in the last few years, reapportionment
created only one black house district--the one which now has a black
incumbent. Black legislators and community groups protested the
dilution of minority voting strength in the rural Black Belt of
Georgia, particularly the area around Dougherty. The Dougherty plan
was redrawn to create two black districts--one with a 69 percent black
majority and one with a 59 percent majority.
          State officials' refusal to cooperate on the congressional issue
was the result of pressure from lame-duck Gov. George Busbee and newly
appointed state attorney general Michael Bowers. Bowers must run for
election in the fall.
          A three-judge panel has been appointed for the state's appeal in
Washington and the Georgia legislative black caucus has intervened
along with private citizens. The NAACP is also requesting the right to
intervene. Although the state opposed intervention, the judges ruled
on March 22 in favor of the caucus and private plaintiffs.
          State Rep. Billy Randall, chairman of the black caucus, criticized
the the action by-Bowers and others as continued discrimination
against minorities, but he is equally dissatisfied with Justice's
objection. Randall believes the objection did not go far enough in
disapproving dilution of black voting strength in house and senate
districts in the Georgia Black Belt.
          
            Florida
          
          In Florida the battle lines on reapportionment appear to be drawn
as clearly between the house and senate as between the legislature and
community groups. Unlike most states, Florida's two legislative houses
have been unable to reach a "gentlemen's agreement" where each house
will draw up its own plan which would be adopted automatically by the
other. The result is the development of house and senate plans by both
houses. And none agrees with any other.
          Though there is disagreement between the two bodies, both have
created plans with single-member districts for the first time in
Florida reapportionment history. Both house and senate plans have kept
the total population deviation to less than two percent in each
district. Legislators believe both these actions will protect against
possible lawsuits.
          One major disagreement revolves around the "nesting" of
districts--a device which places a few house districts within the
"nest" of a larger senate district. Alabama has used such a plan since
its last reapportionment. Florida's house supports such a concept, but
not the senate.
          Another disagreement between the houses is the senate election
schedule. Florida's senate members are elected for four-year terms,
one-half elected every two years. The senate would like to have the
senators elected in 1980 serve until 1984 and then run under new
district lines. The result would be that only half the senators would
have to run in November under the reapportioned districts. The house
has refused to agree to such a plan amid rumors that a number of house
members are interested in a senate seat.
          Florida's constitution allows from 80 to 120 house members and
between 30-40 senators. Here the senate and house also disagree. The
most recent senate plan creates an 80-member house. But the house plan
(which is expected to eventually be accepted) calls for a 120member
body--its present size.
          The disputes between the two houses have spilled over to community
groups involved in reapportionment. The NAACP supports the senate's
plans and Common Cause has backed the house's plans. The groups have
developed individual alternative plans with only limited support for
each other's actions.
          Common Cause developed a plan which some black legislators and
NAACP leaders believe will result in fewer voting-majority black
districts. Common Cause maintains that its plan creates the most
minority districts in the house (nine black and four Hispanic
districts with over 50 percent minority populations). While admitting
that its criteria for a "black or Hispanic" district is 50 percent or
more minority population, Common Cause maintains that it has taken
into account "population growth, voter registration, and voting
patterns." In most Southern states the minority population eligible to
vote is usually 10 percentage points below the total minority
population.
          The house plan presently includes seven districts with 58 to 80
percent Hispanic population--all in the Miami area. Only two districts
are more than 65 percent Hispanic. The plan includes seven black
districts between 52 and 73 percent, and three black districts between
43 and 49 percent. Only one district in the Miami area is 65 percent
or more black. The others are scattered throughout the state. A major
concern of community groups is the lack of consideration shown to
Florida's Black Belt, the area surrounding Tallahassee.
          The Common Cause plan allows for a 53 percent majority-black
district including Leon County in the Black Belt. The plan also
includes a 56 percent black district in metropolitan Miami where the
house plan creates a 45 percent black district. Five blacks and two
Hispanic legislators now sit in the Florida house.
          Senate plans passed by either house include two Hispanic districts
over 50 percent around Miami. The house plan creates a district that
is 65 percent Hispanic while the senate plan calls for a 61 percent
district in its own chamber. Both plans create a district around
Jacksonville that is 47 to 48 percent black.
          Community groups have indicated that there is little likelihood of
creating congressional districts with more than 35 percent black
population.
          
            Louisiana
          
          The Justice Department could decide before the end of April if the
Louisiana congressional redistricting plan violates the Voting Rights
Act. Civil rights groups and the senate legislative black caucus, who
supported a majority black congressional district during the last
legislative session, have filed comments against the state plan which
divides the parish of New Orleans almost in half.
          In its pleadings before Justice, the black caucus notes that, were
it not for the governor's veto, Louisiana would now have a plan with a
majority black congressional district composed of the Orleans
parish. Late last year when the Democratic legislature adopted a 55
percent black district, Republican Gov. Dave Treen vetoed the
bill. Quickly abandoning the majority black district, the legislature
drew the plans to adhere to the governor's objections. That plan
passed and is now before Justice.

          Reapportionment plans for the two houses of the state legislature
are also before Justice, which asked in March for more information
about their origins. Objections are also being raised to these plans
which create 14 legislative districts with 50 percent or more black
populations. To illustrate that the plans effectively dilute black
voting strength, the black caucus has developed an alternative plan
that creates 20 legislative districts with a majority of black
registered voters.
          Some observers believe the congressional plan may test the
willingness of Justice to enforce Section 5 regardless of party
politics. Much of the case against the congressional plan focuses on
the veto of Gov. Treen, one of the few Republican governors in a
Southern state covered by the Voting Rights Act. "No case I've seen
before Justice better evidences that a plan was rejected by the
legislators because it helped urban blacks," commented a lawyer
working with a legal defense fund in Washington. "We'll see if Justice
sees the evidence differently because of Treen."
          
            Mississippi
          
          Schooled in more than a decade of litigation opposing fair
reapportionment, the Mississippi legislature has proceeded with
redistricting its two houses and five congressional seats with a
wealth of computer runs and detailed maps and a careful avoidance of
any plan that increases the potential for added voting strength of
blacks. Turning back efforts of the legislative black caucus to create
a majority black congressional district, leading state lawmakers
appear willing to assure black incumbents of their seats, to limit
majority-black districts to the number provided in the existing
court-ordered plan, and generally to adopt "a holding action," in the
words of one veteran civil rights worker in Jackson.
          The fight over the congressional plan late last year centered on
the creation of a majority-black district from the Delta
counties. Several plans were proposed in hearings and on the floor of
the legislature which had districts with black populations ranging
from 53 percent to 65 percent. All began somewhere in the Delta
counties and the "65 percent" proposal by black State Sen. Henry
J. Kirksey encompassed part of the Delta and the city of Jackson.
          The congressional plan, approved by a 4 to 1 vote, maintained the
character of the existing congressional districts. The new plan is now
before the Justice department and is being opposed by members of the
black caucus and statewide civil rights groups.
          The likely reapportionment plan for the two state houses will
maintain 46 majority-black districts in which 17 incumbent black
legislators now reside. Of the 46, only 2S house and senate districts
will have black majorities of 60 percent or more, a critical fact in a
state where the black registration rate is usually 10 to 15 percentage
points below the general population. Sen. Kirksey has proposed
alternatives to the state plan but has been unable to convince a
substantial number of his colleagues that his plan better avoids
dilution of black voting strength. "Too many of the districts that are
majority black barely hang over the 50 percent line" remarked David
Green, a member of the legislative black caucus. "These districts just
appear to be majority black when they really aren't."
          Challenges to the redistricting plans for the legislature before
Justice and the courts are also expected in Mississippi.
          
            North Carolina
          
          With the advice of former U.S. assistant attorney general Jerris
Leonard, North Carolina state lawmakers passed their third set of
reapportionment plans in March, combining historical multi-member
districts with a few single-member districts which they hope will
satisfy the Justice Department's earlier objections. Lawyers for the
NAACP Legal Defense Fund, however, are predicting another Justice
objection to the new state house and senate plans.
          While a lawsuit in the mid-1960s required the redistricting of the
general assembly, North Carolina had been immune to much of the
disputes over redistricting that spread across the South in the
1970s. Its recent problems began when the NAACP Legal Defense Fund
filed suit in federal district court in Raleigh challenging the state
legislative plans, the congressional plan, and a state constitutional
amendment passed in 1968 requiring that all state legislative
districts follow county lines. That amendment had not been submitted
for approval to Justice as required under the Voting Rights Act.
          Justice found late last year that the requirement diluted the
voting strength of blacks and disapproved it. Meanwhile, legislative
leaders were convinced that the differences in population among the
various legislative districts were greater than the courts would
permit under the "one person - one vote" constitutional theory. Thus,
the general assembly reconvened and passed a new plan for its state
house.
          The old state senate plan and the new house plan were then
submitted to the Justice Department which found that both followed the
1968 amendment and diluted black voting strength. Justice also found
that the congressional plan had the purpose of diluting black voting
strength by eliminating Durham, a center of political activity for
blacks, from the second congressional district that has a black
population of over 40 percent.
          In early February, North Carolina lawmakers returned in special
session and adopted a third set of reapportionment plans and for the
first time created some single-member districts which crossed county
lines.
          No other issue seems to have caused as much stir in North Carolina
legislative politics in recent history. "Some of us are being
sacrificed on the altar," said State Sen. Melvin Daniels who
represents part of the northeastern section of the state. The new
house plan creates two majority-black districts and the senate plan
has one 52 percent majority-black district. The legislature carefully
avoided drawing single-member districts in the metropolitan areas such
as Charlotte Winston-Salem, and Raleigh, since those areas are not
covered under section 5 of the Voting Rights Act.
          J.K. Butterfield, a black leader from northeastern North Carolina,
presented a reapportionment plan at a public hearing which would
create a total of nine majority black districts in the house and
senate. But his plan was never introduced. For a time, the legislature
did consider creating another majority-black senate district but
apparently decided one was enough.
          The new congressional plan was approved in early March and may
prompt a black former U.S. attorney from Durham to challenge incumbent
U.S. Rep. L.H. 

Fountain in the Democratic primary.
          Several observers are predicting that by mid-April the Justice
Department will bar the use of the third set of state legislative
plans. While state officials have threatened to appeal an adverse
ruling by Justice to the federal courts in Washington, the legislature
passed a new bill providing for four different possible dates for
primary elections--all hinging on when a state house and senate plan
would become lawful. That law, too, is now before Justice.
          
            South Carolina
          
          In a surprising decision, a federal court panel adopted in early
March a congressional plan for South Carolina which had been passed
earlier by the state house of representatives but not by the state
senate. The NAACP, which had filed suit asking the court to draw the
congressional lines, protested the court's opinion and promised to
appeal the decision and seek an objection from the Justice
Department.
          The court-ordered plan makes few changes in the present
congressional districts, although it does split Berkeley County, a
suburb of Charleston. The division of the metropolitan area into two
congressional districts rubbed some powerful state senators the wrong
way, and they refused to approve the plan when it was before them.
          The NAACP has presented to the federal court a plan that created a
district with a majority black population. In a hearing on the issue,
senior district judge Charles E. Simons attacked the NAACP plans as
"gerrymandered to give more than 50 percent blacks." The state house
plan which the court has embraced has no congressional district with
more than a 40 percent black population.
          State legislative officials are moving rapidly to have the new plan
implemented. State senate judiciary committee chairman L. Marion
Gressette, one of the most powerful men in South Carolina politics,
contends that the court plan need not be submitted to Justice for
review under the Voting Rights Act. Civil rights lawyers disagree, and
another legal battle may develop.
          While the South Carolina legislature hopes that it may be near the
finish line with congressional reapportionment, it still faces the
task of drawing new lines for its own two houses. Justice disapproved
the first plan of the state house because of the discriminatory
effects of district lines, primarily in the Black Belt areas where the
legislature systematically leveled the percentages of blacks.
          The state senate hasn't even begun to consider a redistricting
plan. The all-white legislative chamber is postponing the task on the
apparent hope that it can secure Justice approval of a plan more
easily later in the year. Some black leaders, including members of the
legislative black caucus, have charged that the state senators hope
the Voting Rights Act will be weakened before the fall and that a plan
without any majority black districts would be subjected to less
scrutiny under a new act.
          The all-white senate has been a subject of challenge for the past
few years. The Carter Administration's Justice Department filed a
federal suit challenging the present districts of the state senate but
withdrew the suit after the Supreme Court's 1980 Mobile
opinion, which now requires black plaintiffs to show that voting
practices have both the effect and purpose of
racial discrimination.
          A plan submitted to Justice under the present Voting Rights Act's
Section 5, however, requires the state or local government to prove
that the plan does not have the purpose or effect
of racial discrimination.
          
            Tennessee
          
          Tennessee is the only Southern state which has passed redistricting
plans that aren't facing serious-legal challenges. Not covered by the
preclearance provisions of the Voting Rights Act, Tennessee also has
had the advantage of adding a congressional seat to its delegation
instead of fighting to determine who must be eliminated.
          Early forecasts had warned that U.S. Rep. Harold Ford of Memphis,
one of only two black congressmen in the South, would be gerrymandered
out of his strongest support in western Tennessee. The fears proved
unfounded, and Ford apparently is now assured of reelection.
          
            Texas
          
          After months of almost daily developments, two separate federal
courts in Texas have issued orders establishing the boundaries of both
congressional seats and the state's general assembly for the 1982
elections. While the orders are under appeal, they bring into focus
disputes that have involved lawyers, politicians and judges throughout
the state.
          In the last few months a scorecard on Texas reapportionment has
required two or three sheets just to list the major players: the
Democratic legislative leadership, the governor, a handful of state
officials on the legislative redistricting board, a couple of state
court judges, six federal court judges, Hispanic and black civil
rights groups, and a couple of dozen lawyers representing all
sides.
          Despite such a large cast in what the usually well-modulated editor
of the Texas Government Newsletter calls "arcane legal machinations
and Byzantine maneuverings," Texas redistricting has evolved around
the three major issues of reapportionment. Will Republicans or
Democrats gain? Will incumbents protect their own offices? And will
racial minorities get a fair chance to elect representatives of their
own choosing? Nobody has won all or lost everything but, if the
court-ordered plans remain, blacks and Hispanics will probably have
lost most.
          Before the reapportionment last year, Hispanic leaders had maps
showing how a congressional district with a majority Hispanic
population should be drawn in southwest Texas because of increased
population. The general assembly balked, and no such plan was
included. While Justice found the congressional plan in violation of
the Voting Rights Act and, more recently, a federal court in Austin
has drawn a new congressional plan, the majority Hispanic district is
still nowhere on the maps.
          The state legislative plans drawn by a Dallas three-judge panel do
improve the voting strength of Hispanics 

around San Antonio and El
Paso but fail to avoid diluting black and Hispanic voting strength in
the urban areas. The plan is "temporary" since the state legislature
will have to try again in 1983 to adopt its own plans that meet
constitutional muster.
          Federal court intervention was required largely by the upcoming May
1 primary in Texas. In order for candidates to register and run for
office they had to know what districts would be lawful.
          While reapportionment will now be decided in the federal courts,
the May 1 primary remains an uncertainty in the face of appeals and
further challenges to the orders of the three-judge panels. More
developments are expected daily.
          
            Virginia
          
          In mid-March the fifth redistricting plan drawn by the Virginia
House of Delegates was rejected by the Justice Department in a
decision which prompted the 

Democratic leader of the statehouse to
advise the feds to "stick it up their ear." Civil rights lawyers
immediately filed a motion asking that the federal court in Richmond
take over the job of redistricting the state legislature.
          In its March objection Justice found that the legislature diluted
black voting strength in rural southeastern Virginia, Newport News,
and Norfolk. In the rural areas the legislature divided black
communities in order to assure that only one candidate would be
elected by blacks in areas where at least three majority black
districts could be created. In Norfolk Justice disapproved of the only
remaining multi-member district in the Virginia plan. Justice found
that the multimember districts subsumed black voters in a larger
district where candidates who won would always be the choice of the
white majority.
          The ruling was a victory for the ACLU, NAACP, and the SCLC, which
had challenged the Virginia legislature at every step in court and
before Justice. NAACP leader Jack Gravely called upon the legislature
to end the "spectacle and waste of the taxpayers' money." Judy
Goldberg of the ACLU said, "Let the courts do it."
          The federal court in Richmond found the first plan adopted by the
legislature as unconstitutional in violation of the "one person - one
vote" constitutional theory. The Justice Department also objected to
the plan. Another plan was vetoed by then-Gov. John Dalton.
          Four blacks presently sit in the Virginia House of Delegates from
majority black districts. ACLU Director Chan Kendrick says that number
can be more than doubled if the federal court adopts the plan which
his group has drawn.
          
            This report was prepared by the staff of the Southern
Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Remarks in Memory Of Lillian Smith
          By Moore, Gene GabrielGene Gabriel Moore
          Vol. 4, No. 2, 1982, pp. 13-15
          
          It is appropriate that we make what echo we can of Lillian Smith's
lifelong battle for those eternal lost causes--a classless
society, uncompromised equality, and a democracy undiluted by the
greed of corporations, by the saber rattling of the jingoists, by the
cynicism of the politicians.
          Today, perhaps more than at any time since the repressive measures
of Richard Nixon and Lyndon Johnson, during the height of the antiwar
movement, we Americans are the victims of a regressive regime whose
threat to our common inheritance, to the rights we were promised that
summer in 1776, is multiplied by the fact that it is the national
government on the Potomac, not a motley cadre of slack-jaw demagogues
down in old Dixie that seems unwilling to translate into the realities
of this century the principles of Thomas Jefferson, of Thomas Paine,
of Martin Luther King, Jr.
          How do you characterize an administration whose priorities are
blatantly in favor of the pitifully deprived rich--and blatantly
against a child suffering from malnutrition, blatantly against that
old woman in a head ag trudging beside the blacktop in Bolivar County,
Miss., blatantly against the hopes of barely literate students in some
woebegone high school in Monroe County, Ala., blatantly against
warming the bones of the elderly in Terrell County Gal, when the cold
of winter creeps into their houses?
          They can be characterized only as classist, racist, as dangerous to
the health of this nation and, heaven help us suicidal to the state of
the world--because whatever the Russians are, they are neither weak
nor easily cowed, a fact which should not cause Americans to quake in
fear but it should give us pause. There is no winner in a nuclear
exchange. There is no world left for a winner.
          We are not sleeping sheep. We are not so much in love with the
upholstery in our sedans. We are not so tied to the feasts on our
tables. We are not so adorned and pampered and sweetsmelling and
satisfied that we will allow the Reagan people to distort and lessen
the nobility and the humanity and the morality of this nation. Look
closely at the rhetoric of the Reaganites. Look very closely. For you
and I and our countrymen are in trouble.
          Lillian Smith knew about trouble.
          Lillian Smith did not rest in the shade. Lil did not lollygag. She
did not hem and hew. She told the bigots in her midst to take
themselves on the short road to hell. She spelled out in language that
rings with lyricism just how close to hellfire those bigots were, how
rotted their souls were.
          It was the day of the lynching tree, that day when Lil and Paula
Snelling started their magazine in my mother's own sweet county of
Rabun. Lil stood up and she told the Talmadges and the Bilbos and the
Rankins and the Heflins and the Byrds and the Longs and the Crumps and
the Stennises that their ways were the ways of ruin and corrosion--and
she did her telling in the face of ever-constant risk to herself. And
you can be sure that those who disagreed with her--and they were most
of the people on this continent, including some who knew better, who
should have been her natural allies--were quick to threaten, to
attack, to harass, to accuse. The ring of the phone in the night was a
fearsome thing on Old Screamer Mountain.
          From Southern trees hang strange fruit. The line is from a Billy
Holiday song, but the words became Lil Smith's--and the novel
Strange Fruit awakened the conscience of the
Nation. Lil hastened the dawn, as Dabbs said. Her first book gave her
an audience. It established her as a serious artist, as a writer of
large gift, as a thinker influenced not only by the ancient
storytelling traditions of her own Southern origins but also by
Gandhi, by Freud, by the music that had been an integral part of her
life since girlhood in Jasper, Florida.
          Lil was short in stature, but she wasn't afraid to stand up and let
her words be heard. They were clear words and her message was
persuasive and it was heard not only in Cairo, Gal, but also in Cairo,
Egypt--not only in Vienna, Gal, but also in Vienna, Austria--not only
in Macon, Gal, but also in Macon, France.
          For a generation of Southerners, Lillian Smith provided the words
that had not been heard in the states of the old Confederacy because
overlaying our reach of the world was a certain silence. It's a
terrible sleep when you can't wake up, Lil said. It was an evil
silence. It was an evil imposed upon the brains of white infants in
the crib. It was an evil enforced in the bosom of the family. It was
an evil ratified by lawmakers. And it was, as all great evils are, as
has been said by a chronicler of another evil in this century, utterly
banal.
          Lil was a white woman. She was a feminist before the word won broad
currency, a thinker to the left of center. She was all those
things--and she was a Protestant Southerner. She was all those
things--but in the main Lillian Smith was a writer. I am a writer, she
said to me in a letter. How others see me is how they see me. I see
myself as a writer.
          I see by the papers that there are biographers at work on lives of
Lillian Smith. and it can only be hoped that they will bracket their
approach to Lil's life and work with that fact clearly in focus. She
was a writer. It is too convenient to critics, to the media, to her
enemies and even to her friends to characterize Lil as a
propagandist--certainly a talented one, but a propagandist
nevertheless.
          I cannot imagine taking Lil's message to her homeland out of an
account of her life, but the fact is that the woman 

put one word after
another in a way that celebrates the language and advances our
understanding of literature's higher role in the human experience. She
did not use words merely as a means of transporting to distant corners
the particulars of her philosophy. She used words as a poet uses
words, and there are exceedingly poetic, lyrical reaches in her
work. That is especially true in her nonfiction--in Killers of
the Dream, in The Journey, and that small
masterpiece, Memory of a Large Christmas.
          Even in casual correspondence, in her letters to friends and
acquaintances, Lillian Smith made art. It is too easily overlooked,
the art of Lillian Smith; it is too easily nudged aside in our rush to
commemorate Lil's courage, Lil's early and often lonely crusade
against the base instincts of the species. We must never diminish
Lil's stature as an artist. She gave us in her two published novels
and in her two major works of nonfiction literature which reveals our
human depth and reach and nobility and foibles and angst. Just as Lil
instructed young Martin King, then hardly more than a country preacher
down in Alabama, on the fine lines of Gandhi's nonviolent civil
disobedience . . . she gave us a body of fiction and nonfiction which
possesses the stuff of important literature.
          My first encounter with Lillian Smith was Killers of a Dream. That
book gave questioning feelings in me the words needed for me to
discover answers. Multiply my experience by ten thousand and extend it
into the next generation, as I have tried to do with my own children,
and you begin to catch the impact which that brave woman on the
mountain has had in our wondrous stretch of the planet.
          We can expect no more than one Faulkner in a century, perhaps in
two centuries. We can hope for no more than one O'Neill in a hundred
years. A language can hope for no mare than one Eliot in a
half-century. And whatever the challenges faced by our society in
these closing years of the twentieth century--and they are true
challenges--we cannot reasonably expect there to emerge a poet of
Lillian Smith's gift--a Lillian Smith to pit eloquence against the
slick Hollywood rhetoric of the manipulators. We can expect no more
than one Lil Smith, and she was here and she is gone.
          
            Pat Conroy
          
          I know well what the life and spirit of Lillian Smith
represents--the transcendence of the artist over the unspeakable
atrocities of her time. She was the word made fire. She was the writer
who possessed the indissoluble courage to say "no." She was the artist
who loved the South with all her heart, but knew in her heart that the
South was both glorious and completely wrong. She was the kind of
Southern writer I tried to learn from and emulate--the kind who would
throw up if they wrote Gone With The Wind.
          I never cared that Scarlett O'Hara went hungry in the Civil War, in
fact, I was glad. Because Scarlett O'Hara, and those fierce, abiding
citizens like her, came out of that War and created the South to which
I was born. Scarlett was true to her promise and rebuilt Tara and
never went hungry again. Nor did she give a damn that millions of
Southerners, black and white, would be hungry from the time they were
born until the time they died. Give me Lillian Smith; let who will
take Margaret Mitchell. Give me Nat Turner over Rhett Butler. Let me
walk the long miles with Harriet Tubman instead of listening to Uncle
Remus. Let me write love letters to the Grimke sisters of Charleston
and say thanks to Abraham Lincoln. Allow me to tell General Lee that
I'm delighted he lost the war and that I loathe any man, no matter how
refined or cultured, who kills other men in defense of slavery. Thank
General Sherman for me, for burning Atlanta, the city of my birth, the
city I love, because slavery could only end in a blaze of horror and
fire. Put a rose on the grave of Martin Luther King for me. Apologize
for me that I once hated his guts and called him rigger. I was a white
boy raised in the South and he will understand. Tell him it was people
like him, people like Medgar Evers, Julian Bond, John Lewis, Will
Campbell, Courtney and Elizabeth Siceloff and hundreds of others who
made me look in the mirror.
          When I looked in the mirror I saw Bull Connor, George Wallace,
Birmingham, Selma, separate drinking fountains, fire hoses, and blood
in the streets. I saw the whole bruised tragic history of the South in
those Southern blue eyes. In the mirror I was seeing myself for the
first time as an enemy of the family of man. When I was a teenager the
South was at war again, but the most splendid and magnificent warriors
in the history of America carried no weapons into battle. They carried
only a single word, "Freedom," and all the guns of the South, all the
troops and all the sheriffs, all the governors and fine Senators, all
the armies of the Klan and the death squads from the Virginias to
Mississippi learned something of the magic and the grandeur of the
English language. They were defeated by that one glorious word. I wish
I had been old enough or wise enough to have used that word in my
childhood, but Scarlett O'Hara and I were at the country club working
on our tans when the horses stormed across the Selma Bridge.
          I grew up in the South and I hated riggers and Jews--in fact, I
think I hated everybody. I brought remarkable skills to the art of
hating. But I was granted a gift when I was taught the alphabet at
Sacred Heart School on Courtland Street in Atlanta in 1950. I was
taught to read and I learned to listen to the language. The learning
of the alphabet began a slow revolution in my soul. I could hate
riggers until Eugene Norris, a white English teacher in Beaufort,
S.C., made me read Richard Wright and James Weldon Johnson and Countee
Cullen and James Baldwin. I could hate Jews until the same teacher
made me read The Diary of Anne Frank. I could hate
everyone until synagogues were bombed, black girls were killed in
church, and men and women were firehosed and bitten by dogs, beaten
and clubbed at bus stations, and murdered and buried in levees in
Mississippi. They taught me how to feel. Then they taught me to write
and I learned that all writing is worthless without feeling; all
writing is worthless without passion and faith.
          In the late Sixties I became one of those tiresome Southern white
changelings. You know the type. Blacks grew weary of the type very
quickly, but I was irrepressible in those quickstepping days and my
calling to the priesthood of civil rights, as I saw it, was to make my
white brothers and sisters understand the spiritually crippling malady
of racial prejudice. Always fear the convert--and at the same time I
was one of the most zealously obnoxious converts to the cause of civil
rights I ever encountered. I'm sure I did much accidental harm to the
movement. I was perfectly ridiculous. It was at this moment in history
I volunteered to teach on Daufuskie Island off the coast of South
Carolina during the first year of teacher integration. This was 1969
and it now seems a 

thousand years ago. I had once argued persuasively
with yankee classmates that the South had separate but equal school
systems and still rather believed it on the day I reached the
island. On the first day of school I learned that not one child in
grades five through eight knew what country they lived in and my
education as a Southerner was complete. I have never heard one
Southern politician from Strom Thurmond to George Wallace to Herman
Talmadge admit that they were monstrous, unconscionable liars when
they claimed the separate but equal doctrine. They were all liars. I
loathe them to this day because I once believed them. And they never
had the grace to recant. They never even had the common decency to say
they were wrong.
          In closing, I want to tell you that the Great American South will
never exist and it will always be waiting to be born. Dreams are
almost never born; they are gently urged along. The Southern Regional
Council has done much of this quiet gentle urging. You are desperately
needed; you are required. Because of President Reagan and his
administration the Southern poor and the American poor will suffer
grievously. There will be hunger and sadness in the land again, in the
world again.
          Fight them.
          
            The articles below were excerpted from speeches delivered
at the Atlanta Biltmore Hotel on Nov. 6, when the 1981 Lillian Smith
Awards for literature were presented by the Southern Regional
Council.
            The annual awards recognize the best fiction and nonfiction books
about the South. The 1981 winners were Pat Conroy for Lords of
Discipline and John Gaventa for Power and
Powerlessness: Quiescence and Rebellion in an Appalachian
Valley.
            Atlanta writer Gene Gabriel-Moore delivered the keynote remarks.
            Pat Conroy currently lives and works in Rome, Italy, and could not
be present for the Smith Awards banquet. He sent his remarks,
excerpted here, to Bernie Schein, who make the speech on Conroy's
behalf.
          
        
        
          Democracy Looks At the New South
          By Dunbar, LeslieLeslie Dunbar
          Vol. 4, No. 2, 1982, pp. 1-4
          
          The news is full these days about people returning to the South,
black and white, poor ones as well as those better off. The question
is, will democracy return with them?
          I don't, of course, mean the democracy of actual life, for the
South never had that, not even in the stumbling, wavering ways
realized in the rest of our country. I mean that democracy of
aspiration, which dwelt in the spirit and grand hopes that
Southerners, as much as people anywhere in the world, have in times
past thrust upward for the challenging of our lives. In the greatness
of such as Jefferson, Madison, George Mason, and--closer to our own
time--Hugo Black, James McBride Dabbs, Clifford Durr, Frank Graham,
Paul Green, Fannie Lou Hamer, Estes Kefauver, Martin Luther King, Jr.,
Lillian Smith, Dorothy Tilly, John H. Wheeler and Aubrey Williams, the
South taught men and women everywhere to love and labor for liberty
and equality.
          In their own region, the thought and example of those like
Jefferson went into a long, sad neglect after their passing. Will the
same be true of the legacy of these later leaders, who rekindled the
spirit that made the Civil Rights Movement an example to be cherished
wherever the wind of democracy moves?
          My own odyssey as a follower of those, our recent and deeply missed
prophets--for that is what they were, persons speaking truth to
power--began on a Spring afternoon in 1949. As the then youngest
member of Emory University's political science faculty, I had been
assigned the generally unwanted task of adviser to the Club of
Departmental Majors. I had already, in my first months at Emory,
voyaged once or twice to that foreign world where the Negro campuses
of Atlanta were; and so, casting about for a speaker for a club
meeting, I'd suggested inviting a man I'd met, Professor William Boyd
of Atlanta University, to come out and talk about race
relations. Rather nervously, and feeling bold, the students acceded. I
extended the invitation, it was accepted, and Boyd came and spoke to
our small group. While sitting in the back of the room and listening
to him, I was suddenly troubled by a new thought; in old-fashioned
language, I might say, was touched by grace--and as we all know, that
happens but seldom to any of us. It came to me that 

my invitation had
been wrong, even insulting. Here was this man, our professional
colleague, responding to his first invitation to appear among us at
the "white" school, and being asked to speak not about his own
professional field--which happened to be international politics--but
about race relations, as if that were all he had the competence to
teach us.
          When the meeting was over, and he and I had sat down in my office,
I apologized to him. Bill Boyd, whose untimely death a few years later
took from us one of our natural leaders, smiled in his ironic but
accepting manner and then as the afternoon wore on gave me alone his
second talk of the day. Without reference to laws or political
controversies, he, out of his own goodness, calmly told me what being
a black in the South entailed, of what it meant to him and his family
in their daily lives, of the heartbreaking dilemmas involved in
rearing his children of the never-ending succession of little things
that had to be coped with in traveling through the South or getting
about in Atlanta. The elephant at the Grant Park Zoo had died and a
campaign was on in the schools to get the children to contribute their
coins to help buy a new one. How, he asked, does one tell his eager
youngster that you may give your dime, but you won't be allowed to see
the elephant when it's bought? There was more, much more, of that; and
as I listened I suddenly had my second thought of the day: I did not
need it because had I ever given a moment's thought, I could have
known it on my own.
          That illumination has come back to me over and over again. I have
trod about ever since in the tangled morass of America's racial
struggles, not only those of blacks, but of our Hispanics and Indians
as well. Time and again, I have been taught and have been made to see
realities to which I had been blind theretofore. And nearly every
time, I have had ruefully to reflect that I should not have needed the
instruction, that the lesson could have been--should have
been--deduced from my own knowledge of what American society is.
          Discrimination is a social product, a fact to which the present
Supreme Court, in its insistence that only that discrimination which
can be proven to have arisen from the specific intentions of specific
officials is prohibited by the Fourteenth Amendment, seems to have
willfully shut it eyes. And, not the Supreme Court alone. Does, for
example, any thinking person need to be shown that poverty and housing
discrimination are root causes of criminal behavior? In recent years,
we have had to have large studies to show a direct connection between
poverty and hunger and malnutrition; did we truly need to be taught
that? There comes a point when our craving to be shown, to be given
documentation, is a mask for irresponsibility, a resistance to
realities which we know full well but which to admit would threaten
too strongly our willful belief in the morality of our social
order.
          The lesson that Bill Boyd taught came back to me anew when years
later I read Dr. King's "Letter From A Birmingham Jail." Do you
remember where he said:
          
            "I guess it is easy for those who have never felt the stinging
darts of segregation to say wait. But when you have seen vicious mobs
lynch your mothers and fathers at will and drown your sisters and
brothers at whim; when you have seen hate-filled policemen curse,
kick, brutalize and even kill your black brothers and sisters with
impunity; when you see the vast majority of your twenty million Negro
brothers suffering in an air-tight cage of poverty in the midst of an
affluent society; when you suddenly find your tongue twisted and your
speech stammering as you seek to explain to your six-year old daughter
why she can't go to the public amusement park that has just been
advertised on television, and see the tears welling up in her little
eyes when she is told that Fun Town is closed to colored children, and
see the depressing clouds of inferiority begin to form in her little
mental sky, and see her begin to distort her little personality by
unconsciously developing a bitterness toward white people; when you
have to concoct an answer for a five-year-old son asking in agonizing
pathos: 'Daddy, why do white people treat colored people so mean?'
When you take a cross-country drive and find it necessary to sleep
night after night in the uncomfortable corners of your automobile
because no motel will accept you. When you are humiliated day in and
day out by nagging signs reading 'White' men and 'Colored'; when your
first name and your last name becomes 'John,' and when your wife and
mother are never given the respectable title 'Mrs.' when you are
harried by day and haunted by night by the fact you are a Negro,
living constantly at tip-toe stance never quite knowing what to expect
next, and plagued with inner fears and outer resentments; when you are
forever fighting a degenerating sense of 'nobodiness'--then you will
understand why we find it difficult to wait."
          
          Shortly after that "Letter" was written, the Southern Regional
Council, of which I was then Executive Director, was asked to join
another agency in its printing and distribution. I declined. I suppose
I had practical reasons

--of money and such like--for doing so, though
what they were I can no longer recall. It was a bad mistake, one of
which I am ashamed. It did not keep that classic statement from being
printed, but it did keep what was then the South's principal bi-racial
organization from standing with it and for it. It was another missed
opportunity, of which there have been so many, when the voices of
black people were turned from in the South.
          All that which Dr. King described happened in a past that, although
but a few years ago, now seems distant. This is the New South, men
say. And they are right. The Civil Rights Movement did accomplish
great deeds, the South is vastly changed, and is the better for
it. Yet much lies ahead to be done, to build democracy here, as well
as in our nation. And sometimes one wonders if the cutting edge, as we
used to call it, is still sharp. Way back in 1946, W.E.B. DuBois made
a speech in Columbia, S.C. In the course of it, he said:
          
            "White youth in the South is peculiarly frustrated. There is not
a single great ideal which they can express or aspire to that does not
bring them into flat contradiction with the Negro problem. The more
they try to escape it, the more they land in hypocrisy, lying and
double-dealing; the more they become what they least wish to become,
the oppressors and despisers of human beings. Some of them, in larger
and larger numbers, are bound to turn toward the truth and to
recognize you as brothers and sisters, as fellow travelers toward the
dawn."
          
          Whatever else must be said about the experience of being white in
the pre-1970 South, there was always that bothersome conscience which
DuBois described. I may be wrong, and hope that I am, but I doubt if
it has still the same force, among either white youth or their
elders. The war is over and done, the burden of conscience has been
discharged, the duties it imposed are no more, it is time to cease
doing good and instead simply start doing well for ourselves. The edge
has gone out of too many of our young people. Compassion seems to have
become unfashionable. To be heard, one must appeal to material
interests, as such are perceived by what today passes for political
parties and by our media.
          If the future is now, it is a grim forbidding one. The Civil Rights
Movement did its great work, just as men like Jefferson in their day
did theirs. It has left us the next and even greater task and that is
the combating of war and poverty, and the South is central in both.
          We must never allow ourselves to take our sights
off the main event, and that is the terrible bombs ready to
explode in the center ring of all our our existences. One bomb, is
quite literally, the bomb of nuclear warfare, to which the governments
of the world approach closer day by day. The other is the bomb of
world-wide poverty, compact of the misery of probably the majority of
human beings now living, of whom all too many dwell here in the South
and in urban and rural ghettos throughout our land.
          It is instructive to go back in our thinking to Gunnar
Myrdal. Perhaps you will recall the famous "rank order of
discrimination" which he set down in The American
Dilemma. Researching prior to and during World War II, he
believed that he had found that white Southerners were and would be
most resistant to any change that had to do with sex between black men
and white women and with intermarriage. Following this, he found that
the white South would yield most slowly on, in order: personal
relationships and the "etiquette" between the races; the use of public
facilities: political disfranchisement; discriminatory law
enforcement; and finally, would yield most easily on economic
discrimination.
          His survey of Negro Southerners gave him just the opposite
conclusion; namely that they cared most about economic opportunities,
least of all about sexual mingling. Myrdal went on to acknowledge that
he might be wrong about the white South's dominant interests, and of
course he was. We know now that, when push came to shove, the white
South has far more cared about maintaining its economic privileges
than its sexual codes or traditional etiquette. The harsh fact is that
today at least one-third of black Southerners live below the poverty
line and that upwards of two-fifths of the nation's poor, white and
black, live in the South. We have reached that disappointing
level--and that is what it seems, a level ground which year to year
does not rise or fall--after and despite all the great, and they were
indeed great--events and victories of the intervening decades: the
court battles over the white primary and higher education, the work of
President Truman's Civil Rights Committee, the suppression of the
Dixiecrats, the 1954 and 1955 decisions on segregated schools, the
bitter and finally successful battles against "massive resistance,"
the sit-in movement and the magnificent demonstrations and voter
registration campaigns of the sixties and early seventies, the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and the "War On
Poverty" declared in 1964.
          But all that accomplishment left poor people still poor, and some
of them poorer than ever; and left the white folks mostly still in
charge. Working alongside Mack Jones, a successor of my old mentor,
Bill Boyd, as a professor of political science at Atlanta University,
I have in the last year and a half helped out the Federation of
Southern Cooperatives, as it fought off the harassment of the
Department of Justice. That episode showed, among other things, how
determinedly and resourcefully the white economic and political powers
of the Black Belt will act to put down a poor people's organization
that is perceived as threatening their control.
          The episode suggests another possibility. It is that the economic
reform which this country so desperately requires may not come about
until poor people organize themselves at local and state levels to
insist upon it; that the reform to be effective must include new
structures, as in the co-ops, which end the dependence of poor people
on established economic and political powers; and that just as the
struggle for civil rights did not gather strength and momentum until
black Southerners took charge and gave leadership, so will the
struggle for economic justice not really move very far until its
leadership comes from the poor and those who have earned the poor's
trust.
          The "beloved community" which the Civil Rights Movement in its
glory days proclaimed may exceed our grasp. Must it also be beyond our
reach? I would if I could call us back to those mind-changing,
nation-rocking, soul-lifting ideals of non-violence and equality and
freedom for all. I would because they are, ultimately, the only
realistic and practical guides for our action. It is impractical and
unrealistic to expect millions of people of our nation--and of a
couple of billion, more or less, world wide--to endure indefinitely
their poverty and degradation and not to tear down somehow the peace
and prosperity of the rest of us. It is utterly unrealistic to believe
that we and the Russians, not to speak of a host of lesser
governments, can continue the grossest arms build-up in all history,
one which features nuclear weapons of civilization destroying potency;
can continue "projecting our power" all about the globe without
uncontrollable war erupting. The madness of our times is that what is
palpably irrational 

and even insane passes for pragmatism, while
realism is dismissed as soft-headedness. Yet it is only through that
idealism of the Civil Rights Days, which was in fact hard realism,
that our nation and the world and the civilization that keeps us from
being mere brutes stand any chance of survival.
          It was through it that the possibility of democracy was brought
back to the South, from which it had departed with Jefferson's
generation. Will it become more than a possibility? Democracy means
the rule of the people. Its attainment and keeping are never-finished
tasks. First of all, comes the establishment of equality, for the rule
of the people without at least enough equality among the people so
that self-reliance is everywhere is a contradiction in terms. Then
comes justice, for that means that every person is to be treated
fairly and with equal rights. And then true democracy requires peace,
for without it the people will never rule, for commanders must, and
justice will not prevail, because force and regimentation will.
          We are generally led and ruled by men who though often as not good
and conscientious individuals are by their policies unwitting killers
of the dream, foulers of the nest, sellers of the birthright. And not
America's birthright only but that of the civilization to which we
were born and which has given edge and strength to our character,
given us eyes to see and to be aware of the world's beauty and the
world's callings.
          But I have too pessimistic a faith in political leaders, in the
absence of ground swells of public opinion, to call upon them. As I
said before, if I could I would call upon us to reclaim the ideals,
the realism, of the old movement. If we did, I think we should now be
saying, and acting on the saying, that we stand for no political or
economic system, no ideology; that we stand instead for women and men,
boys and girls, living freely, everywhere. We stand for the hope of
equal chances for all, and the demand for good chances of all, now, in
our own time. We stand for peace; peace between nations: peace with
each other. To be for peace is to be against violence. It is to be
against inculcation of the values of violence, the training of the
world's youth in violence, the all-absorbing preparations for
violence. We can no more make peace by threatening war than we can
make friendship by threatening enmity. Sooner rather than later, that
game will not work.
          From the great nuclear plants at Oak Ridge, Tenn., and Savannah
River, S.C., to the Pantex Plant in the Texas pan-handle where the
bombs and warheads are assembled, the South is deeply embedded in
preparation for nuclear holocaust. From the hollows of Appalachia to
the migrant farm labor camps of Florida the South is still the poorest
of regions. Here, if anywhere, is the place to redirect America from
policies and values that will not work, toward those that have been
tested--and do.
          
            Dr. Leslie Dunbar is the former director of the Southern
Regional Council and of the Field Foundation. He now works with the
Fund for Peace, Washington, D.C. The article here its adapted
from. remarks to the Blue Ridge Institute for Southern Community
Executives, July 26, 1981.
          
        
      
    
  
