
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 4, Number 3,
	       1982
        
          Against the Grain: Southern Radicals and Prophets,
1929-1959. Edited by Anthony P. Dunbar, Charlottesville:
University Press of Virginia, 1981.
          
            
              Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
            
          
          Vol. 4, No. 3, 1982, pp. 14-15
          
          The past remains as unpredictable as ever. As proof, we have Tony
Dunbar's fine book, Against the Grain. From scattered,
vagrant and half-forgotten sources, he has fashioned a story which is
not only important in its own right, but also is suggestive of what
remains uncollected and as yet, untold.
          Dunbar himself acknowledges that his narrative is only "a piece of
the history" of Southern radicalism and protest in the 1930's. "No
single work," he writes, "could record all that happened in the mines
and factories, all that was attempted by women's organizations, or all
that resulted from the dissatisfaction of blacks and the poor in
little towns without number." In its fashion Against the
Grain now joins several recent books already on the shelf:
Donald Grubbs' Cry from the Cotton, Thomas Krueger's
exploration of The Southern Conference for Human Welfare,
H.L. Mitchell's autobiography, Ted Rosengarten's All God's
Dangers, Nell Painter's edition of Hosea Hudson's
recollections and essays and oral histories in numerous issues of
Southern Exposure. Additionally, these volumes of
printed word have appeared concurrently with a rediscovery and
reissuance of the 1930s music of Southern working folk. Record labels
such as Folkways, Rounder, County, Flyright and Clanka [unclear] have tracked down the scratchy old
seventy-eight rpm recordings and made them available, with extensive
annotation, on shiny new albums. (This is a story for another
occasion, however; readers interested in surveying the range of these
musical materials should write Roundup Records, P.O. Box 147,
E. Cambridge, MA 02141 and ask for a catalog or the current issue of
The Record Roundup.)
          All this energy betokens several genuine cravings. First in mind
are the empowering effects which come through the rediscovery of
indigenous traditions of Southern protest and activism. Each
generation needs to know the persistent themes of its predecessors,
the context of their temperaments, the campaigns waged, the findings
and keepings. Awareness of kinship with the critical past, Dunbar
knows, can help clarify insights and shore up our courage. A rock in a
weary land.
          Against the Grain traces the origins, emergence and
transformation of the South's "radical gospel" 

uprising. This was a
movement which shook not so much the established church as the lives
of many farmers and millworkers. For a time it restored grass-root
meaning to the word Protestant. Ultimately, of
course, it had its failures. The redress of class power and racial
prejudice are no modest goals. The movement's ommission from or
slighting by standard history books testifies to Lillian Smith's
understanding that history's winners name their age and to the
selective orientation of historians interpreting backwards from these
winners.
          But as the swift ages roll, new possibilities appear and old
alternatives revive, provided there's someone like Tony Dunbar around
to prod us with the memories. His interpretation first establishes the
influence of teachers, people such as Alva Taylor of the Vanderbilt
School of Religion, Reinhold Niebuhr and Harry Ward at New York's
Union Theological Seminary. These teachers themselves carry the spirit
of a generation older than Dunbar's central characters: Claude and
Joyce Williams, Don and Constance West, Miles and Zilphia Horton, Ward
Rogers, Alice and Howard Kester, James Dombrowski, Elizabeth Hawes,
and others. Dunbar then follows these "students," their ideas,
institutions and influences primarily through the 1930s, but also, in
more summary fashion, right down to now.
          Yet, Dunbar is far from suggesting that the orders went out from an
old line of graybeards to a young cadre of ideologues. Perhaps the
most important notion in Against the Grain in is that
Southern farmers and working people carry, within their own cultural
resources, the seeds of populist revolt. And that organizers and
teachers who can speak the language of the culture, who can, for
instance, bring home a radical gospel, can help these seeds to
flower. Such was clearly the case in the mid-1930s with the Southern
Tenant Farmers Union. Thousands of black and white Mississippi and
Arkansas tenants risked their lives in several strikes. This rising,
before it was broken by state and vigilante violence and by the
political clout of certain Southern Democrats within the New Deal
coalition, "marked the high point of agricultural unionism in the
South and provided an example of the races working together which
would not be repeated until the civil rights movement emerged two
decades later."
          Finally, a note on the book itself as object and artifact. From the
dust jacket to the photographs which bind it's beginning and end, the
University of Virginia Press has done an excellent bit of
handiwork. Photographs of the participants are interspersed
throughout, along with occasional copies of period handbills, posters,
poems and song texts. The type is large and easily readable and the
overall design speaks of that rarest of modern productions, a work of
thought and care.
        
        
          Murder At Broad River Bridge. By Bill Shipp,
Atlanta: Peachtree Publishers, 1981, $8.95.
          By Wilson, GrantGrant Wilson
          Vol. 4, No. 3, 1982, p. 15
          
          Lemuel Penn was killed without cause and anonymously by members of
the Ku Klux Klan outside Athens, Gal, in 1964. His murder was only one
of dozens in the Civil Rights era but his colonel's rank in the army
reserve and the political climate of the time made Penn's death a
national matter. The combined forces of federal and state officials
quickly found the murderers but what passed for justice in the South
in those days protected the guilty from the law.
          The history of discrimination and oppression around Athens at the
time of Penn's murder and the lives of ignorant men filled with fear
and hatred give a melancholy backdrop to Bil1 Shipp's story of the
event, the investigation and final resolution. Though brief--91
pages--Shipp's book is well-researched and is told in a clear
journalistic style that pulls the reader, resisting, back to the
confused, frightening years of the 1960s.
          The story is not pleasant but it is well done. Murder At
Broad River Bridge will be helpful to civil rights historians
and to the average reader wanting to find reaffirmation of the
principles that fought against injustice then, so those ideals may be
applied again, now. Penn's killing was one of the factors that helped
break the Klan hold over the South in the sixties. National attention
and government pressure was focused on the KKK and it withered under
the assault. But though much improved, too much stayed the same, and
today there is a small yet mounting growth in the Ku Klux
Klan. Shipp's short chronicle might not have been written but for
that. History could have noted Colonel Penn and moved on to other
atrocities but Shipp has given the fullest story possible in order
that we not avoid an important lesson.
          Asleep or awake the Klan lives, like a grub in the ground until a
spring of opportunity arrives. It's spring again, and Bill Shipp's
book reminds us that no matter what its guise the Klan deals out
violence, death and injustice which have to be countered. The lesson
must be that old battles don't always stay won but must be fought
again and again.
          
            Grant Wilson is a freelance writer and an aspiring
gentleman farmer in Kensington, Ga.
          
        
        
          Figures of Speech--Can a Country Boy Survive?
          By Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 4, No. 3, 1982, pp. 1-3
          
          You have to stay up awful late in Alabama nowadays to put nostalgia
and melancholy under the table. In cahoots, Action News and the
jukebox are blowing the null breath of extinction. Some of the good ol'
boys feel the hair rising on the backs of their necks. They even have
a tune: "Who's Going to Sing the Last Country Song?"
          But it is the NAACP's Benjamin Hooks who asks the musical
question. Blacks, he says, have lived so long with hard times and
thwarted hopes that they know the territory. What will the white folk
do? Spook and go off halfcocked, he fears. Realize a common plight?
Not likely. Hooks is familiar with the shape and color of banty
messiahs and traditional scapegoats.
          As I drive a car-full of friends across Birmingham's Red Mountain
one night this May, the signals come clear. Vulcan, the iron man,
holds high a red torch to show a death on the highway. The familiar
cracks about his near-nakedness are more biting: how the Vulcan forgot
to cover his ass, how Birmingham is mooning the affluent, over
the-mountain community of Homewood for its failed merger vote. Looking
down upon miles of city lights, we hear the car radio offering Lynyrd
Skynyrd's Sweet Home Alabama. Down home this song is always in revival
but tonight I hear, in a new way, the line "In Birmingham they love the
Governor . . ." For the last twenty years, Alabama has really had only
one Governor.
          The news in Birmingham, bad for months, got worse in May and
June. Magic City unemployment hung around twelve percent even before
word came that U.S. Steel (a major employer for three-quarters of a
century) was closing its Fairfield Works and even before local schools
turned out for the summer. As a state, Alabama s jobless rate is
second only to that of Michigan. The Governor, who carried Michigan in
the 1972 Presidential primary, insists that he left the Heart of Dixie
a different legacy. "When I was Governor the last eight years," he
proclaims, "we were first in the Southeast in new and expanded
industries."
          On the radio, some Fairfield workers are interviewed. 

Twelve
thousand steelworkers punched in at Fairfield just five years
ago. Now, their numbers cut to nothing, their feelings are variously
strong and resigned. Almost all of them resent the secrecy and
hard-heartedness of U.S. Steel. Some blame the Japanese, some the
"business cycle." The district's Congressman, Republican Albert Lee
Smith, audaciously blames the workers themselves.
          "I'd be willing to take a cut in pay," says one veteran, "if we
could keep the plant open. But the big man has to do some giving back
too." The Big Mules at U.S. Steel refuse comment. They check their
digital watches and have their secretaries dust decades of fly ash and
tailings off of ancient carpetbags.
          Such were the Steel City's ironies this May that among all the
layoffs and rumors of layoffs, the AFLCIO was holding its Southeastern
labor conference. Union officials heard the growing rank and file
anger, noted the increasing toll that Reagonomics was taking on
industrial membership and speculated. that momentum, continuing to
build from Solidarity Day, would bring some election results this
fall. The Southern union leaders pledged stronger organizing campaigns
among service workers. Black and white women working in hospital,
office and food service jobs may help shape labor's direction in the
l980s.
          Meanwhile, a quarter gets you only two plays: Merle Haggard ringing
the jingo bell with his latest "Okie From Muskogee" spinoff, one
called "Are the Good Times Really Over For Good?" and George Jones
singing "It's the Same Ole Me" as he fails to show for a performance
at Boutwell Auditorium.
          Birmingham's Post-Herald observes that as of January
1982, more than 45,000 people, about seven percent of the Jefferson
County population, take their guns to town. Thousands more keep them
handy at work or at play.
          Guns take the worry out of being close. "Knowing what's going on in
this town," says one citizen, "you need a gun."
          No matter how early you wake up in Alabama nowadays, a mean taste
whispers in your mouth. A whisper that sometimes rises to a
scream. Lately, it has found voice in Hank Williams, Jr., providing
an unauthorized campaign anthem for a re-tuned George Wallace, The
Governor:
          
            I live back in the woods, you see,
            My woman and the kids and the dogs and me. 
            I got a shotgun, rifle, and a four-wheel drive 
            And a country boy can survive.*
          
          * A Country Boy Can Survive," copyright, Bocephus Music, 1981.
          It hurts that Hank Jr. has chosen this tact that country boys will
be boys. For several years his considerable musical gifts and poignant
Iyricism have shadowboxed his father's awesome legacy and struggled
against country music cliche. But his toughest opponents remain the
sexism and the half-snarling, half-plaintive, go-it-alone stance which
plagues the genre, the culture and the family tradition of which he
sings. On his recent album, The Pressure Is On, Hank
Jr.'s antagonisms too often invoke the emotions of reaction. Codewords
are just a shot away. He sings in his powerful solo voice, while the
electric guitar drives in dead earnest:
          
            I had a good friend in New York City 
            He never
called me by my name, just "Hillbilly.'  
            My grandpa taught me how
to live off the land 
            And his taught him to he a businessman.
          
          
            He used to send me pictures of the Broadway nights

            And I'd send him some homemade wine.  
            But he was killed by a man
with a switchblade knife 
            For forty-three dollars my friend lost his
life.
          
          
            I'd love to spit some Beech Nut in that dude's eyes

            And shoot him with my ol', forty-five.  
            Cause a country boy can
survive.  
            Country folks can survive.*
          
          * A Country Boy Can Survive," copyright, Bocephus Music, 1981.
          Hank Jr. turned thirty-three in May and allowed the photographers
to snap him hunkering at his daddy's graveside in Montgomery. Yet
along with the new confidence that he gives off, it is as if at the
entrance to his country-rock domain in Cullman, Ala., Bocephus has
thrown up a guardhouse and razor wire fence. Here, the passwords--"We
say grace and we say ma'am"--give clues to the same fierce anger
which, in part, propels the Wallace candidacy--"if you ain't into
that, we don't give a damn."*
          * A Country Boy Can Survive," copyright, Bocephus Music, 1981.
          Behind the swagger, and despite the worthy call to more
self-sufficiency, the message is one of romantic retreat and
retrenchment. And this in a state where country boys' farm debts now
total more than two billion dollars, a rise of eighty-four percent
since 1977. What happens when the bank comes to repossess the
four-wheel drive? The romance of outlawry is thin solipsism to pour
over the hard biscuits of attrition. Perhaps country boys can
survive. Can they grow up?
          For George Wallace, May brought another sort of commemoration and a
resurrection--that most miraculous of survival tactics. First elected
Governor in 1962, Wallace has served three terms, four really, if you
count 

the time his late wife Lurleen sat in for him until her death by
cancer. Now, after a self-imposed four-year "retirement," and with a
new wife, Lisa, who once sang country songs with her sister (Mona and
Lisa) in the 1968 Wallace For President campaign, The Governor is
ready to honor the state again with his service. Ten years to the
month after he had been shot and partially paralyzed, he made the
announcement. As of today, his chances for election seem
excellent. Much depends on whether he can maintain the appearances of
strength, stamina and coherence. It's hard for anyone to campaign
against a man come back from the grave with an electorate desperate to
prevail with ah' its myths intact.
          "So hell," The Governor told a Post-Herald interviewer, "I nearly
died ten times after I was shot. I'd get well and peritonitis would
develop. I would never do anything that would injure my health because
I have a God-given instinct to want to survive as long as I can."
          In June, as he hops about the state from barbecue fundraiser to
television studio, it is not George Wallace who appears immobilized,
but many of Alabama's voters and politicos. The spectrum of opposition
appears ideologically narrow, tentative and uninspired. A few black
leaders, most prominently Montgomery's E. D. Nixon (the bus boycott
leader) and Tuskegee Mayor-Johnny Ford, have even made horse trades
with The Governor and are willing to swallow their history lessons in
exchange for the promise of small leverages and front seats on the
early-rolling bandwagon.
          So back to the jukebox and one more play. This time however, it's
Tammy Wynette singing, not "Stand By Your Man," or "Take Me To Your
World," but a different story. In it, a woman begins to find herself
only after her man has moved out. She is glad to be rid of his
hang-ups, gives his favorite chair to charity, wears her jeans a
little tighter, changes her hair style and learns how to dance. Then,
when her used-to-be wants to do her the favor of moving back in, Tammy
sings, "Maybe you better wait a little bit longer, before you come
back and give me another chance." It is a promising tune which
Alabamians ought to consider in this season of survival.
        
        
          Reagan's Way of Eliminating Poverty
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 4, No. 3, 1982, pp. 11-12
          
          Last month the Census Bureau confirmed that Southerners remain
closer kin to poverty than anyone else in the country. Southern
states, as of 1980, continue to have the nation's highest rates of
poverty. One in four of all Mississippians, for example, are poor, and
so are nearly half of that state's blacks. In no Southern state was
the extent of black poverty less than twenty-nine percent.
          This news was followed by the general silence of the region's
politicians, as it has been since poverty statistics were first
compiled in the early 1960s. When pressed, some of the white officials
responded like a prideful father whose illegitimate, poorest relation
had just arrived on his doorstep: get them out of sight as soon as
possible and tell the neighbors they aren't related and, no, they
certainly aren't poor.
          Ironically, with the election of a former California governor over
an incumbent President from Georgia, the White House has transformed
Southern traditions into national stateways. It is proposing to
eliminate poverty in this country by removing federal expenses to
combat it by making the poor pay for being poor, by giving poverty
away and by defining poor people out of existence.
          The first step came when the Reagan budget was adopted by Congress
last summer. While expenditures for programs aimed- directly for the
poor constituted less than one in eighteen of the dollars in that
year's federal budget, sixty percent of the entire cuts which the
President asked for and received came out of these programs. The same
pattern--to a lesser extent--will apply in the budget for next
year. On the basis of current proposals, it's likely that thirty
percent of all cuts will come out of these same programs.
          Inspired by the pages of the Congressional Record of
the 1960s, the Reagan Administration's second step is to make the poor
pay hard cash before they become eligible for any government
assistance. Already there are propos-

als in the hopper in Congress and
floating around in concept papers at the White House to initiate the
universal requirement for "co-payments" by the poor. If, for example,
a mother wants a prescription filled under Medicaid for her child, she
will have to put up some money before the government pays the
remainder.
          From its start, the food stamp program was plagued by this notion
that if the poor really want and need something, they ought to put up
some money of their own. Volumes of studies show that such a policy
assures that the very poorest families will be the ones the program
fails to reach. This strategy no doubt reduces the number of
recipients, and allows some Southern senators to argue, as they did
two decades ago, that the poor really aren't poor. Since they don't
participate in the programs, they obviously don't need them.
          The third step being considered is the withdrawal of federal
responsibility to help the poor. The White House's major proposal on
"new federalism" seeks to make the states take on the task of
financing food stamps and the cash assistance program for families
with dependent children (AFDC) while the federal government takes over
Medicaid and the financing of ten or fifteen year bloc grant
programs. This venture to define the relations between state and
federal governments does not propose a shift from the federal to the
state the entire responsibility for paving highways, financing sewer
systems, or fostering agriculture. Rather, new federalism is a
proposal to get rid of the federal responsibility in the two major
programs aimed directly at the poor.
          To finish the job, the White House has shown increased interest in
defining people out of poverty. The Administration's first domestic
advisor held the view that poverty no longer existed in America. and
the President has repeated a weakened version of this sentiment in
several news conferences. The Administration appears eager to give a
cash value to all government services which the poor receive in order
to compute the income of people in deciding if they are poor. By this
method, the number of poor would drop since the value of services a
family received would price them out of poverty. For example, a family
of four living in a housing project with a total income of $6,000
would be assessed about $3,600 (the average rent in Atlanta) for their
five-room apartment. With $9,600 income calculated, the family would
then be ineligible for other government aid, such as medical care,
because the family "makes" more than the $8,700 poverty limit.
          No White House official, however, has proposed to calculate the
cash value of any government service to anyone else for purposes of
paying taxes or deciding if the person is eligible for the program.
          Fifteen years ago efforts to achieve the same results by a south
Alabama state senator helped earn Roland Cooper the nickname of "The
Wily Fox From Wilcox" County. Still in Alabama's law books is one of
Cooper's bills that would permit the governing board in his Blackbelt
county to authorize payments for those on welfare to purchase tickets
to leave the state. If the Reagan Administration's major efforts to
eliminate poverty by making the poor more poor continue to gain
momentum, the schemes of the "Wily Fox" and other past vocal and
silent Southern politicians who fought aid to the black poor may look
increasingly generous by comparison.
        
        
          The Race Toward Reapportionment
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 4, No. 3, 1982, pp. 18-24
          
          Billboards and television commercials of earnest faces and subdued
colors are inviting many Southerners already to think about the
virtues of candidates for the November elections. Back in the halls of
the state capitols in almost half the Southern states, however,
politicians face the prospects of computer runs, cross-examinations,
and twilight negotiations in order to draw the lines that will decide
what are the congressional and state legislative districts for the
fall.
          Because of the delay in the final redistricting, especially in the
Deep South, the federal courts will be deciding in the next few weeks
if they must order special redistricting plans in order to assure that
elections go forward later this year. White state officials have been
quick to lay the blame for the failure to produce a reapportionment
plan on the courts or the U.S. Justice Department. "The bureaucrats in
Washington," is a phrase that begins many private conversations
throughout the region in legislative chambers and state election
offices. One state official in North Carolina sounded more like a
former governor of Mississippi when he called the decision of the
Justice Department to object to a North Carolina reapportionment plan
"obscene and asinine."
          Black state legislators in the South see it another way. State
Representative Jerome Tucker said of the rejection of Alabama's plan
in early May: "I anticipated the plan would be rejected. I look at it
as a failure of the Alabama legislature to reapportion itself fairly."
In Georgia, where the state decided to appeal a Justice Department
decision disapproving of its congressional plan, State Rep. Billy
Randall of Macon, chairman of the Legislative Black Caucus, said that
the delay in holding primary elections could have been avoided if the
state had been willing to correct the mistakes which Justice
identified.
          While reapportionment is the politics of pencils, calculators, and
computer printouts, it is also at bottom the process by which
fundamental changes are made in the distribution of political power,
and individual political fortunes rise and fall according to the lines
that are drawn. This democratic exercise presents more convincing
evidence that in Southern politics race as an issue remains king. The
examples of relentless opposition to creating any district that permit
black voters to have a powerful voice in electing representatives is
staggering when added together from across the South.
          In Virginia, the General Assembly met more than three times in
special session considering dozens of reapportionment plans over
twelve months before it was forced to permit three additional black
majority general assembly districts. Of a total of 140 members, black
voters will control at most the election of only seven delegates to
the legislature for the next decade.
          The North Carolina legislature also convened in three special
sessions to adopt four redistricting plans before it decided it must
add three districts where blacks may be able to control the elections
for representatives to the general assembly. In February, the North
Carolina legislature refused to create anything more than a fifty-one
percent majority-black district in the face of advice from its lawyers
and the state research officer that the plan was unlawful and that
another special session would be required. Their lawyer advised them
to add four or five percentage points to one senate district to forego
another round of reapportionment. Yet, five more percentage points of
black population in one northeastern district was too much for the
general assembly to do willingly.
          In South Carolina, the all-white state senate has held off
redistricting in the hopes that Congress would weaken the Voting
Rights Act and thus the pressures to draw districts that will give
black voters a chance to elect at least one state senator. In
neighboring Georgia, state lawyers are appealing a ruling that its
plan for congressional redistricting was discriminatory in the face of
verified comments from the chief opponent of a majority black
congressional district that he would not permit "a nigger
district."
          For several days in May in Alabama the state legislature ran the
high risk of jeopardizing its entire reapportionment plan by reducing
one rural south Alabama district from sixty-five to sixty percent
black because the incumbent white legislator said that he simply could
not get elected with that many blacks in his district.
          In Mississippi, the legislature turned away efforts to have a
majority-black district in one of five congressional seats in a state
where almost two of five are black. In Louisiana, the governor vetoed
a majority-black congres-

sional district that the legislature had first
adopted, and then the legislature turned around in the redistricting
of its own houses and reduced by one-third the number of
majority-black legislative districts in New Orleans despite a rise in
the percentage of blacks in that part of the state.
          In Florida, Texas, and Tennessee--all states receiving additional
congressional seats for the 1980s--the state legislatures refused to
give serious consideration to creating districts with a majority of
black or Hispanic population.
          If the expenses of lawyers and special sessions of the legislatures
were added into the cost of holding some of the special primaries that
may be required, the price of doggedly opposing black influence in
Southern reapportionment may reach as high as five million dollars
before the last penny is spent in 1982. It's an intimidating cost,
especially in these days of shrinking state budgets.
          Although these facts merely highlight the systematic efforts to
retard black voting strength, white Democrats continue to debunk
reapportionment as only a tool for Republicans who are using blacks to
front for their partisan gains. Also, some white politicians truly
believe that it is bad politics for blacks' own self interests to
concentrate their influence as a majority of voters in a limited
number of legislative districts when they could make up a
substantial--but not a majority--percentage of several more
districts.
          Both arguments ignore the continuing existence of racial "bloc"
voting throughout the South. In a recent study in Mississippi, for
example, one political statistician found that almost ninety percent
of the white voters m the state in local elections will vote only for
white candidates and that a very large percentage has a pattern of
voting only for white candidates who are not allied with black
organizations. In such circumstances, which are not unusual throughout
the South in most local elections, black voters often must have a
controlling vote if they are to have a meaningful voice.
          Because the number of legislators elected by black. votes continues
to be very limited, the Voting Rights Act and the
U.S. Constitution--more than political horsetrading--remain the major
protections for the rights of black voters. The Act provides that
jurisdictions in six Southern states and forty counties in North
Carolina must file with the U.S. Department of Justice any change in
voting before that change is implemented. These changes, including
redistricting, are examined by Justice to decide if they will have a
discriminatory effect or purpose. If so, the changes cannot be
implemented.
          A local or state government covered under this pre-clearance
provision may appeal to the federal district court in Washington where
a panel of three judges is convened to hear the case. In turn, black
citizens are also able to file suit in local Southern federal courts
if they believe that redistricting plans violate the
U.S. Constitution.
          In the following summaries of most Southern states, a few case
studies are presented in order to illustrate the anatomy of
reapportionment in the region, as it has developed recently.
          
            Alabama
          
          In perhaps its most comprehensive objection to a state
reapportionment plan to date, the Justice Department rejected the
Alabama Legislature's proposals in early May. Justice found that
Alabama had diluted black voting strength in Birmingham, Mobile, and
all urban areas "with current black populations of over twenty-five
percent and in the rural Black Belt counties."
          The decision set in motion a month of backroom politics and agile
legal efforts to keep the federal courts out of Alabama
redistricting.
          In Birmingham, the proposed plan reduced the number of districts
with majority-black populations from seven to six. It also reduced the
influence of black voters in one of the remaining six districts
despite an increase in the percentage of the black population in those
parts of the metropolitan area. In Mobile and Montgomery, Justice
found that the state used almost contradictory means of redistricting
in order to dilute in both places the voting strength of blacks in
senate districts. The redistricting of the Black Belt also evidenced
voting discrimination since Justice found that the legislature had
shaved off the percentage of blacks in order to reduce from five to
one the number of house districts with a majority of blacks of voting
age. Even in the one remaining district the majority of voting-age
blacks was reduced somewhat.
          Word of Justice's actions spread quickly among state political
leaders in Montgomery but reaction was comparatively mild in a capital
where an Alabama governor in past years had suggested after an adverse
federal court decision that the judge ought to have a "barbed wire
enema." Tempered by the experience of the last fight in Alabama over
reapportionment, which brought a court order tripling the number of
majority-black legislative districts, the cochairman of the
reapportionment committee and probably next year's speaker of the
house, veteran state Rep. Rick Manley, moved quickly to figure out the
minimal changes in the original plan that Justice would approve and
his colleagues would accept.
          Manley realized that a three judge federal panel sat in the
background and might step in to take over reapportionment in Alabama
if a plan was not adopted that could get Justice's approval in time
for candidates to file for primary elections in September. On that
court, convened because of a suit by black legislators and citizens,
was Frank Johnson, the judge who had ordered the sweeping
reapportionment in the 1970s; Myron Thompson, a black appointee of the
Carter administration who once worked for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund
and the National Education Association: and Truman Hobbs, a
conservative who had nonetheless supported the wing of the state
democratic party that opposed George Wallace in times past.
          As a white Black Belt politician, Manley was especially concerned
about reshaping his own district, presently sixty-two percent black,
and others in that part of rural, south Alabama. Birmingham also
presented a major political problem since any remedy of Justice's
objections 

would probably mean running two or more white incumbents
against one another. Indeed, to keep the court out of reapportionment,
Manley had to orchestrate the drafting and adoption of the legislative
plan that would affect more than twenty legislative districts and that
could be approved by Justice by early June.
          Meeting and telephone calls began to multiply. Manley and lawyers
for the state met with Justice officials in Washington one day during
the week of May 7 and the next day were back in Montgomery for a
meeting with lawyers for the black plaintiffs challenging the
reapportionment in federal court. Apparently, Manley told Justice,
legislators and the plaintiffs' lawyers that he was open for any
suggestions and implied that he had no new plan in mind. Therefore, he
would be willing to let them help shape any new plan for the
legislature. It was a useful--if not entirely truthful--strategy since
it kept his white colleagues believing that they would not be betrayed
and told the black legislators that they might be able to get what
they really wanted from him. In truth, Manley had statisticians and
computers devising several options in Birmingham, the Black Belt, and
Mobile, where he thought the major problems lay. When the special
session was convened on Monday, May 24th, Manley had worked out his
plan.
          In the new plan, the percentage of blacks in the majority of black
senate districts in Mobile was increased, as were the numbers of
voting-age blacks in the Black Belt house districts. Further, the
Manley plan created one additional majority-black house district in
Birmingham and pitted two white incumbents in the same house
district. Although white legislators in Birmingham grumbled and blacks
realized that the proposals failed to meet all their concerns, the
plan actually jeopardized the political future of no more than five
white incumbents and did increase the number of majority-black
districts.
          Manley was taking no chances in permitting opposition to build too
quickly. Claiming computer problems, Manley's reapportionment
committee withheld the details of the plan from most legislators until
the session was already underway. These convenient "technical"
problems kept the endangered legislators from rallying support around
specific changes and added pressure on the other legislators to adopt
the plan and go home. The alternative, Manley kept reminding them in
public and in private, was to fail to pass a plan and turn the job
over to Justice and the federal courts.
          While not visible in the map-drawing, speaker of the house Joe
McCorquodale also wanted a quick, tidy session. A declared candidate
for governor, McCorquodale didn't want to open himself up to charges
of wasting taxpayers' money on long, expensive special sessions that
didn't accomplish anything. Also, while not wanting to offend black
legislators whom he was still courting, he certainly did not want any
hand in twisting the arms of white legislators from the Black Belt
where he resides and whom he'll depend on in the November election.
          In the first day of the session Manley and his cochairman Lister
Hill Proctor claimed that no amendment could be made to their plan if
it was to be approved by Justice. Black legislators countered that the
plan had to be amended to do more in protecting the voting strength of
blacks if it was to pass muster at Justice. Supporting their view,
black state Sen. Michael Figures presented an alternative plan that
would create additional black majority senate districts in Montgomery
and the Black Belt while increasing the black population in five house
districts in the Black Belt--including Manley's own district. Other
black leaders also voiced disappointment with Manley's plan at a
public hearing on Tuesday, May 25th. Wendell Paris of Sumter County
said that the Black Belt house districts were "gerrymandered to make
it so black people can't be elected."
          Leaving nothing to chance, Manley quickly had the Figures plan
analyzed and circulated a list to his colleagues showing that a rather
large number of incumbents would be pitted against one
another. Manley's analysis created a stir even in the Legislative
Black Caucus since it showed that the Figures plan, due to a mistake
in the computer tabulation, placed two incumbent black legislators
from Mobile in the same district.
          Despite the attraction of the Manley-Proctor plan to most
legislators, who would after all remain unharmed by the proposal,
Manley was unable to hold all of his white colleagues in line. Black
Belt state representative Leigh Peg ~es, who had defeated his black
opponent by less than 250 votes in the last election, successfully
convinced the house to reduce the black percentage in his district in
the Manley plan from 65.9 percent black to 60.4 percent. In debate,
Manley warned his colleagues once more that the change would
jeopardize the whole plan and let the federal courts determine what
everyone's district lines would be. But, whites in the House were
moved by Pegues' emotional reminder: "I can't win with 65.9 percent
blacks in my district." After his plea, they approved Pegues'
amendments and the Manley plan over the objection of blacks.
          That Wednesday night, Manley apparently decided that he should
begin to court the black legislators' support for a plan that gave
them something in return for accepting Pegues' needs somehow. If the
House kept Pegues' changes, the plan might get through Justice if it
had the support of all black legislators. Since the senate had
followed Proctor's instructions and passed the exact Manley plan,
Manley circulated a proposal to black legislators that gave them
something in the senate. First he assured some of the members of the
Black Caucus that Pegues' amendments would not stand precisely as they
were. But, if the Caucus could live with a little less in the Black
Belt, he would be willing to place into his own plan a majority-black
senate district in Montgomery. The offer was tempting and caused
spirited debate. Some Caucus members thought that Justice disapproval
of a plan without a substantial black majority district in Montgomery
was a sure thing. So there was nothing to negotiate over. Others had
doubts.
          As the Caucus considered its political and legal strategies, Manley
and Proctor were busy polling senators on their reaction to possible
changes in the senate districts which an agreement with the Caucus
might cause. They were also conferring with state's attorneys about
the Justice Department lawyers' inclinations on the different
options. Apparently, news from both lines of inquiry indicated that
the Pegues' amendments would kill the pla[unclear] Justice and that most white senators
weren't willing to add another black majority district to make up for
short-

comings in the Black Belt.
          According to one lobbyist in Montgomery, McCorquodale was in fact
responsible for the initial success of the Pegues' amendments. He
refused to persuade Pegues to l accede to the Manley plan in fear that
Pegues would desert his gubernatorial campaign. In absence of Speaker
McCorquodale's strong arm, Pegues could not be brought in line.
          Unable to pressure Pegues or to get agreements, Manley called the
Caucus late Wednesday night and withdrew his proposal. "It won't fly,"
Manley said. No longer considering a compromise, the Caucus
unanimously decided to oppose any plan that didn't remove the Pegues'
amendments and did not create a substantial majority-black senate
district in Montgomery and the Black Belt.
          Manley's impasse was broken when Pegues agreed in a Wednesday
twilight conversation, that if given an opportunity to present his
case for a sixty percent majority-black district directly to the
Justice Department, he would not jeopardize the whole legislative plan
for the sake of "fairness to me" if Justice rejected his
proposal. With that promise, a complicated arrangement was then
designed with the cooperation of McCorquodale and Governor Fob
James.
          The plan called for the house judiciary committee--which Manley
chairs--to take up the senate-approved, original Manley plan on
Thursday, May 27. It would be reported to the house floor on
Friday. This procedural move was necessary since Manley didn't want to
ask house members to override directly their own vote to approve
Pegues' amendments. After all, legislators have their pride. The
strategy also allowed Manley to keep the issue clear and simple: the
house should vote only once to approve the full plan and vote against
all amendments including those from disgruntled white and black
legislators. In this way, Manley thought he could cast the actions of
the house before Justice as a good faith effort to meet it's
objections while turning away "excessive" proposals from both white
and black legislators.
          To satisfy Pegues, Manley arranged for the endangered legislator to
go to Washington after the house had approved the Manley plan and to
meet with Justice officials to argue his case for a sixty percent
black district. The legislature would not adjourn until Tuesday so
that if Justice approved Pegues' sixty percent black district, an
executive or legislative amendment could be made to reinstate it. If
Justice failed to approve it, the original Manley plan would be law
and Gov. James would sign it.
          The script for this compromise was followed carefully. The
legislature met and, over the objections of some disgruntled whites
and the Black Legislative Caucus, approved the original Manley
plan. On the weekend, Pegues flew to Washington and returned for the
session on Tuesday, June 1. On the floor the legislator plaintively
admitted, "If my amendment alone went on the bill, it would adversely
affect it." He had failed to convince Justice.
          Both houses quickly confirmed the Manley plan with dissenting votes
coming only from black legislators who didn't think the plan went far
enough in remedying the efforts of the old plan and from a handful of
whites who thought it went too far or who just didn't like the way
Manley or Justice had treated them.
          With final legislative action, activities shifted from Montgomery
to Washington and the Justice Department. Manley, Proctor, and state
lawyers flew to Washington immediately after the legislative
adjournment to put their case before the U.S. Assistant Attorney
General. A delegation of the Legislative Black Caucus followed in the
same week to ask for an objection. On Tuesday, June 8th, Justice
issued a letter approving most of the Manley plan. Full arguments
before the federal court will come late in June or July.
          
            Florida
          
          With most counties in the state not covered by the Voting Rights
Act's preclearance section, Florida has settled the primary issues of
reapportioning its congressional and state legislative districts.
          With the addition of four congressional districts in the state,
blacks had hoped vainly for a majority-black congressional district
and some gains in creating single-member, majority-black districts in
the state senate and house. Putting aside those concerns, the Florida
legislators saw the most bitter fight between the interests of
Republicans and Democrats and among several leading state legislators
who have eyed one of the new congressional seats for their own
political future.
          
            Georgia
          
          After the Justice Department's decision in April to approve
Georgia's state legislative reapportionment plan while rejecting the
congressional one, the state's new attorney general, Michael Bowers,
led the way in appealing the decision of Justice to the federal courts
in Washington. Assuring other state officials and congressmen that the
court appeal would be won in time to hold elections as usual, Bowers
got a vote of confidence from both houses of the Georgia General
Assembly, the Lt. Governor, and the Governor.
          The state argues that Justice's rejection of a fifty-seven percent
black-populated congressional district in the Atlanta area misapplies
the Voting Rights Act. The district is already fifty percent black and
the state's proposal would have increased the number of blacks in the
district by seven percentage points. Bowers says that Justice is
attempting to require Georgia's legislature to make a guaranteed black
seat of the Fifth Congressional District. The Democratic incumbent of
the Fourth District, Elliott Levitas, adds that Justice is attempting
to define him out of office by creating a district with a Republican
majority.
          The Justice Department's decision to disapprove the fifty-seven
percent majority-black district indicated that the state failed to
rebut evidence that "the line between districts number four and five
were drawn to minimize 

the voting strength" of blacks in that
area. U.S. Assistant c Attorney General Bradford Reynolds reminded
Bowers that the state senate had adopted the plan sponsored by black
state Sen. Julian Bond to create a sixty-nine percent majority-black
congressional district. Reynolds also noted that Georgia had failed to
rebut evidence that the Bond plan was rejected (after several days of
negotiations between the two houses of the General Assembly) largely
because of the state House of Representatives' determination not to
permit black voters too much power at the polls in any congressional
district. (See SOUTHERN CHANGES, April, 1982).
          Once Bowers had filed the state's appeal in Washington, several
black state legislators and citizens from Atlanta intervened to
support Justice's objection. Intervenors claimed that the proposed
fifty-seven percent black district not only has a discriminatory
purpose but also a discriminatory effect on black voting strength. The
trial starts June 28 and may last ten or fifteen days. A decision by
the federal court could come as late as the end of July.
          If Justice's actions are upheld, the federal courts will likely
take over the job of drawing an interim congressional plan for the
primary and general elections this year in order to assure that the
elections are held.
          Because time is running out, the state's attorney general attempted
in May to have Georgia's secretary of state receive filing papers from
congressional candidates for the existing districts. The federal
district court in Washington, however, blocked that attempt after the
intervenors' lawyers from the American Civil Liberties Union argued
that the state should not be allowed to proceed under congressional
plans that are unlawful. ACLU lawyer Laughlin McDonald told the court
that the state should not be permitted to use a congressional plan
until it had adopted one that was approved by Justice and the
courts. The court agreed and barred the state from proceeding with the
existing congressional districts.
          Pretrial discovery in the case indicates that key legislative
leaders in the general assembly were in fact working to keep black
voters out of control in any congressional district. Black and white
state legislators have stated in sworn testimony that the primary
discussion in the legislature on congressional redistricting was
whether a "rigger" district would be created. The chairman of the
lower house's reapportionment committee, Joe Mack Wilson, has stated,
"The only thing worse than a 'rigger' district is a Republican
district."
          Such revelations during discovery may have caused the state lawyers
to develop a highly unusual and possibly unethical practice of keeping
clients and the state's witnesses under control during
testimony. Recently it was uncovered that a lawyer in the state
attorney general's office had arranged a system of tapping a state
legislator's foot under the table during depositions whenever the
lawyer believed that the legislator's testimony was "getting out of
control."
          Both Justice and the intervenors have continued to stress that the
proposed district which Justice rejected may have had a majority-black
population but had a "fifty-four percent white voter registration."
Also, lawyers have pointed out that while legislators say they
objected to Bond's proposed district because it unnecessarily crossed
county lines and divided the metropolitan area, the proposed,
unsuccessful congressional district crossed county lines just as
much.
          
            Louisiana
          
          As state officials began leaving their offices in Baton Rouge for
Memorial Day weekend, Justice Department lawyers in Washington
informed the state's attorney general by telephone that the Louisiana
state redistricting plan had been rejected under the Voting Rights
Act.
          Members of the Legislative Black Caucus and civil rights leaders i
n New Orleans had petitioned Justice earlier to turn down the
redistricting passed by the legislature late last year. They contend
that the proposed plan is racially discriminatory, especially in New
Orleans where the number of majority-white districts increased from
seven to eight. This rearrangement was proposed despite an increase in
the percentage of blacks in New Orleans. Black leaders pointed out
that, statewide, the number of black majority districts would have
been decreased from seventeen to fourteen if the legislature's plans
had been approved by Justice.
          One alternative plan which the Black Caucus may present soon to the
legislature when it takes up reapportionment again would provide for
twenty majority-black house districts across the state.
          
            Mississippi
          
          Federal courts in Mississippi and Washington will decide in the
next several weeks if the poorest state in the nation, with almost a
forty percent black population, will have one of five congressional
districts with a majority of black voters.
          The possibility of a black congressional district was rejected by
the Mississippi Legislature late last year when it turned down a plan
by black state Sen. Henry J. Kirksey of Jackson who proposed a
sixty-five percent majority-black congressional district that centered
in the state's Delta region. On March 30 the Justice Department
objected to the legislative plan which created a forty-eight percent
black district that ran across the midsection of Mississippi from the
Delta on the west to the Alabama border on the east and a forty-five
percept black district in the southwestern corner.
          In disapproving the congressional plan, Justice noted that the
heavily black-populated Delta had been split into congressional
districts shortly after the 1965 Voting Rights Act was passed in order
to break up black Mississippians' strongest voting power. Justice
found, that in drafting reapportionment lines in 1981, Mississippi
state officials had failed to show that the rejection of alternative
proposals such as Senator Kirksey's was not racially motivated.
          By the second week of April, Mississippi had filed an 

appeal of
Justice's decision in federal court in Washington and retained Jerris
Leonard, the lawyer also handling North Carolina's redistricting case,
to present their claims that a change from an existing forty-five
percent black district in the Delta to a forty-seven percent black
district was not racially discriminatory. According to local press
reports, Mississippi also set aside a quartet of a million dollars in
order to allow its lawyers to press their case.
          A few days later, twelve blacks filed suit in federal court in
Greenville asking that a three-judge panel prohibit the state from
using the 1981 congressional plan which Justice rejected and implement
instead an interim plan with a sixty-five percent majority black Delta
district for elections this year. State officials apparently had hoped
to win their appeal in Washington or to be permitted to use a version
of their 1981 reapportionment in the June 1 primaries; however, the
court did not permit its use and instead asked for oral arguments and
briefs in order to make a decision on what plan could be used this
year.
          Blacks and some white liberals in Mississippi are also split
politically on the issue of a black Delta district. Whites fear that
the creation of a Delta district will take so many blacks from other
areas that Mississippi would have "one friendly black face and four
hostile Republicans" in its five-member congressional
delegation. Blacks respond wistfully that they must have missed
something in the last thirty years of Mississippi politics since they
have not been able to find all those white responsive, sympathetic
Democrats which such an argument assumes.
          While the Greenville court is expected to rule soon, both sides in
the litigation promise an appeal, and the final shape of the Delta
district for the November elections this year may not be decided until
late July.
          
            North Carolina
          
          Never in its history has the North Carolina legislature faced such
persisting problems in reapportioning its own houses. The general
assembly has already convened four times to draw district lines. While
the dispute has now been settled in Washington and the Justice
Department, a federal court in Raleigh will decide later in the summer
if the state must make a fifth effort.
          The latest special session on reapportionment came in late
April. The legislature convened after Justice objected for the third
time to both the house and senate lines. In its letter of objection,
Justice found that a 51.3 percent majority-black senate district in
the northeastern part of the state continued to dilute black voting
strength in an area where a 61.2 percent black district had been
proposed by the N.C. Association of Black Lawyers. In the house plan,
Justice objected to the continued submerging of black voters in
Fayetteville in a large, multi-member district of white voters. In a
county where five representatives sit in the lower house, the General
Assembly had proposed a district which it claimed contained
"eighty-four percent majority of black registered voters." In fact,
the district of almost fifty thousand people had less than four
thousand registered voters on the books because most of the residents
were military families stationed at nearby Ft. Bragg. Justice accepted
the arguments of the black plaintiffs who had challenged the
reapportionment in federal court that this majority-black district was
an illusion at best.
          Because candidates' filing dates were scheduled to begin in May,
North Carolina state officials moved quickly when Justice's actions
became known. After Jerris Leonard, the state's Washington counsel and
former assistant attorney general under Nixon, advised his clients
that Justice's objections could be met with only minor changes, the
legislature was called into special session. Within-three days the
General Assembly had approved an increase of four percentage points in
the black population of the northeastern senate district; up to 55.1
percent. In Fayetteville, a new single-member district was carved out
of both the Ft. Bragg area and some of the black-populated parts of
the City.
          Before the General Assembly adjourned, rumors spread that
U.S. Assistant Attorney General Bradford Reynolds had approved, by
telephone, the new plan with its two minor changes. The official
approval of the plan on April 30th, less than two days after the
legislature's adjournment, seemed to confirm the scuttlebutt.
          Lawyers for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund (LDF) who represent black
plaintiffs in the Raleigh suit criticize Justice's decision as
providing too little protection for black voters. They point out that
the fifty-five percent black senate district has less than a majority
of blacks of voting-age population and that black registration is
probably closer to forty-three percent. They also argue that while the
Cumberland County house district may have a majority of registered
black voters, it does not have a majority of potential black
voters.
          Despite Justice's approval, the district lines for the legislature
are not yet settled. LDF lawyers contend that the legislature's
failure to create single-member districts in Charlotte, Raleigh, and
Durham, where several majority black districts could be created. will
be declared unconstitutional by the federal court when the issue comes
to trial in the summer or fall. Because North Carolina has only forty
of its one hundred counties covered by the preclearance provisions of
the Voting Rights Act, the legislature's redistricting of the major
urban centers were not reviewed by Justice. Legal. observers believe
that Justice may intervene in the federal suit in Raleigh on the side
of black plaintiffs to help challenge the redistricting of the urban
centers since they could not review it under the preclearance
provisions.
          As in other Southern states, several groups are in court fighting
reapportionment. State Republicans have had their case consolidated
with the Raleigh lawsuit. They are challenging as unlawful all
multi-member districts throughout the state. At the same time, white
citizens in Wake County--near the city of Winston-Salem--are suing the
state because it created a single-member district that split parts of
Wake into different legislative districts.
          With Justice's approval, North Carolina officials have gone forward
with their elections for the fall. Yet, 

depending on the future
evidence presented in the federal court, those plans may be only the
fifth edition in the long run of redistricting in the state.
          
            SOUTH CAROLINA
          
          After extensive negotiations between the Justice Department lawyers
and State Representative Robert Shebeen, the redistricting of the
South Carolina house came to an end in April although the state senate
has yet to take up its own reapportionment.
          Shebeen, the chairman of the state house judiciary committee, came
up with a revised plan after Justice objected to an earlier
redistricting. Shuttling back and forth from Washington for almost
four weeks, the South Carolina lawmaker came up with an acceptable
plan that created twenty-six majority-black house districts, two more
than presently exist. The gains are in majority-black districts in
Richmond County surrounding Columbia and in Florence.
          While primary elections proceeded on schedule, the biggest battle
in line-drawing may lie ahead. The state senate has sixteen
multi-member districts which elect up to five members each. The
Legislative Black Caucus, none of whose members sit in the all-white
state senate, are urging a single-member district plan that would give
black voters a better opportunity to have their vote count.
          
            TEXAS
          
          Primary elections were held in Texas in early May and June under
redistricting plans which federal courts had ordered for 1982. Before
the next congressional elections, however, the legislature must return
to Austin to draw up at least four new congressional districts around
Dallas and may choose to remap the entire state.
          Appeals to the U.S. Supreme Court went to the wire as the primary
election of May 1 approached. The decision of a three-judge federal
court panel in Texas was overturned once by the Supreme Court in early
April because the lower court had gone too far in redrawing too many
congressional districts. In April the lower court acted quickly and
revised its plan which the Supreme Court refused to overturn.
          Hispanic groups in Texas were especially disappointed in the
redistricting since they had expected a majority district in Congress
and substantial additions in both the state senate and house in
southwest Texas.
          
            VIRGINIA
          
          On April Fool's Day, the Virginia General Assembly reluctantly met
in special session and ended more than a year of entanglements over
redistricting by creating three additional majority-black districts in
the lower house.
          Civil rights and civil liberties groups who had fought the state
plan before the Justice Department and the courts expressed almost
complete satisfaction of the new plan. "We've achieved what we set out
to do," said Henry Marsh, black mayor of Richmond and lawyer for the
state NAACP. Judy Goldberg of the Virginia ACLU echoed the sentiment
by calling the plan a "99.5 percent victory." After a federal court
and Justice had given the state delegates three opportunities to draw
lawful lines, the General Assembly acknowledged that its April session
was its last chance to keep the courts out of redistricting.
          While the new reapportionment adds probably three districts where
blacks may be able to elect candidates Virginia presently has only
four blacks among the 140 members of the House and Senate. One in five
of the state's population is black.
          While black leaders and civil rights groups are pleased, white
Democrats claim that the reapportionment does more for Republicans
than for blacks. Calling reapportionment a "ghettoizing" of blacks and
a promotion of Republican districts, these Democrats argue that the
next General Assembly will be more hostile to black interests. Most
black leaders find the claims unpersuasive.
          
            This report was prepared by the staff of the Southern
Regional Council
          
        
        
          Ending the Short Stick In Mississippi's Woods
          By 
            Israel, TomTom
	       Israel and Williams, RandallRandall Williams
          Vol. 4, No. 3, 1982, pp. 16-18
          
          Pine trees are commonplace, but timber is an industry, especially
in the South where forests stretch from Houston to the Carolinas. In
Mississippi today, timber is the largest provider of manufacturing
jobs and the state's largest crop.
          The timber industry will play a key role in the next several
decades in the South. The trees are here, the giant wood products
companies are here, and a paper shortage is projected for the next
twenty-five or thirty years. The crop is constantly expanding, as
witnessed by oldtimers who drive through rural areas and point out the
cotton fields of their youth, now grown into the piney woods.
          For the harvesters of the crop, however, even those who enjoy the
work, woodcutting is one of the dirtiest, most dangerous and poorest
paying of occupations.
          There are two types of wood harvesters--pulpwooders, who cut and
haul wood to be made primarily into paper products, and loggers, whose
labor ultimately leads to the making of lumber. They can be
distinguished on the road by the way the wood is stacked on their
trucks: pulpwood is short and stacked across the truck, while logs are
long and stacked lengthwise. In Mississippi, an estimated ten thousand
people work in the woods, and about eighty percent of them are
black. However, log haulers are more likely to be white than black,
largely because cutting logs is more profitable than cutting pulpwood
and because the timber companies have allowed whites to take that
economic step up.
          About four-fifths of the wood harvesters are pulpwooders, and they
are the chief beneficiaries of the Mississippi Fair Pulpwood Scaling
and Practices Act, which was to go into effect July 1. The story of
the passage of that act and the reasons why it was necessary is worth
hearing.
          Woodcutters are paid a piece rate for each cord of wood they
sell. A cord is a volume measure of four feet by four feet by eight
feet. The pulpwooder and his crew cut the trees down, saw off the
limbs, cut them into five-foot 

lengths, load them on the truck and
haul them to a wood yard. The work is hard and dangerous: a
get-together of woodcutters where everyone has all his fingers or toes
is rare.
          An average truck load has three or four cords with a gross value to
the woodcutter of about $120. When the hauler brings the wood to the
yard, it's measured with a long yardstick. The common practice is for
the wood hauler to hold the stick against the stack of wood on his
truck, and the dealer stands back and reads the scale off the top of
the stick.
          The woodcutter can't see the scale and he isn't even told how much
wood was on his truck until it has already been unloaded, by which
time it's too late to argue. The United Woodcutters Association
estimates that woodhaulers earn about six to seven thousand dollars a
year if they work full-time, and that an average cutter loses about
fifteen hundred dollars per year to the short stick. So it has been a
real problem.
          The Woodcutters Association decided to organize a campaign around
this issue and tried for three years to get a bill passed that would
set standards for measuring-scaling--the wood at the yard. But
woodcutters are very isolated from one another. They work in remote
locations and they usually know only the other woodcutters who may be
in their family or in their church.
          They may recognize some other woodcutters by sight or may recognize
their trucks which they've seen on the road or at the woodyard, but
they don't know them. They also haul their wood to about 250 scattered
woodyards throughout the hills of Mississippi (The United Woodcutters
Association is organized in forty-two counties in Mississippi.)
          A second barrier to effective organizing is fear on the part of the
workers. The Association is not, like most unions, an organized
shop. The people who join and who speak out in favor of such things as
the fair scaling act are completely unprotected at the woodyard
against firing and harassment. Even woodcutters who simply attend
Association meetings are subject to intimidation from dealers.
          To overcome some of these barriers to organizing, the Association
started a cooperative. The woodcutters have to own and operate
chainsaws and trucks and they burn up large amounts of supplies, which
they usually get from the wood dealers for whom they work, often at
exorbitant prices.
          The system is very similar to sharecropping. The woodcutters are
considered independent contractors and are thus not usually covered by
insurance or other benefits from either the wood dealer or the big
paper companies, yet they end up in economic dependence to the wood
dealers, who function much like labor contractors.
          When a woodcutter needs a tire for his truck or a chain for his saw
or even a loan for a piece of equipment, he will go to the wood dealer
who will advance him the money and then deduct it a little at the time
from the woodcutter's pay for each cord of wood. The net effect is
that the woodcutter never gets out of debt and his already meager
take-home pay is whittled away even more. From the payment he receives
from the wood dealer, of course, the woodcutter also has to pay his
helpers, own and operate his truck and saws, pay social security and
buy insurance, if he has it.
          The cooperative was thus a very effective organizing tool. The
Association now has co-ops at forty-three different locations around
the state where the woodcutters can get their saw files and their
chain oil and a dozen other products they need to stay in
business. The woodcutters not only get lower prices but they get to
meet and get to know each other, which helps break down the problem of
isolation. And because the members of the Association are the
administrators of the co-ops, they gain confidence in working together
as a unit.
          All of this work helped in the three-year campaign to get the fair
scaling practices act, but it wasn't enough. The campaign succeeded
when the word finally got out to the landowners that they were losing
as much as the woodcutters due to the short stick, or inaccurate
measuring of the loads on the pulpwood trucks. The landowners off
whose land the wood is cut are also paid on the basis of the
measurement taken by the wood dealer at the yard. By doing a lot of
organizing among small farmers, the Association eventually got an
endorsement from the Farm Bureau, and on March 8 the Mississippi Fair
Pulpwood Scaling and Practices Act passed.
          The act requires licensing of wood dealers and establishes uniform
measurement procedures, procedures where the woodcutter can file
complaints, and third-party arbitration to settle disputes. These
procedures are important to give protection to the woodcutter who
actually files a complaint, so he won't be told the next day not 

to come back to that woodyard again.
          The next step for the Association is to organize strikes at some
wood yards. The fundamental poverty of the woodcutters is not going to
change until they are paid more. Getting an accurate measure will mean
a lot more money but the woodcutters are still paid very little for
their labor. By the time he pays all the costs of production, the
woodcutter who clears eight or nine dollars on a cord of wood is doing
very well.
          The Association put together its first strike last summer in
Fayette, Miss., where three yards were shut down for about one
month. One yard settled with a two dollars per cord raise and an
agreement to post standards on how the loads would be measured. The
second yard came through with just a raise. The third yard, which was
run by International Paper Co., shut down and moved out of town.
          In addition to more strikes and other job actions, the Association
is now campaigning for workers' compensation coverage for woodcutters;
as independent workers with the middlemen wood dealers between them
and the paper companies, they have been denied this protection for
on-the-job injuries or deaths.
          Finally, there are thousands of woodcutters in other Southern
states whose working conditions are equally as dangerous, whose pay is
equally as low, and whose isolation is equally as limiting.
          For these woodcutters, it seems, imitation of the Mississippi
example may be the first step on the road out of poverty.
          
            Tom Israel is the lead organizer for the United Wood
cutters Association. This article is adapted from his remarks at a
recent conference hosted in Montgomery by the Southern Poverty Law
Center, where Randall Williams is employed.
          
        
        
          Ensley, Alabama: 1932
          By Beecher, JohnJohn Beecher
          Vol. 4, No. 3, 1982, p. 17
          
          
            The mills are down.
            The hundred stacks
            are shorn of their drifting fume. 
            The idle tracks
            rust . . . 
            Smeared red with the dust 
            of millions of
tons of smelted ore
            the furnaces loom--
            towering,
desolate tubes--
            smokeless and stark in the sun . . . 
            Powerhouse cubes 
            turbines hummed in, 
            platesteel
mains the airblast thrummed in 
            are quiet, and the sudden roar
            of blown-off steam . . . 
            At night 
            the needle
gleam 
            where the ladle poured at the pig machine, 
            the
deep smoulder of an iron run 
            and the spreading light 
            of molten slag over the sleeping town 
            are seen 
            no
more 
            now mills and men are down. 
          
          
             From Collected Poems, 1924-1974 by John
Beecher, New York: MacMillan, 1974.
          
        
        
          The Lost Colony of North Carolina
          By 
            Dyer, DonnaDonna
	       Dyer and Adams, FrankFrank Adams
          Vol. 4, No. 3, 1982, pp. 3-11
          
          
            "We don't have poverty in Hertford County. People live
like that because they want to. They don't want it any other
way"--L.M. "Mutt" Brinkley, Hertford County
Commissioner.
          
          In speaking of the rural poor of Northeastern North Carolina,
Sister Mary Genino, a Catholic nun who has worked in the region for
three years, acknowledges a bewildering configuration of
powerlessness: "They are bound," she says, "by a social structure that
has not changed for hundreds of years. It has affected their economic
freedom, their political freedom and their social freedom. They don't
vote--though no one comes around with a gun or turns them away from
the voting polls. They drop out of school--because education doesn't
get them anywhere. And although there are no written laws that say
'blacks and 'while,' the mores of past generations are still rigidly
adhered to."
          Seldom since William Byrd staked the Virginia--North Carolina
boundary in 1728 has there been so much discussion within and without
the region about conditions of life in the "Northeast." Some have
begun to call the area east and north of Interstate 95 the state's
"lost colony." Colonies exist when a region's people or natural
resources are under the sway of outside individuals and
institutions. A colony is subordinate to and dependent upon outside
sources of accumulated capital, upon the "superior training" of
outsiders or their agents, upon the outsiders' control and
manipulation of privileged information, or some combination of these
factors.
          Advantage over the colonized or peripheral region is preserved
through manipulation of wages and labor markets, through continued or
increased levels of outside ownership over resources, and through the
thousand and one ways in which wealth and concentrated power make
themselves felt. There are also the advantages which are played
through in discriminations of sex, race, religion or culture. And when
necessary, there can be a show of force. Poor people are usually
numerous in dependent regions (witness Sister Genino's comments), and
passions over racial attitudes, sexual traditions or religious beliefs
often divide them, further preventing effective challenges to the
causers and causes of poverty and quiescence. Appalachia is one such
colony in the United States.  

Is Northeastern North Carolina another one?
          In August 1981, Governor James B. Hunt, Jr., spoke at an "economic
summit" arranged by the Department of Commerce in Edenton, once the
state's capital. The Norfolk Virginian-Pilot announced
the event saying the Northeast's governmental and commercial leaders
were being invited "to continue a process of focusing bureaucratic,
political, and economic attention on the region."
          Later that month, either spurred by the governor's zeal or
unimpressed by what they heard, sixteen counties formed a coalition
calling itself Northeastern North Carolina Tomorrow to promote a
regional agenda for economic growth. In October, they met with a
delegation of Virginians to plea for help in pushing tourism,
industrialization, links with the thriving Tidewater, and markets for
new products. The area's feelings of being a stepchild were
underscored by talk of secession. State senator Melvin R. Daniels,
Jr., a Democratic Party stalwart and influential banker, told the
Virginians, "If things don't go right with redistricting in Raleigh,
we might petition Virginia to take us back in--everything from the
Roanoke River through the Chowan River Basin." Whether ploy or
facetious warning, Daniel's remarks drew swift rebuttal from equally
powerful state senator J.J. "Monk" Harrington, a Lewiston
manufacturer, who bluntly defended the state's efforts to spur
development. He said, "I think Northeastern North Carolina has been
looked out for quite well by North Carolina officials. I have never
known them-Virginians--to give us anything. We give and they take."
          Governor Hunt's Balanced Growth Policy stirred some faint hopes for
economic growth in the Northeast, a land of productive farms, endless
timber tracts, pocosins, slow moving rivers and small towns. But the
highly visible policy debate during the governor's first
administration spawned more rhetoric than results. The coalition's
leaders, pushed by Ahoskie newspaper publisher, Joe Parker, were
agreed in their determination to see some change in the region's bleak
economic status. They arranged public meetings and held symposia at
community colleges and offices of Chambers of Commerce. However,
despite the region-wide, public nature of all the talk, very few of
the debate's participants offered more than a glimpse into the
Northeast's economy, or provided an analytical framework for
discussing the region's severe economic ills.
          For instance, there are shifting definitions of which counties are
to be included, or more accurately, are willing to be tarred as
"underdeveloped." The Governor's Task Force on Northeastern North
Carolina, the group responsible for the Edenton Summit, included
Beaufort, Bertie, Camden, Chowan, Currituck, Dare, Gates, Halifax,
Hertford, Hyde, Martin, Northampton, Pasquotank, Perquimans, Tyrrell
and Washington. Their list coincided with the sixteen-county
coalition. Other observers, particularly a few municipal, regional
planners, and University of North Carolina professor of planning Ed
Bergman, argue the entire First Congressional District shares the
common demoninator of an agrarian-based economy with the lowest per
capita income in the state. In accepting Bergman's position, we
include Carteret, Craven, Greene, Lenoir, Pamlico and Pitt counties in
our analysis.
          Too, the debate has been blurred by a division as to the reasons
for persistent underdevelopment. Some point to myriad human
deficiencies; others blame the lack of roads, schools or bridges. The
first camp attributes the region's plight to ills they say are
inherently a part of the Northeast's people and their culture. In
circular fashion, they claim that the often shocking statistics of
poverty, poor health, inadequate diet, ignorance, rotting housing, or
lack of participation in the electoral process characteristic of the
First Congressional District, explains the origins and causes of
underdevelopment. Another camp, perhaps the majority, holds that the
lack of adequate roads, incentives for investors, shortages of skilled
labor, and inadequate tools for capital formation prevent regional
modernization.
          Both camps ignore several essential questions: Who owns or controls
the land in this sprawling region? Who owns the region's jobs? Where
do profits go? How are governmental services distributed, or taxes
levied? These key questions are at the base of any regional
analysis. And while the Governor and the coalition have let them go
begging, some of the citizenry has not.
          Dr. Eugene G. Purcell, a minister and professor of philosophy at
Atlantic Christian College, spoke at a regional development seminar
organized by Elizabeth City's College of the Albemarle on November 17,
1981. He drew knowing, approving nods from listeners when he declared
that growth is difficult because people "realize the critical
decisions that affect them most are made by people they cannot see and
do not know." Purcell continued: "The economic future of small towns
is determined in a corporate boardroom in a distant city. 

Impersonal
bureaucrats make decisions about state or federal funding and control
of the schools, the quality and availability of medical care, who gets
a slice of the welfare pie, what interest rates you pay for borrowed
money, and even the quality of the air you breathe or the water you
drink."
          Intellectuals are certainly not the only persons asking who
prospers from the region's people and resources. In 1979, before the
present debate became public, a popular bumpersticker was sold at many
Northeast restaurants, grocery and hardware stores. The message?
"Welcome to North Eastern North Carolina: Owned and Operated by
VEPCO." The bumpersticker reflected the successful drive by twenty-one
Northeast municipalities to terminate contracts with Virginia Electric
and Power Company (VEPCO), headquartered in Richmond, and then buy
power from Carolina Power and Light Company, based in Raleigh, saving,
they predicted, $1.1 billion over a twenty-one year period.
          
            Who Owns the Land?
          
          According to the Sixth Edition of the Profile of North
Carolina Counties, published in 1981,thereare5,783,500 arable
acres in the District. Farmers till 24.9 percent of the land, or
1,400,700 acres. Timber is grown on 61.8 percent, or 3,572,200
acres. The federal government owns 233,909 acres, or 2.5 percent,
using that land principally for military bases or parks. The remainder
is taken up by roads, towns, trailer parks, shopping centers,
junkyards, schools or prison camps.
          All told, according to the 1978 U.S. Census of Agriculture, there
are 10,658 farms in the District. They produced twenty percent of the
state's agriculture receipts, or $657,204,000, averaging about $62,000
per farm. The majority are small, inherited, family-held operations
whose number is declining.
          North Carolina State University's Dr. Leon E. Danielson found in a
1981 study that about a third of all the state's farmland was owned by
retired persons, or by white- and blue-collar workers who farmed
part-time and worked other jobs. The average size of a North Carolina
farm was forty-two acres. The patterns he found hold in the Northeast,
especially because tobacco is grown in abundance, and is labor
intensive, and can be done part-time. But changes in farming
practices, operating costs, interest rates and labor costs are wiping
out the small family farm. Black farmers in the District have been
particularly hard hit. Their number declined from 2,570 full-time
farmers tilling 111,888 acres in 1954 to 529 full-time farmers working
26,876 acres in 1979, a drop of seventy-nine percent, causing the
N.C. Division of Policy Development in June 1981 to predict that by
the end of the century "there will be no black-owned farms," in the
state.
          As small farms vanish, larger farms and "superfarms"--requiring
huge capital resources and extensive management skills, have taken
their place, adapting new technologies and taking in previously unused
or marginally productive land. This trend started in 1973 when Malcolm
P. McLean, the one-time Winston-Salem trucking magnate, paid $60
million for 581 square miles c land or about one third of the entire
Albemarle-Pamlico peninsula, and appropriately called what he'd bought
(the state's largest farm), First Colony Farms. Since then, dozens of
other investors, all but two from outside the region, have bought and
developed land, cleared and drained the property, then leased or
resold the farms to absentee owners or corporations. Mostly corn,
soybeans and hogs are raised on these farms. A partial list of the
Northeast's superfarms includes the 44,000acre Open Grounds farm in
Carteret County, owned by an Italian grain merchant; the 35,000acre
Mattamuskeet Farms in Hyde County, owned by John Hancock Mutual
Insurance Co. of Boston, which has another $70 million in invested
farm mortages elsewhere in North Carolina; a 7,500-acre farm along the
Roanoke River in Halifax County, owned by ten New York City investors;
and two Washington County farms--one totalling 9,400 acres and the
other 4,700 acres--owned by foreign investors hidden so completely by
corporate veils that even the resident managers don't know for whom
they till. Only two of these megafarms are held by North Carolinians:
Rich Farms, a 13,000-acre operation east of Belhaven, and the
15,000acre farm operated by the relatives of A.D. Swindell around
Pantego.
          Decisions about the daily operations on these are made locally, but
management policies are set elsewhere. Profits and tax advantages
accumulate elsewhere, too. Further, local control over land use policy
is eroded, if not lost, as a result of absentee farm operations. Even
the state's Environmental Management Commission found their reins a
bit short. They voted to assess the impact of the superfarms on the
ecology because "no one knows now what effect the 'gigantic
denudations' of large farms . . . will have in the long run on
weather, water, and wildlife . . ." First Colony managers pooh-poohed
the study as having little value other than "keeping a few state
bureaucrats off the street."
          
            Who Controls the Water?
          
          Water, so vital to farming and seemingly so abundant in the
Northeast, is also becoming scarce as a result of industrial activity
controlled by absentee owners, or interests outside North
Carolina. The superfarms profoundly alter water distribution
patterns. Thousands of pounds of farm chemicals run off into swamps
and rivers, and have had a devasting impact on fish and shrimp in the

sounds. Meanwhile, underground cones of depression traced to huge
industrial withdrawals daily in Virginia have begun to diminish the
underground water supply in Hertford, Northampton and Gates
counties. Union Camp Corporation, operating in Franklin but
headquartered in New York City, pumps about forty million gallons out
of the ground daily, dropping the ground water level at least eighteen
feet annually. To the south near Aurora, Texasgulf, Inc.,
headquartered in Stamford, Connecticut, but owned by the Government of
France, pumps over nine million gallons of water daily to keep its
subsurface phosphate mines dry. These withdrawals, combined with the
ground water pumped by municipalities or by other industries, has
caused the Northeast's ground water level to drop nearly forty feet in
ten years, according to Robert Cheek of the N.C. Department of Natural
Resources. Private wells from Wanchese to Rich Square have dried up as
a result of the depleted artesian aquifier. Already, fishermen net
crabs in the Chowan River as far upstream as Winton.
          
            Who Controls the Forests?
          
          The region's timberlands are held primarily by hundreds of private
landholders in small tracts. This is the pattern across the
state. There are some 245,000 non-industrial forest landowners in
North Carolina, more than in any other state in America. They control
about eighty percent of the commercial forest production--which yields
over three billion dollars annually, if the furniture industry is
included. In North Carolina, only twelve percent of the forests are
held by all corporations, but in the First Congressional District,
five giant forest product firms own twenty-one percent of the forests,
or 746,322 acres. None of them are headquartered in the Northeast
although each has a regional office there, and one, Weyerhaeuser,
operates a mill in Plymouth employing nearly 2,300 persons to replant
trees, run its nursery, haul logs, and run the complex, sprawling mill
itself.
          Weyerhaeuser illustrates how firms outside the region directly
influence the life inside. The Tacoma, Washington, corporation owns or
manages 660,000 North Carolina acres, mostly in the First
Congressional District. Even with all these holdings,
Weyerhaeuser-owned timber accounts for only twenty-five percent of its
production needs. Nearly three-fourths of the timber it processes must
come from smaller landholders, many of whom are unable to afford
investing an average of $120 per acre to replant and then wait twenty
to forty years for a return on their investment. To insure that its
needs are met, Weyerhaeuser constantly buys up more timberland. Also,
the company sponsors reforestation programs which enable the family
timberowner to hold onto land, but puts hundreds of Northeast acres
under its indirect control, or under the indirect control of the
handful of other companies. For they are the only buyers available.
          The giant firm influences the region's social economy even more
directly. At the end of October 1981, Weyerhaeuser settled a
four-year-old suit brought by black employees at its Plymouth
mill. They had alleged that the company assigned blacks in
disproportionate numbers to its wood products division rather than the
higher paying 

fiber division. No blacks worked in the nursery, they
said, and only a handful in salaried positions. Some seventy-eight
percent of the work force in Plymouth (1,800 persons) was black, and
the counties from which the firm drew the majority of its workers have
large black population. Weyerhaeuser agreed to divide $700,000 in back
pay among approximately 725 workers and pledged no further
discrimination in job transfers, hiring, or promotions. Discriminatory
wage patterns--to say nothing of hiring policies--provide a major
reason why the region's poverty is widespread and enduring and why the
term "colony" is accurate.
          Race has not been openly a part of the current debate about the
region's economic future. Black participation has been marked by its
absence. Only after the sixteen-county coalition's preliminary plans
were well laid were any blacks invited to join what had been an all
white, mostly male group.
          An ad hoc committee of the N.C. Department of Commerce reported on
March 19, 1979, on "the minority concentration issue." Its authors,
many of whom lived in the Northeast, sought to "dispel the myth that
areas populated by high concentrations of minority individuals are to
be avoided as possible locations in industrial facilities." Some
potential industrial clients, they noted, spurned the region because
of its lack of water, sewer services, poor roads, or their low regard
for its schools, shopping centers, cultural activities and
recreation. Others frankly balked at the Northeast because of
race. "Some . . . cite higher minority concentrations in the
population and labor force as an additional factor adding to the lack
of client interest . . . Some have stated a firm will not look at an
area which has over thirty or forty percent minority
concentration. The explanation is given that, in general, due to the
lack of economic and educational opportunity, the Southern rural Black
worker is perceived as having a poorer work ethic and is more easily
organized by union efforts." According to the 1980 Census, blacks are
the majority of the population in four of the Northeast's twenty-two
counties and a third or more in eleven others.
          
            Who Controls the Jobs?
          
          Long periods of unemployment or long daily commutes for workers are
another regional characteristic. Sixteen Northeast counties reported
unemployment rates above the state's average in 1980. Tyrrell County
had the highest unemployment rate in the state--11.5
percent. Aggregate figures do not account for seasonal employment in
the tourist industry (a major factor in Dare, Pamlico and Carteret
counties) nor farming, making it likely that real unemployment during
some months may be much higher than official averages reveal. For
hundreds of persons, the option is commuting. Between 2,200 and three
thousand North Carolinians drive daily into Virginia to work at
Tidewater shipyards, or the meat packing and food processing plants in
Suffolk and Smithfield. As the prices of fuel, autos and vans increase
more rapidly than general inflation and the real incomes earned at
these distant jobs, the region's economy is further weakened by
reducing the actual amount of money available to be spent or saved in
Northeast.
          The work which is available in the Northeast is characteristic of
jobs to be found in other colonies--apparel sewing and manufacturing,
timbering, mining, or food processing--which pay the lowest wages and
characterize first-stage, primitive industrialization.
          Even a casual look at available employment in the Northeast
explains why workers choose to commute such long distances. Jobs are
scarce. In twelve of the twenty-two counties, less than thirty percent
of the nonagricultural workforce is employed in manufacturing. The
state's average is 34.6 percent. In the nine counties where more than
thirty percent of the work force is employed in manufacturing, jobs in
food, apparel and lumber dominate. By considering Beaufort, Craven,
Lenoir and Pitt as "metropolitan centers" among the other
overwhelmingly rural counties, work in those three categories accounts
for fifty-six percent of the District's jobs. Across the state, the
average is twenty percent. These low-paying, low skill industrial
sector job categories quickly feel the nation's cyclical economic
lurches. When building permits drop nationally, the Northeast's trees
do not. When clothing sales decline, sewing machine operators are laid
off.
          In only two of the Northeast's twenty-two counties do average
weekly wages exceed or approach the statewide average of
$222.56. Seven counties reported weekly wages of less than two-thirds
the state's 1979 average. During that year, North Carolina, which
became the nation's eighth most industrialized state, ranked fiftieth
in average weekly industrial wages. Hyde County workers labored for
the lowest wage in the state, if not the U.S.,--$85.66 a week.
          There is a parallel scarcity of unions. In nine Northeast counties
there isn't a union local at all; in the others only three locals are
listed in telephone directories. Recent efforts by the United Food and
Commercial Workers, a progressive union with an emphasis on organizing
among the poorest paid sectors of the labor market, failed to overcome
widespread fear among poultry processors in two huge, profitable
factories. Even those unpleasant jobs were precious to people who know
other work isn't available. One veteran UFCW organizer, a native of
Williamston who is based in Asheville, says, "Organizing back home is
as tough as any place in the South I know of."
          Low wages, the large number of unemployed, plus the lack of unions
dull any prospect for immediate change in 

wage patterns. When new
firms do locate in the Northeast, pay levels remain low despite
increased competition for labor. For example, a British-owned elastic
manufacturing firm in 1981 took over a Jamesville building which had
housed a zipper factory also owned by absentee investors. As an
official from the elastic firm cut a ribbon to reopen the
once-abandonded plant, he told Martin County boosters, "Pay scales at
the company will be commensurate at least with those of the region of
the state."
          By subtracting the public sector portion of the non-agricultural
jobs, an even gloomier picture of the region's real wage level
emerges. Persons in government employ tend to be paid at higher hourly
wage rates than persons in the private sector. Government employees
comprise about twenty-five percent of all jobs in the Northeast and
thirty-five percent of the non-manufacturing jobs in the
region. Across North Carolina, the public sector averages only sixteen
percent of the total work force, and twenty-five percent in
non-manufacturing. In some Northeastern counties, Gates, for instance,
public schools are the largest single employer. And while county
government exercises control over a few jobs, most government workers
are managed, hired, and fired by policies or regulations set in
Raleigh, Atlanta, or Washington.
          In December 1981, Governor Hunt told a Military Appreciation Day
ceremony that the armed forces were more important to the state's
economy than tobacco. "The military pays out about $1.7 billion
dollars annually in North Carolina," he said, "while tobacco generated
about $1.3 billion dollars in wages and salaries in 1981--one of the
best yet for our number one crop." In 1980, the military pumped $230
million into the Northeast, primarily to run the Cherry Point Marine
Air Station, the New River Marine Air Corps Station, Camp LeJeune,
Johnson Air Force Base, the Fifth District Coast Guard Station in
Elizabeth City, and the demolition training center operated by the
Central Intelligence Agency outside tiny Hertford. Over 41,000 persons
are employed at those installations. Higher than average levels of
government employment, plus the large concentration of military bases,
further characterize a colony.
          
            Who Controls the Capital?
          
          Determining the final resting place for profits gained from the
region's workers and resources helps to explain why the Northeast has
a severely limited capacity to form a local capital base. According to
the 1981-1982 N.C. Directory of Manufacturing Firms, there are 103
manufacturers employing one hundred or more persons in the First
Congressional District; only thirty-four of these are headquartered
within the region. The rest make their decisions and count their
profits elsewhere, usually far from North Carolina. Of these absentee
firms, thirty-five, or one-half, are either textile, apparel, or
lumber producers. And while the 103 firms employ nearly 23,000
persons, sixty-nine of them, or the majority, control the jobs of
18,000 persons, according to N.C. Department of Commerce figures. Every one of those sixty-nine firms is headquartered
outside the Northeast. One is a foreign government.
          Still another measure of how the region's resources are drained
away by absentee capitalists is seen in expenditures for new plants or
machinery. These capital investments translate into tax revenue for
local government, indicate a firm's solvency, stability, and,
importantly, potential for additional jobs. They hint of continued
plans for operation. Only four of the twenty-two counties are within
ten percent of the state's average per establishment capital
investment levels. They are the most urban counties--Beaufort, Craven,
Lenoir and Pitt. In the rest of the Northeast, capital investments
ranged from seventy-five to five percent below North Carolina's
average. Industrial development has paid off less than handsomely for
local tax coffers. When Peat Methanol Associates announced plans to
build a $250-million plant on forty acres south of Lake Phelps,
Washington County officials crowed, "It would be a terrific iprovement
of our tax base," but were unable to tell "how much of the finished
plant would be subject to county taxes."
          The Northeast's low-wage, low-skill manufacturers produce goods
with low added-value above the costs of raw materials plus
labor. According to The 1977 Census of Manufacturing,
only firms in Pitt and Lenoir approached or exceeded the state's
average value-added statistics. Thus, industrialization has neither
translated into prosperity for individual workers nor substantial
additional tax revenue for local governments.
          Tax laws add to the region's impoverishment. The property tax is a
chief source of funds for North Carolina's schools, human services,
and some local roads. The Northeast's county and municipal governments
rely on ad valorem taxes for revenue. These taxes
are disproportionately paid by small farmers, or homeowners, and
storekeepers, rather than owners of the superfarms or the forestry
industry relative to their profits per acre. Farms and forests are
taxed according to "use values" instead of "market values," the
measures used to assess homes, trailers, autos or personal
property. Land used for farm forestry usually carries a lower assessed
value than residential, commercial or industrial land use.
          For years, North Carolina tax law has exempted timber companies
from paying taxes on cut-over land for ten years after re-seeding or
replanting. In 1973, the General Assembly went a step further by
exempting all 

standing timber from the tax base. The impact of their
decision can be seen in tiny Gates County where 165,000 acres, or 75.5
percent of all its arable 219,300 acres, is used for forestry. Three
timber companies owned 57,752 acres in Gates the year the exemption
bill passed. The previous year, they had paid $7,823.73 on standing
timber alone, and a total of $21,124 to the tax-poor county which had
no industry at the time, and can boast only of one small sewing
factory now. In a single legislative stroke, Gates lost nearly a third
of the taxes paid by the timber companies. Yet the human problems
faced by county government persisted. According to the 1980 Census,
over twenty-four percent of the population was poor, twenty-two
percent of the houses were substandard, and the unemployment rate
fluctuated between five and eighteen percent annually.
          How valuable was the timber harvested in Gates County that year? On
one seventy-four acre tract the timber sold for over $302,000. Seven
yers later--as the tax burden grew heavier as a result of the forestry
exemptions--Gates County farmers sought relief. They claimed four
hundred farmers, farm laborers and the county's few businesses paid
for seventy-five percent of the county revenue needs. Nor was Gates by
itself. Throughout the region, the ad valorem tax
rate is higher than the state average. Greene County has the highest
rate in North Carolina, at $1.39 per hundred dollars of valuation,
followed closely by Pamlico and Tyrrell with rates of $1.25 per
hundred.
          As tax rates increase, the incentives for industrial development
decrease. This forces individual property tax rates to continue to
climb, making it ever increasingly difficult for small property owners
to hang onto their land. Adding to this self-perpetuating cycle is the
regressive state sales tax. One cent of every four collected by the
state in sales taxes is returned to the counties from which the
revenue derived. Only a handful of the Northeast's counties possess
significant trading centers. Elizabeth City, Edenton, Williamston,
Greenville, New Bern and Kinston qualify, as do Little Washington and
Roanoke Rapids. However, market magnets such as Fayetteville, Raleigh
and Durham--even Richmond and Tidewater, Virginia--regularly attract
the Northeast's shoppers. Rural counties with limited retail sales
fail to benefit from the sales tax revenues to the degree "market"
counties enjoy, thus increasing the pressure to tax rural county
property at higher rates.
          
            How are Government Services Delivered in the
Northeast?
          
          Consider the following: According to the Eastern Carolina Health
Systems Agency in Greenville, the region's health planning
organization which has the largest geographic area to serve of any
agency of its kind in North Carolina, sixteen counties are "medically
under-served and have health manpower shortages." Regarding emergency
medical care only, the agency found that fourteen of the region's
hospitals had no twenty-four-hour physician coverage. Eight of them
did not have registered nurses on duty twenty-four hours daily in
emergency rooms. Only half the region's ambulances--132 of 264--met
Department of Transportation standards, and the region was short 513
ambulance attendants. Partly as a result, the agency noted, the
region's stroke mortality rates are twelve percent above state
averages. Motor vehicle deaths are ten percent above state
averages. Heart attack victims run a ten percent greater risk of dying
before getting medical attention in the Northeast than elsewhere in
North Carolina. Getting to hospitals is further complicated by the
fact that nearly a third of the region's roads are unpaved. In eleven
counties, the average number of miles of unpaved roads outstrips the
statewide average of 33.8 percent. In sprawling Beaufort County, for
instance, over 44.3 percent of the roads are unpaved.
          In a 1979 study of the Department of Human Resources listing of
every county's human service agencies, which included sheriffs'
departments, jails and prison camps, as well as hospitals, Red Cross
agencies, or Departments of Social Services, a relationship between a
county's poverty and scarcity of resources appeared. In Camden County,
where twenty-one percent of the 5,829 citizens were poor, there were
thirty-one state or federal agencies, the fewest in North Carolina, to
provide the available range of services open to other North
Carolinians. Gates County, which had thirty-two listings, the next
fewest in the state, had, as has been noted, nearly a quarter of its
8,876 citizens impoverished. In Hyde County, with thirty-four
agencies, thirty-seven percent of the 5,875 citizens were poor. There
was no public housing authority listed in these three counties, yet in
Camden, nineteen percent of the housing was substandard, in Gates,
twenty-two percent was below par, and in Hyde County, twenty-three
percent was substandard. By contrast, in Wake County, seat of state
government and one point in the affluent Research Triangle, and where
less than ten percent of the citizens are poor, there are 876
agencies, the state's highest number. In second place was Guilford
County with 483, then Forsyth with 412 and Mecklenburg with 353.
          Schools are often at the core of citizens' expectations from local
governments, and they frequently reflect the degree to which
governments can or will finance human services. Across the region,
dozens of schools have been left in the lurch and are falling to
pieces. A Raleigh newspaper found that Bertie County's only high
school held fifty-four classes daily in three World War II quonset
huts. Classrooms flooded regularly during rains. Two other Bertie
County schools had been condemned as unsafe but continued to be
used.
          For the region's older citizens, the picture is hardly brighter. In
North Carolina, an average of sixty-eight dollars per person was spent
on Medicaid in 1980. Fourteen of the Northeast's counties spent less
than the state average, and Northampton spent only thirty-eight
dollars annually. This dismal listing could continue, but the point
seems clear: Human services are scarce and supported at levels lower
than available elsewhere in North Carolina.
          
            Some Conclusions and Prospects.
          
          There is not a single Northeast county in which the per capita
income equals or exceeds the state's average, which was $7,382 in
1979. In Hyde County, the figure was one half the state's average; in
Greene, it reached ninety-five percent. In the decade between 1970 and
1980, the Northeast's citizens made no real gains in per capita 

income
if their wages were measured against those of fellow North
Carolinians. In real terms, adjusted for inflation, the gap remained
about thirty percent lower. Thus, it is not surprising that nineteen
of the twenty-one counties reported higher-than-average levels of
poverty, and in four counties, the number of poor was double the state
average.
          The internal colony metaphor provides insights into some aspects of
reality, distorts others, but forces attention on a set of
questions. Some of the Northeast's citizens want to know who controls
development, and how. A growing number want to regain control of their
jobs and land.
          Long before the state's policymakers told black farmers they were
an endangered species, those farmers were struggling to survive
despite predictions, policies and practices bent on eliminating their
way of life. Decades of planning by the state for a unique seafood
industrial park in Wanchese--at costs estimated at over $100 million
in state and federal funds--raised fears among Dare County
fishermen. "I've always said that the project will destroy us," one
fisherman told a Raleigh newspaper. "We'll have no control over the
large corporation which can absorb losses our small operation can't
stand."
          Two lines of strategy have characterized official response to the
plight of the Northeast. One tack, ever since William Byrd set down
the eighteenth century dividing line, has been to send in missionaries
to correct deficiencies thought to be inherently a part of the local
population's own waywardness. Byrd noted in his famous journal, "
. . . sometimes the Society for Propagating the Gospel has had the
Charity to send over Missionaries . . . " to Edenton, whose residents,
he wrote were "too lewd for the Priest . . . ", lacking ambition
"enough to aspire to a Brick chimney," wanting in religious devotion,
and without "the least taint of Hypocrisy, or superstition, acting
very frankly and above-board in all their excesses." Helping people
get used to or accept their deprivations continues to this day as the
chief means which many well-intentioned persons use in Northeastern
North Carolina.
          Others, uneasy about blaming the victims but equally concerned
about regional shortcomings, have substituted the term "progress" for
the patronizing "backward." To cure ills, these capitalists argue, a
modernizing corps must be posted to the region to bolster schools,
lure new industry, build roads, negotiate tax incentives. The
Northeastern North Carolina Tomorrow coalition would bring into the
region scores of professionally-trained persons: experts in hog and
black dirt farming, medicine, community development specialists,
economists, and lawyers experienced in corporate finance.
          These elite approaches ignore the talents, energies and questions
of the Northeast's citizens who don't own the banks, newspapers, or
manage the superfarms. Without local, democratic control over the
region's resources and the capital needed to develop them, the
colonial circle will go unbroken. Nonetheless, there are things which
can be done.
          In offering the following suggestions, we recognize the resistance
posed by the visible and active dimensions of power and also those
which, as Sister Genino suggested at the beginning of this essay,
result from generations o. powerlessness. Northeastern North Carolina
awaits a more thorough going analysis than that which we have
provided. In the absence of such a regional analysis, as the debate
goes on, we suggest some possible next steps.
          First, small scale, labor intensive farming should be fostered,
particularly for minority farmers or the young who are virtually
prohibited from entering farming unless land is inherited. A family
farm development authority similar to one established recently in
South Carolina should be created by the Legislature for the
Northeast. The authority would make long-term, low interest loans to
persons who earn sixty percent or more of their annual income from
farming, or who have adjusted incomes of less than $25,000. Absentee
landownership should be halted as one step in a long-range land reform
program.
          Second, markets should be guaranteed for crop alternatives to
tobacco, peanuts and corn, particularly the wide range of vegetable
crops which can be grown profitably in the Northeast but which are as
often as not imported. One U.S. Department of Agriculture study
reported that North Carolinians import three fourths of all the fresh
vegetables they consume.
          Third, the timber industry, or N.C. State University, should take
existing forest management programs into Elizabeth City State
University and East Carolina University or the region's community or
technical colleges. The aim would be to upgrade the husbandry skills
of small-tract timberowners, and to search for alternative marketing
sources for wood products.

          Fourth, the managers and employees of small businesses should be
provided opportunities to upgrade skills in all phases of their
businesses at state subsidized training centers at no cost to the
individuals or businesses. No firm with more than one hundred
employees would be eligible; nor would any absentee-owned firm.
          During the past two decades, small businesses have generated
sixty-six percent of all the region's new jobs. The state should
abandon its touted industrial recruitment program and concentrate
instead on development of enterprises directly related to the region's
economic needs, the skills of its people, and those marketable uses of
the region's resources. The state should establish a revolving loan
fund for democratically managed businesses. This would provide working
capital or start-up funds for small businesses owned and managed by
workers themselves.
          Fifth, state and local governments should re-examine the impact of
tax policy, law and formulae on timber, farming, fishing, and small
businesses; absentee ownership of both land or industry should be
discouraged through higher taxation. The guiding aim of any review
would be to insure rural counties a fair share of tax revenues, and to
insure they are not unfairly drained of resources vital to maintain
schools and human services, while seeking to spur indigenous economic
activity.
          Sixth, the state should encourage the growth of small scale,
locally control led energy development through continued solar tax
credits, demonstrations to small farmers of alternative energy
options, home insulation rebates, or energy efficiency audits at large
and small industry sites.
          Seventh, the state should provide the necessary technical
assistance for local county officials seeking to adopt industrial
development policies which take into account appropriate technology,
small-scale and locally controlled enterprises, or with qualifications
which include firm size, ownership, waste discharge, energy
efficiency, and, particularly, production links with local
resources.
          In the final analysis, however, we residents of Northeastern North
Carolina must ourselves organize the means to autonomy. We should
apply pressure on absentee owners, state politicians, county
administrators, and policymakers at every level. We must close the gap
between the "lost colony" and the state to which we pledge allegiance
and pay taxes.
          
            Donna Dyer and Frank Adams are natives of eastern North
Carolina. Ms. Dyer is a principal with Triangle Planners Network,
Inc., a nonprofit corporation offering planning and technical
assistance to community groups. Mr. Adams is the author of Unearthing
Seeds of Fire: The Idea of Highlander and is a community educator who
now lives in Gatesville. Maps and illustrative materials for this
article were prepared by Marge Manderson of the SRC
staff.
          
        
        
          Paying the Price In Pickens County
          By 
            Dowe, KellyKelly Dowe
          Vol. 4, No. 3, 1982, pp. 13-14
          
          When 69-year-old Julia Wilder of rural Pickens County, Alabama, was
allowed to transfer from the Julia Tutwiler Prison for Women to a work
release program in Tuskegee last January, she praised God in
thanksgiving.
          "I thank God for opening the minds of the people here to help us. I
knew he would work in his own way," said the elderly black woman. She
and her longtime fellow civil rights worker, 51-year-old Maggie
Bozeman, were imprisoned Jan. 11 for a 1979 conviction on three counts
of voting fraud. All-white Pickens juries had found them guilty of
marking ballots for elderly and illiterate blacks in the 1978
Democratic primary and runoff. Circuit Judge Clatus Junkin sentenced
Mrs. Wilder to the maximum five years in prison, and Mrs. Bozeman to
four. It was the stiffest vote fraud sentence in the memory of state
officials.
          After the women failed in their three-year process of appeals to state
courts and the U.S. Supreme Court, they made an eleventh-hour plea to
Junkin for probation. When he refused and immediately dispatched them
to Tutwiler, the state's penitentiary for women, a public outcry by
civil rights workers and black political leaders reached a
crescendo. State officials, including Gov. Fob James, hurriedly met
and came up with the Tuskegee arrangement. On Jan. 22, 11 days after
entering prison, the women moved from their common cell to a mobile
home and jobs in Tuskegee. There they remain, living quiet lives under
the guardianship of Macon County Sheriff Lucius Amerson, no doubt
comforted, but still incarcerated.
          If the women were thankful for this bit of clemency by the state,
they surely appreciated its irony as well. Convicted and jailed as
they were under a system which has no standardized mechanism for
prosecuting voting violators, and which almost never imprisons those
transgressors it convicts, the Pickens County women grabbed the brass
ring. They got to serve time for everyone.
          Consider:
          * In 1979, a federal grand jury indicted sixteen people in Randolph
County in east Alabama on charges of voting violations in a 1978
sheriff's election. The charges included conspiracy, vote buying,
casting false ballots, soliciting illegal absentee ballots, and voting
more than one time by an individual. Of the sixteen, seven pleaded
guilty and received fines ranging from $250 to $500 and suspended
sentences. Two more were found guilty in federal trials and received
thousand dollar fines and suspended sentences. A tenth person,
Randolph County Sheriff Charlie Will Thompson, was convicted on seven
counts of conspiracy and vote buying. His sentence: a thousand dollar
fine and three months in jail.
          * Secretary of State Don Siegelman received more than eighteen
complaints about municipal elections in 1980. These included charges
of persons who had moved to other states remaining on the voting rolls
in Florala; a candidate in Headland having absentee ballots
distributed and cast illegally; vote buying in Woodville; and misused
absentee ballots in the towns of Fyffe, Moulton, Double Springs,
Bridgeport, Hamilton and Haleyville, among other
allegations. Siegelman said that as far as he knows, none of these
situations has resulted in convictions.
          * An investigator with the Alabama district attorney's office took
statements from more than twenty Sylacauga area residents after the
1978 Coosa County election. The statements alleged coercion by elected
officials, illegal registration of non-residents and vote
buying. Neither the Alabama district attorney nor the attorney
general, however, both of whom were given copies of the
statements. pursued the matter into court.
          * Circuit Judge Clatus Junkin of Pickens County gave the police
chief of nearby Haleyville a sixmonth suspended sentence in a vote
fraud case recently. Junkin says the circumstances of the case were
different from those of the Bozeman-Wilder case. Anyway, he said, the
police chief had admitted his guilt, which Mrs. Bozeman and
Mrs. Wilder never did.
          In the absence of a statewide elections commission or fair campaign
practices commission in Alabama, the handling of vote law violators
obviously is as inequitable as it is varied.
          Said Siegelman: "Alabama law is so diversified and decentralized,
it puts the prosecutorial decisions in the hands of local, elected
officials. The (state) attorney general has been reluctant to get
involved for political reasons.
          "When it gets down to the district attorney level, many of them are
hesitant to pursue vote fraud cases. They are elected officials and
they are prosecuting people for election offenses. From a district
attorney's standpoint, they just don't like election cases."
          Siegelman pointed to further limitations imposed by Alabama law.
          "You have to take prima facie evidence to a judge, showing there
were enough illegal votes cast to make a difference in the outcome of
the election. The judge will order the examination of the ballots, if
it's a county with paper ballots, or the voting machines, if it's a
county with machines.
          "But to do that, you would either have to have direct knowledge (of
voting fraud) or a list of voters. Unfortunately, that list is locked
up and sealed inside the voting machine or ballot box. It's a Catch 22
situation which deters any cases filed on the basis of vote fraud."
          As for the sentences of the hapless Pickens County women, "I think
they are out of line for the type of crime they are alleged to have
committed," Siegelman said.
          "Obviously any act that results in votes being stolen or thwarting
of the Democratic process must be punished. But in this case the
sentences seemed to be out of line with other acts committed by other
people in other parts of the state."
          The convictions of Wilder and Bozeman stemmed from the assistance
with absentee ballots they gave to thirty-nine elderly and illiterate
voters in the 1978 Sep-

tember Democratic primary and runoff
elections. Using testimony of local voting officials and thirteen
absentee voters, the prosecutors tried to show at the trials that the
women had used the ballots of the old people to vote many times for
candidates of their own choosing.
          The Pickens County circuit clerk testified that many individuals
requesting absentee ballots asked her to send their ballots not to
their homes but to the address of either Mrs. Bozeman or
Mrs. Wilder. All ballots mailed to those addresses were cast for
precisely the same candidates, an investigator for the county district
attorney said. He said that applicants whose requests for absentee
ballots were signed with an "X" often signed the ballot with a legible
signature, or vice versa. A Tuscaloosa notary public testified that he
notarized, at his office, many applications for absentee voting that
Wilder and Bozeman brought him during the two elections.
          Prosecutors called to the witness stand thirteen elderly voters for
whom absentee votes had been cast. The testimony of many was garbled
and confusing, and several changed their stories back and forth
depending on whether the questions were being asked by the prosecution
or the defense. However, four consistently said they had not voted by
absentee ballot, and the Alabama Court of Criminal Appeals pointed to
their testimony when it refused to overturn Mrs. Wilder's
convictions. The most damaging testimony was that of Sophia Spann, 79,
whose application and ballot were signed with an "X", and who said she
always voted at the polls and not by absentee ballot. Moreover, she
testified that she could read and write and did not spell her name as
it was written on both documents. She testified that she did not know
Mrs. Wilder, whose signature was on her application to vote
absentee. Mrs. Spann said Maggie Bozeman had visited her on election
day to find out if she had voted.
          Robert Goines, 87, testified he had applied for an absentee ballot
and made an "X" on the application, which Mrs. Wilder witnessed. But
he said that although he had seen the ballot, he never filled it in or
signed it, because he could not write. He said he didn't give anyone
permission to vote for him. Mrs. Lucille Harris testified that
Mrs. Wilder brought her a paper to sign so she wouldn't have to go to
the polls. But she said she never received a ballot in the mail, and
that Mrs. Wilder didn't visit her again. Lula DeLoach testified she
signed an application for absentee ballot, which Mrs. Wilder brought
to her house, but she d id not mark any ballot. She said Mrs. Wilder
had told her she could "sign the paper" and "fix the paper for me,"
which Ms. DeLoach said she did not object to.
          Mrs. Wilder and Mrs. Bozeman pleaded innocent to the charges
against them. Mrs. Wilder testified at her trial she often helped
people to vote by absentee ballot in the 1978 elections. She said she
often picked up applications for absentee ballots at the circuit
clerk's office, which she distributed herself or through her
workers. But she said she never had the absentee ballots of other
voters sent to her own box unless the voter requested her to.
          She said she would often have an exchange like this with a
potential absentee voter: "'What kind of election is this?' I would
say, 'Well, it's the Democratic.' And they would say, 'That's the way
I want to vote.'"
          "You reckon you will be able to be at the polls?"
          "They would say, 'No. You know I can't get around."
          "And I said, 'Well, would you like for me to show you how you can
vote without getting down there?'
          "' Yeah.'"
          She said she would offer to take the application back to the
clerk's office once the voter filled it out, and that the clerk would
mail the voter a ballot.
          "And most of the time, 'Would you like for the ballot to come to
you?'
          "And they would answer no, that they weren't able to, you know, get
it back to me or nobody else, and they would say, 'No, I can't get it
to you.'
          "Would you like for me to--What would you like for me to do--let it
come to my box, or how would you want it done?
          "'Let it come to your box.'" She said she would agree to that and
to get the ballot back to the absentee voter. She said that when she
or her workers signed names to absentee ballots, it was with the
permission of the individual and that the voter would "touch their
hand to the pen." She said in such visits she took along a sample
ballot fo the Alabama Democratic Conference, the major black political
organization in the state, but filled out the ballot only as
instructed by the absentee voter.
          The unanswered question is: Why did the state, which turns a blind
eye to so many accused voting offenders, allow the Pickens district
attorney to throw the book at these two women? One marvels at the
state's self-contradiction: First it flings them into confinement, but
immediately it fishes them out and sets them up in a work release
program in a town at the other end of the state. And not just to any
town, but to Tuskegee, the home of Tuskegee Institute, Booker
T. Washington and George Washington Carver, a town with a politically
prominent black mayor and a black sheriff, a town which would give
comfort and even honor to the two women. Did this transfer amount to a
pardon? Or was it a sort of apology to the women for their having to
take the stripes for all voting offenders?
          Today, Mrs. Wilder works at a senior citizens center, and
Mrs. Bozeman teaches at a center for retarded children. Their
attorneys continue to seek post-conviction relief.
          It could be argued that in a fifty-eight percent white, rural
county, where most elected officials are white, the conviction and
jailing of two black political organizers would not bring that much
negative political pressure on the white district attorney, the judge,
or the jury. Many of those who testified against Mrs. Bozeman and
Mrs. Wilder made it plain they would not have voted at all had it not
been for the women's efforts. Many did not know what an absentee
ballot was. Yet they, and other poor, black residents of Pickens
County, are a likely group from which any opposition to white elected
officials would logically come.
          Attorney Solomon Seay thinks the prospect of this opposition
becoming organized was the motivation for the vigorous prosecution and
stiff sentences given the two women. Forty-two percent of the voters
can't determine an election, he says, but if they're organized they
can influence the results. In asking for dismissal of the case, Seay
and the fifteen character witnesses he put on the stand have charged
that the case was racially motivated and was contrived to halt black
voter registration in Pickens County.
          "I think if black people do not seize upon this opportunity to
launch a statewide, effective voter registration campaign to register
every qualified black person in this state to vote, we will have
missed a golden opportunity," Seay said.
          "That's what this is all about--the efforts of two old black women
to assist functionally illiterate aged and infirmed blacks to cast
their votes."
          
            Kelly Dowe its a freelance writer who lives in
Birmingham, Alabama.
          
        
      
    
  
