
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 4, Number 4-5,
	       1982
        
          Black Political Participation in the 1980's: Challenged by
Conservatism
          By Willingham, AlexAlex Willingham
          Vol. 4, No. 4, 1982, pp. 5-11
          
          Assessing the state of black politics today requires a
fundamentally different approach from what would have been appropriate
even ten years ago. For one thing we have the administration of Ronald
Reagan which seeks to curb federal policies designed to promote racial
advancement. For another, there has been a significant increase in
black political power throughout the country.
          We are now confronted with new problems: the recruitment and
staying power of black candidates; performance in public office; rates
of participation among the general black population, and white
response to the exercise of political authority by blacks. Where, in
years past, American liberalism has pegged the quality of its racial
commitment to its own ability to deliver (i.e., through appeals to the
national conscience and through federal enforcement), now the vitality
of American liberalism itself is dependent on the effective
participation of this newly enfranchised group.
          Nowhere has the change been more dramatic than in the American
South, long the laboratory for creating structures to retard equal
participation and still the symbol of white supremacy in
politica. During the 1970's, Atlanta, Memphis and Houston each sent
blacks to Congress. In each case the election reflected successful
coalitions and broke patterns that had prevailed since
Reconstruction. From beyond these Southern cities came a further
message. Important changes began to appear in the towns and rural
places where hard-core opposition to black participation remains and
where the appeal of white racial politics has been strongest.
          
            Reagan's Radicalism
          
          The potential of black politics must be understood against an
uncertain background in which levels of participation stand to be
lowered by threats to the rules that are supposed to protect and
reward participation. The Reagan Administration's threats represent a
single-minded effort to radically redirect the energies of
government. Insofar as this effort succeeds, civil rights enforcement
will suffer. Clearly, the President intends to lead the federal
government out of its established role in promoting equal
opportunity.
          Reagan's actions reverse a trend in executive behavior going back
at least to Executive Order Number 8802--a wartime measure signed by
Franklin Roosevelt prohibit-

ing discriminatory hiring by federal
defense contractors. Over the next four decades the role of the
federal executive remained integral to the liberalization of race
relations. It was a forceful complement to Congressional legislation
and court decisions and resulted in a formidable array of orders, laws
and decisions. Signed by Lyndon Johnson during his presidency,
Executive Order Number 1124 updated and expanded the earlier Order and
created the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs
(OFCCP). The first direct action on civil rights by the Reagan
Administration was to weaken the OFCCP.
          Characteristically, the New Right and the Reagan candidacy
recognized the systematic forcefulness of civil rights
protections. During the presidential campaign and the transition
period, special attention was devoted to developing a nullification
strategy which did not overlook the "civil rights establishment."
Consequently, there was a successful effort to place into key
executive positions people who accepted the charge to dismantle the
enforcement mechanism.
          
            Is Ronald Reagan a Racist?
          
          The retreat from enforcement is qualitatively different from the
espousal of crude white race supremacy. The Administration claims that
the status of American minorities is a by-product of the economy. Once
formal assumption of biological equality is made, so the argument
goes, no strictly racial attention is necessary. A troubled economy
becomes the reason for citizen dissatisfaction. Salvation of that
economy means less government activity. "Supply side" economics
describes government activity as intrusive and burdensome. Because the
growth of public agencies is seen as intrinsically negative,
maintenance of adequate enforcement activity is inconsistent with the
desired limited government. By this line of reasoning, matters of race
decline in significance; racial preoccupation is made to seem
juvenile. In black studies this is the familiar argument associated
with Booker T. Washington and other New- South spokesmen who used it
to rationalize their accommodation to the disfranchisement of black
citizens at the turn of the century.
          Yet for all of their diminution of the importance of race, the
Reaganites operate with a definite view about the status of black
citizens. They believe that white institutional leaders--including
those in the South--have. cleansed themselves of prejudice and will
hire, for example, qualified persons without regard to
race. Reaganites also make a harsh distinction within the black
population itself. They claim that we should be less concerned about
race because of the number of successful blacks who are now gaining
jobs, promotions and decision-making responsibility before whites with
the same qualifications. That experience shows, they say, a perverse
benefit black Americans now enjoy because of past racism. They are
aware of the multitudes of poor blacks who have not cracked the elite
world of work and play. But, they say, this results from slovenliness,
poor work habits and lack of competitive drive--the legacies of
slavery and of the false promises from the welfare state. To mount
effective opposition to Administration policies it is important to
recognize their deceptive mixture of half-truths and
distortions. Reaganite rationales do not disturb white race supremacy
but are disarming because they appear to be "non-racial."
          
            Reagan's Plan of Attack
          
          An administration so intent on taking government out of the
business of race relations pursues a variety of tactics. In the past
two years these have included budgetary cutbacks, deregulation,
dismissal of seasoned civil rights officials, and the withholding of
leadership. In responding to the Reagan challenge, I want to focus
attention on three areas of domestic policy: revision of federal
implementing regulations; weak or selective enforcement of the Voting
Rights Act, and extension of the block grant method of providing
federal support to local government. The first of these--federal
regulations--involves the classic role of the federal government in
civil rights enforcement. The other two differ in that they have
direct implications for the quality of participation at local
levels. They are especially significant in our expectations about the
future of black participation.
          Implementing Federal Regulations. Immediately after the November
1980 election, the Reagan Administration suspended Carter-approved
regulations in the Department of Labor that had been designed to
strengthen the OFCCP's affirmative hiring program. A "full review" of
OFCCP regulations resulted in the not unpredictable conclusion that
there was a need to reduce the compliance burden. In August 1981,
Ellen M. Shong, Reagan's appointee to head OFCCP, issued substitute
regulations that were designed to weaken the agency's power in civil
rights work. During the first two years, the Administration, working
through Shong, has held back on previously approved regulations and
issued new ones in employment, child labor and rulemaking itself that
if approved, would limit federal enforcement.
          Perhaps the boldest move of the Administration was in January 1982,
with its support of tax-exempt status for racially segregated
education. This move reversed a twelve-year policy and demonstrated
that traditional advocates of racial segregation (e.g., Trent Lott,
Strom Thurmond, and Jesse Helms) would have a strong voice 

on racial
policy. The move was particularly disheartening to those Reagan
apologists who had proclaimed him more innocent than mean on racial
matters.
          Along with the revision of existing regulations comes lax
enforcement even when the regulations remain intact. At the
U.S. Office of Revenue Sharing, for example, very effective
regulations bar discrimination by local governments that receive
revenue sharing money. These are nullified, however, by soft
enforcement attitudes.
          The revision of regulations not only shows the seriousness of the
Reaganites--they leave no stone unturned--it dovetails well with
so-called "racially neutral" de-regulation and thus avoids the more
difficult task of acting directly to repeal civil rights
legislation.
          Selective Enforcement of the Voting Rights
Act. From the beginning months of the new Administration it
appeared that New Right conservatives would make the Voting Rights
extension a test of their effectiveness. Portions of the Act were
scheduled to expire in 1982. What finally happened is illustrative of
the politics of deception.
          From the President on down there were early and forceful statements
of support for the Act. Reagan himself was heard to support a simple
ten-year extension. Parallel to these public statements of support was
a well-defined move to take the teeth from the Act by opponents within
the Administration and their allies. Three tactics were planned:
calling for application of the Act nationwide, thereby creating an
administrative nightmare; amending its Section Five to include an easy
"bailout" provision to allow local governments to exempt themselves
from the Act; and amending Section Two so that remedies to citizens
suffering from discrimination in local government could only be
provided if such victims could prove an intent in the action.
          Passage of these amendments in any combination would have
undermined the Act while allowing politicians to appear to support
it. In time the President dropped his original position in favor of
the more devious tactic.
          These maneuverings failed to prevent extension of the Act. Early,
persistent and generally unified lobbying action by civil rights
groups, thorough hearings in the House, and key compromises by
moderate Senators overcame the opposition. Reagan signed an extension
into law that may make the Act more effective in removing racial
barriers.
          Extension of an amended Voting Rights Act kept in place the most
crucial portion of civil rights legislation having to do with
political participation. The problem has become one of selective
enforcement. In several cases where local jurisdictions were charged
with violations of the Act, the Justice Department has either
abstained or actually supported the offending government. Take, for
instance, the Mobile, Ala., case in which Senator Jeremiah Denton
sought to censor the wording of the government's position against the
city. The Administration responded to Denton's interference by making
the changes he wanted.
          In Edgefield County, South Carolina, where county commissioners
changed to an at-large system of elections, the local blacks objected,
saying the plan diluted black voting strength. The Justice Department
agreed with these citizens and prepared to support them in federal
court. Yet on the eve of the court appearance, the Department was
ordered not to proceed with its case. This time in deference to
Senator Thurmond.
          Another situation involved Burke County, Georgia. Here, Justice was
preparing to make a dramatic move. Both the federal district court and
the appeals court had ruled that the at-large system in Burke was
unconstitutional. The Justice Department had entered the case before
the appeals court with extensive argument against the Burke
system. The Burke County case reached the Supreme Court after the
first Mobile decision. It attracted extraordinary attention as an
occasion to get some clarification of the Court's very divided opinion
in Mobile. Between the appeals hearing (which was argued before Reagan
took office), and the Supreme Court argument, Justice not only
withdrew from the Burke case, but initiated efforts to present an
argument in support of the county--a contradiction of its earlier
position. Ultimately, Justice abstained from joining the case at the
Supreme Court level.
          Just where the Justice Department decides to place its support has
enormous importance for the success of cases brought to challenge
discrimination in the electoral process. Usually these cases pit local
black civic groups against city or county officials. And even though
local citizens do often get support from other groups--Legal Services,
the ACLU, the Southern Poverty Law Center, or, less often, from the
private bar--they never have the resources available to their
adversaries who have direct access to the public dole. Because some
measure of equity is brought when the Justice Department's resources
are involved, decisions not to support the victims of discrimination
may result in the persistence of prejudicial systems.
          Block Grants and New Federalism. If defeat of
the Voting Rights Act would have resulted in less pressure upon local
officials who discriminate, the block grant concept means more power
to them. The central characteristic of the block grant system is the
removal of oversight of how federal funds are spent by local
governments. At present these proposals have not evolved into a
coherent national policy. There are, however, five features in an
emerging structure:
          1) Block grants already approved by Congress. Although there is
some confusion on the exact number of these, the programs are outlined
in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 (Public Law
97-35). Examination of the Act shows that Congress has approved at
least eight block grants.
          2) Block grants selected for implementation by the states. States
had a year in which to decide whether to choose any given block grant
program.
          3) The Primary Care Block Grant and the Education Block Grant
scheduled to go into effect in fiscal 1983.
          4) A new round of block grants proposed in the Reagan fiscal 1983
budget.
          5) The whole "New Federalism" proposal initially outlined in the
1982 State of the Union speech. There has been some action on this
proposal--including negotiations with local officials and hearings in
the Senate--but the final outcome has not been settled.

          The civil rights implications of block grant proposals are
several. Not only would block grants undercut the use of federal funds
as an inducement to end discrimination in local communities, they
would enhance the power of local politicians who continue to
discriminate. A state by state, crazy-quilt pattern of administration
will inevitably result, adding to the burden of community-based groups
and weakening national advocacy groups who have been accustomed to
centralized lobbying in the relatively friendly confines of
Washington. These factors may well result in effective denial of
benefits to eligible populations.
          In general, block grants now in place are covered by the provisions
of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 which forbid
discrimination in the use of federal funds. However there is really no
"Block Grant Civil Rights Provision," as such. Nondiscrimination
provisions are included in the separate grants already approved with
the exception of Social Services and Education. Yet in Title XVII of
the Act, where there is general language governing all block grants
(e.g., audit requirements, public hearings, state plans,
certification), there is no nondiscrimination language--a troubling
and perhaps telling oversight.
          In proposing the 1982 New Federalism plan, the Administration
indicated a willingness to funnel federal money through the Office of
Revenue Sharing. That would subject funds to model civil rights
provisions and an experienced investigative staff. Such a tactic would
be important in addressing the problem of detailed enforcement
procedures but would leave open the question of the adequacy of
enforcement resources. Limited enforcement resources plague ORS
already and would surely grow with the administrative changes under
New Federalism.
          Insofar as block grants are concerned, we are
somewhere out in the stream between the fading categorical grant forms
and a New Federalism on yonder shore. New Federalism avoids the
appearance of meanness; it taps the rhetoric of pure democracy and
engages our emotions about the beauties of local control. Yet the
enhancement of a local authority which does not measure up to national
standards of openness or of fairness in the delivery of services is
irresponsible.
          
            The Ghost of Federalism Past
          
          New Right ideologues who decry the role of public expenditures
should look at the way local governments have often used federal
resources in violation of the spirit of the programs. Local
communities receiving community development block grants or Farmers
Home or Urban Development Act Grants (UDAG) have found ways to go
about spending these monies without providing equal services to their
constituencies. Sometimes this has entailed dubious participation
schemes involving low-income blacks who had no real understanding of
the programs or the process.
          In one town I worked in, personal efforts to check the level of
participation of black members listed on the town's Community
Development Block Grant Advisory Committee drew puzzled looks and
blank responses. Yet an application had been made for the entitled
money, it had been approved and nearly a half-million dollars had been
spent. William Boone and I found a similar level of non-participation
among minority "members" of multi-county planning and development
(A-95 Review Agencies) throughout the Southeastern states.
          If the track record is so bad in programs such as these where
minority and low-income participation is mandated, it is only
reasonable to expect the same or worse in block grant programs with a
minimum of regulation. In General Revenue Sharing that, indeed, has
been the case. Local governments have used this money for a variety of
schemes of little benefit to their low-income citizens. The Civil
Rights Division of the U.S. Office of Revenue Sharing had a 1981
backlog of over thirteen thousand complaints concerning misuse of
money nationwide. The experience of the Revenue Sharing Enforcement
Project of the American Civil Liberties Union suggests that the number
of complaints would be substantially higher in Southern towns if the
regulations were well-known among local groups.
          
            The fact is that local governments have been
beneficiaries of unrestricted funds for nearly a decade and have shown
little real commitment to, or imagination for, using this money to
redress accumulated inequalities.
          
          
            The Southern Struggle for Political Equality
          
          Recent events have had their effect upon slowing nearly fifteen
years of steady political advancement by blacks. In Richmond, Va., the
town's first black mayor, Henry Marsh, has been engineered out of
office by a downtown clique of white business people opposed to his
local politics and national standing. They were aided by the national
Republicans. In Atlanta, long the symbol of enlightened Southern
attitudes, Andrew Young's election to mayor exhibited a pattern of
racial bloc voting that was disquieting both to that city's official
boosters and to some longtime black observers. In Georgia's Fifth
Congressional District (the Atlanta area), a large contiguous black
population was recently ignored by white legislators in drawing voting
lines. So blatant was this move that Reagan's Justice Department
objected under provisions of the Voting Rights Act. In New Orleans,
incumbent Mayor Ernest Morial was returned to office by a record
turnout and support from the black electorate. Yet, intensive
opposition to the Morial reelection rose from the Governor's office to
former New Orleans Mayor and HUD Secretary "Moon" Landrieu.
          The elections in both Atlanta and New Orleans turned out record
numbers of black voters. In both cities, prominent blacks accepted the
rumors that serious efforts were being made to "return" the cities to
white mayoral leadership. After each election the cities' media
offered much somber analysis saying that no white could ever win a top
office again.
          In Houston, black voters joined a dynamic coalition there to elect
the city's first female mayor, Kathy Whitmire. She secured the
appointment of a black, Lee Brown, to head the city's notorious police
department. Now that city is going through a familiar scene in which
an entrenched white police element is arrayed against a black
appointee and his affirmative action and reform efforts.

          Away from the cities, in the Southern small towns, not only has
economic and political opportunity been slow to arrive, but whim and
custom sometimes provide formidable obstacles even to the extension of
modern marketplace principles. "Good business practices" alone
compelled urban banks, for example, to at least moderate their racism,
and treat customers according to their financial utility to the
bank. The opponents of equal opportunity programs are correct in their
argument that market rationalism had no small part to do with the
affirmative hiring and training programs of corporations. That
rationalism also enabled A&P, Kroger, Safeway and many mom and pop
stores to treat the food stamp as cash.
          Such principles have been slow to reach the towns. In one case in
Georgia, the locally owned bank simply refused to cash a government
check for one black community group involved in political conflict. In
another instance, in Arkansas, where a town had diverted revenue
sharing money away from services in the black sections, the woman who
exposed this situation backed out of her formal complaint when told
that her unemployment check would be stopped. In Burke County,
Georgia, it is still the custom for white creditors to stand
prominently near the polls on election day.
          But even these indirect forms of intimidation give way to more
direct attacks. In Vienna, Gal, Tom Shaw has worked to bring change
throughout his county. He filed an election suit against the county
commission, the school board and called for official investigation
into the local use of revenue sharing money. Over the years his
actions led to desegregation of the school system, biracial membership
on the school board and county commission and affirmative hiring plans
for the county and its municipalities.
          Tom Shaw never quite became a hero among some of his neighbors,
however. Today he sits in the Dooly County Jail sentenced to thirty
years.
          Shaw's jailing came because of a conviction for his role in a
confrontation with a local police officer. Charged with aggravated
assault (firing a pistol around an officer) and robbery (taking the
pistol from the officer), he got a hung jury at his first trial. He
argued that his involvement resulted from an effort to defuse a
dangerous situation. When the second trial came, he had not been able
to settle on legal counsel. The judge refused a continuation and
appointed a local public defender who admitted that he had
insufficient knowledge of the case. Shaw then tried to defend
himself. This time, he was easily convicted and given a near maximum
sentence of fifteen years for each charge. He was ordered to serve his
time consecutively and has been denied bail bond while the appeal
takes place. Needless to say, it was Tom Shaw's political activities
that caused his problems.
          In Tchula, Miss., Eddie Carthan, the properly elected black mayor,
found himself in a similar situation. He and six others (the Tchula
Seven) face three-year terms in Parchman penitentiary resulting from
an incident provoked by the refusal of a white police chief to step
down for a Carthan appointee. Efforts to enforce his orders led to
physical confrontation and assault charges against the mayor. Carthan
was also charged with forgery in applying for federal aid and has been
indicted for conspiracy in the mysterious death of Roosevelt
Granderson, a black town councilman and a Carthan opponent. Carthan's
election as mayor of this majority-black town spurred intense
opposition from the traditional white rulers and resulted in the
series of harassing actions that left him under a cloud of politically
motivated indictments and too dispirited to offer for re-election. The
town has been restored to white political leadership.
          In Greenwood, also in Mississippi, David Jordan was fired by the
school board for canvassing on election day. It seems that Jordan, a
high school math teacher and president of the Leflore County Voters
League, had not agreed to ask his group to endorse the favorite
candidate of the school board members.
          In Albany, Gal, both John White, a member of the state General
Assembly, and Don Cutler, a member of the county board of
commissioners, are facing school board regulations that seek to force
them to discontinue their jobs as a condition for holding elected
political office.
          In Pickens County, Alabama, two elderly black women--Maggie Bozeman
and Julia Wilder--were sentenced to state prison terms for violations
during a voter registration campaign among elderly black voters. The
Southern Christian Leadership Conference led protests in support of
the women and drew national attention by pointing to the harsh
sentences given these women and the refusal of state executives to
give a pardon.
          By far the most aggressive attempt to retard affirmative community
work in the rural South was the year-long fight between the Federation
of Southern Cooperatives ,(FSC) and numerous government agencies,
including the 

General Accounting Office, the FBI, and the
U.S. Attorney and federal grand jury in Birmingham. The investigation
resulted from complaints made by political adversaries in Sumter
County, site of the Federation's Rural Training Center. The conflict
took place over a two-year period, including more than a year of
formal proceedings before the grand jury. In a classic "fishing
expedition," the authorities, claiming to be investigating misuse of
federal money, demanded to look at nearly all of the FSC's
files. Numerous, sometimes antagonistic appearances before the grand
jury required extensive time of FSC employees and counsel. In the end
no formal charges were brought and the case was dropped.
          The ease with which official institutions can harass political
opponents is made possible by the continuing domination in elected
office of traditional white elites resentful of bi-racial
governance. Black groups in Black Belt counties continue to find it
difficult to turn their majorities or near majorities into effective
political clout. In only one of the nearly twenty-five majority black
counties in Georgia, for instance, is there a black sheriff.
          In part, this state of affairs results from a continuation of past
habits. The voter registration and turnout rates by race in these
places continue to show wide disparities to the detriment of black
candidates. But the situation is also maintained by electoral
chicanery. While physical intimidation is not usually employed,
registration officials have declined to adopt measures to encourage
registration among under-participating populations. Flexible
registration hours, scatter site or neighborhood registration and
deputy registrars have not been widely adopted.
          In Edgefield County, South Carolina, there are no black elected
county officials. This is due to the change to at-large elections
mentioned above. In Alabama, the old tactic of a challenge and purge
system has been reinstated through a process called
"re-identification." Registration of all voters in selected counties
is suspended until they have "re-identified" themselves. This local
legislation passed the state legislature under the sponsorship of
white lawmakers. It is widely acknowledged to have a disproportionate
effect on black political activity. In Brunswick, Ga., a city-county
consolidation system would create a new jurisdiction just at the stage
when black voting strength has improved in the city.
          From the Atlantic seaboard to Delta Mississippi, expensive counsel
has been retained by counties, school boards and townships to defend
all-white governments that make public policy in communities of
bi-racial population. Losing at one level, these attorneys continue to
appeal. After the Burke County, Gal, County Commissioners lost their
round in U.S. Appeals Court and announced their intention to carry the
case further, one lawyer took the news in stride: "If they lose in the
Supreme Court, they'll probably request an opinion from the House of
Lords."
          
            The Changing Prospects for Change
          
          In spite of the obstacles we have surveyed, active advocacy
survives. The Federation of Southern Cooperatives was exonerated in
its battle. A multi-million dollar law suit against the Port Gibson,
Miss., NAACP was reversed. Court action has saved other jobs and
initiatives.
          But the problem confronting black participation in the South today
is whether such victories may be merely hollow when weighed against
the longer campaigns of resistance which delay, deflect and
retard. That, after all was the agenda of the old Southern
segregationists: to buy time, to deny full equality as long as
possible. If this assessment is correct, then advocates of democratic
reform will be tested until the final vestige of privilege is
removed.
          If we lament the intransigence of the white power clique in Burke
County, we should also note that in Wayneboro, the county seat, the
town's white mayor led the way to a negotiated settlement that did
away with the at-large system and resulted in the election of blacks
to the town council. In Greene County, Alabama, a black slate has
governed since 1968 holding all of the county commission and board of
education seats and pursuing personnel and administrative policies of
their own.
          And there have been other cases of exemplary advances. In the
Fourth Congressional District in Mississippi, Wayne Dowdy pulled
together a winning coalition of Democrats, labor, blacks and
small-town whites. In his campaign, Dowdy took unequivocal positions
on labor, extension of the Voting Rights Act and Legal Services.
          Finally, another positive sign comes from the potential for
changing the make-up of government officials at the local
level. Non-traditional groups--women, blacks, labor, educational and
environmental activists--are moving to contest directly for political
office. Although the South Carolina Senate remains a conspicuous
exception, there have been dramatic increases of blacks in Southern
legislatures. Final reapportionment under the 1980 population figures
should increase the number even more. Parallel to the increase in
elected officials has been an increase in the number and status of
blacks in the states' administrative bureaucracies.
          
            The Challenge of Conservatism
          
          Starting with the social programs of the New Deal and continuing
into the present, government's "safety-valve" function has attempted
to resolve social ills that private business and industry either would
not or could not handle. The clients of the "welfare state" have
included white middle-Americans, but have been disproportionately
racial and ethnic minorities. Having limited resources, these latter
groups turned to the government for improvements in education, jobs,
housing, health and so on.
          In one sense, particularly striking after the mid-1960's urban
rebellions when black people lost their legendary "invisible" status,
one of the half-truths of the New Right was confirmed. The government
did become, however limited, a vehicle for advancement. Yet, even
during these years, some progressive social critics thought this
change in black status seemed too one-dimensional--resulting in the
dependency of too many middle- and low-income blacks on public works
and federal services. There was skepticism as to whether such
developments, positive in an immediate sense, would actually lead to
the structural changes needed for full democratization.
          Frankly, this "safety-valve" strategy for change reflected a belief
by an ascending liberalism that the race 

problem required a
concentrated public investment as a precondition for final systemic
integration. In this, liberalism was reformist, not visionary, and
betrayed its wont to design social change without regard to new forms
of dependency, or to the extra-racial inequities intrinsic to market
relations in modern capitalism.
          So two decades of New Frontier and Great Society programs from
model cities to community and urban development became as crucial to
the advancement of minorities as the more familiar judicial and
administrative measures we readily associate with racial
progress. Those programs did their jobs. At the highest national level
they gave us a number of individuals to command bureaucratic posts
once limited to whites. In small and medium-sized places, blacks who
have any professional executive experience often obtained it as head
of a federal program or of the local department handling federal
money.
          The New Right conservatives--such as George Gilder, Martin Anderson
or Thomas Sowell--who have discovered these relationships are
Johnnie-come-latelies. Not only do they miss the historical intention
of corporate state strategy, they also find- themselves in the classic
contradiction of American conservatives who--living in a nation of
historic, expansive, rapacious, change have to argue, in the name of
that nation, to stop all change. Specifically, with regard to black
people--whom they accept as the typical victims of American
democracy--they are caught in the hyprocrisy of celebrating a new
middle class created by the use of government resources while decrying
the mechanism that created it; they celebrate the end-product of
liberal policy while repudiating liberalism; they acknowledge the
concrete benefits of these programs but say they cannot be helpful to
lower income blacks, who remain victims, to native Americans or newly
arriving immigrants. They fear that realization of the need to
completely emancipate America's black population will shatter the
illusions that sustain an unspoken tolerance of suffering as a feature
of national life. Thus they point to success as a reason to eliminate
the public's role in equal opportunity! This programmatic ambiguity
reflects a moral bankruptcy in American conservatism that has never
been more plain than today--at the hour when its influence on the
national agenda is greater than at any time since the Great
Depression.
          Notes on Sources
          The philosophical perspectives of the New Right and their racial
implications may be found in George Gilder's Wealth and
Poverty (New York: Basic Books, 1981) and Thomas Sowell,
Black Education (New York: McKay, 1972) or
Knowledge and Decisions (New York: Basic Books,
1980).
          Statements of the government's role in protecting the rights of
minorities and the opportunities created are in E. Richard Larson and
Laughlin McDonald The Rights of Racial Minorities (New
York: Avon, 1980); and Larson, Sue Your Boss (New York:
Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1981).
          Conservative strategies to reverse the enforcement mechanism are
discussed in Charles L. Heatherly, (ed.) Mandate for
Leadership (Washington, D.C.: The Heritage Foundation,
1980). After a year in power, conservative evaluation of its efforts
were mildly enthusiastic. See Richard N. Holwill (ed.) A
Mandate for Leadership: The First Year (Washington,
D.C.: 1982), and Chester E. Finn, Jr. "'Affirmative Action' Under
Reagan," Commentary (April, 1982).
          The role of the federal executive in civil rights is reviewed
extensively in two congressional reports taking opposite views of the
matter. A positive attitude is in "Report on Affirmative Action and
the Federal Enforcement of Equal Employment Opportunity Laws," a
report of the House Subcommittee on Employment Opportunities
(February, 1982). The negative view is in "Committee Analysis of
Executive Order 11246," by the Senate Committee on Labor and Human
Resources (April, 1982).
          Efforts to document and counter the declining enforcement have been
numerous. See Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, Without
Justice: A Report on the Conduct of the Justice Department in Civil
Rights. 1981-1982 February, 1982); Affirmative Action
in the 1980s: Dismantling the Process of Discrimination
(U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, November, 1981); "Statement of
Principles on Affirmative Action,: adopted by the Congressional Forum
on Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action (February 1982).
          Two very different modes of harassment are represented in the
Bozeman-Wilder incident and with the ordeal of the Federation of
Southern Cooperatives. See Thomas W. Ottenad, "Stiff Sentenees in
Alabama Case," St. Louis Post-Dispatch May 14, 1982;
Kelly Dowe, "Paying the Price in Pickens County," Southern
Changes, June/July, 1982,and Thomas N. Bethell, Sumter
County Blues (Washington D.C.: National Committee in Support
of Community Based Organizations, 1982).
          Problems of political participation are discussed in Voting
Rights in the South: Ten Years of Litigation Challenging Continuing
Discrimination Against Minorities (New York: American Civil
Liberties Union, 1982); Frank R. Parker and Barbara Y. Phillips,
The Justice Department and Voting Rights Enforcement: Political
Interference and Retreat (Washington, D.C.: Lawyers Committee
for Civil Rights Under the Law, 1982); The Voting Rights Act
Unfulfilled Goals (U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 1981)
Voting Rights in Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi, and South
Carolina (State Advisory Committees, U.S. Commission on Civil
Rights, 1982); Raymond Brown, The State of Voting Rights in
Georgia in 1982 (Atlanta: Southern Regional Council, 1982).
          
            Alex Willingham has been Director of the Revenue Sharing
Enforcement Project of the American Civil Liberties Union. He will
begin teaching political science at Dillard University in New Orleans
in the fall. He is editor of SPECTRUM, a forthcoming
publication of the National Conference of Black Political
Scientists.
          
        
        
          Daddy's Missile: Shaping the South's Pre-war Economy
          By Schlesinger, TomTom Schlesinger
          Vol. 4, No. 4, 1982, pp. 1-2, 23-30
          
          In mid-May 1982, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and
Harvard's Center for Science and International Affairs co-sponsored a
meeting about the dangers of prospective budget cuts. "As other,
non-military, government spending is reduced," wrote the conference
organizers, "and deficits run high, the proposed increases in military
spending are beginning to face resistance. The cuts that may result
may be of the sort that hamper long-term political policies designed
to strengthen the defense industrial base." Convened by Cambridge
lawyer Antonia Chayes, Undersecretary of the Air Force during the
Carter Administration, and featuring representatives from the
Pentagon, academic, corporate and political communities, the Harvard
conference tried to outmaneuver the resistance by breathing life into
a lie.
          Already, that lie--the assertion that America's defense industrial
base is "eroding" and in desperate need of money, deregulation and
other forms of resuscitation in order to be war-ready--had been
promoted relentlessly for the last two years by a bloc of
military-industrial partners. Appreciating Harvard's justly famous
capacity for organizing consensus among elites, the industrial
mobilization lobby humbly described its gathering as an attempt to
"arrive at the boundaries within which reasonable people can be
expected to disagree." 1
          While the American Academy's declaration of war concluded with a
scheduled "sherry and sandwich on the run," the state of North
Carolina was serving barbecue at a related military-industrial
get-together on the campus of North Carolina State University. The
Raleigh conference highlighted Governor Jim Hunt's celebration of
Small Business Week by bringing together contract office-

ers from the
Defense Department and state military installations, buyers from major
defense contractors and a raft of small business owners eager to learn
more about--if not jump into--the only part of the economy that's
expanding. The Raleigh conference also disproved the lie being
fashioned at Harvard that day. Not that the conference's agenda
included truth-telling, it just provided a backdrop for some truth to
out. But first we need to fathom the depth and origins of the lie.
          Since 1979, elements of the Department of Defense and Congress have
portrayed America's defense industries as abandoned by small business
suppliers, desperately short of machine shops and titanium forges,
critically lacking a future supply of engineering talent and skilled
labor, over-reliant on "unpredictable" foreign sources for hard goods
and strategic minerals and generally unable to mobilize. "Industrial
preparedness" issues have been magnified by the Defense Science Board
(a Pentagon-directed team of executives from major war contractors),
the House Armed Services Committee, the Senate Small Business
Committee and mounting publicity from such beacons of corporate
liberalism as Business Week, whose shrill and
misleading "Why We Can't Rearm Fast," published in early 1980, remains
a movement landmark.
          Like all good, heavily invested lies, this one contains some
half-truths. America's military does rely on
U.S. transnationals like Texas Instruments which have exported their
military production facilities at a dizzying pace. Hence the Pentagon
does have a "foreign" producer problem--at least eighty-five percent
of all military semiconductors, for example, are made in Southeast
Asia by the rabidly anti-union Texas Instruments and other U.S. firms
which steadfastly refuse to repatriate their manufacturing
facilities. 2
          The half-truths and genuine whoppers animating the industrial
preparedness movement rest upon the pursuit of more fundamental
questions: prepare for what? mobilize for what? The answer reveals a
shift in American strategic thinking. Throughout most of the 1970's,
military spending was guided by the Arab-Israeli Six-Day War and
lessons gleaned from other recent conflicts. Military scenarists
assumed that the next war would be a short one, with the antagonists
quickly spending their war resources and just as quickly devastating
the other side's In the late 1970's, however, segments of the defense
establishment began to question the "short war" assumption.
          On the day after Christmas in 1979, a Wall Street
Journal essay elaborated: "Because of budget stringencies over
many years, our military stockpiles today could support a major
conventional war for only a couple of months or so. This puts our
planners in a quandary: either they have to assume a short war or
envisage fighting a war without supplies. Understandably they choose
to 'plan a short war.'"
          The writer of that essay was Fred C. Ikle, head of the Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency during the Ford administration and a prominent
member of the Committee for the Present Danger. Today, the Swiss-born
Ikle is Caspar Weinberger's Undersecretary for Policy, one of the
half-dozen most senior positions at the Pentagon. Once in power, Ikle,
Weinberger and company extended their supposition about the industrial
base's inability to refight World War II. They tethered U.S. military
policy to the expectation of protracted conventional war. The
Pentagon's 1970's preparations to fight one-and-a-half wars turned to
a 1980's vision of unparalleled destruction in any number of
theaters. One of the vision's chief effects is making almost any defense industrial base look indequate.
          Some members of the industrial preparedness movement, like Georgia
Representative Newt Gingrich, candidly explained its centrality to
shifting from a "war-deterrence to a war-winning philosophy." But the
Pentagon contends that long-war reindustrialization will actually
deter that war by sending adversaries signals that we have every
contingency covered, including a replay of World War II. DOD's
long-war logic implies a deeper sort of wishful thinking as well. If
superpowers continue committing ever greater portions of their
productive capacity to conventional warfare (where ninety percent of
U.S. military spending currently goes) those powers will feel obliged
to use up that capacity before resorting to nuclear holocaust. In
essence, the long-war hypothesis assumes that each human actor and
technical element in the world's arsenal of fifty thousand nuclear
warheads can be held in "non-escalatory restraint"; that warring
nations will not even turn to nuclear weapons when one side is clearly
winning and the other losing. If money weren't a consideration, one
might lay the motivation of Ikle and his team to simple nostalgia for
U.S. industrialism's "Audie Murphy" phase. "Looking back at those
years," Ikle rhapsodized in the Wall Street Journal,
"it seems we were almost ten feet tall." 3
          With the mutually supporting rationalizations of long war and
industrial "erosion" incorporated into policy and 

public
consciousness, the lobbyists moved to secure goldmine incentives for
DOD's supply-side. Marked by signals like a thirty-one point memo from
Deputy Secretary of Defense Frank Carlucci in April 1981, they pushed
such contracting nuggets as multi-year acquisitions, guaranteed return
on investments (twenty percent is a figure bandied about) and training
and automation subsidies.
          All this activity, proceeding though it does from deranged
assumptions, contrasts with the lack of activity on most civilian
economic fronts. That contrast has energized the states to effectively
reinforce DOD's attempts to broaden its constituency and find new
places to spend its bottomless budget. Instead of battling over
federal taxes, General Accounting Office procurement policies or the
arcane of grant formulas, state governments have increasingly shifted
their attention to the only area of federal spending which will grow
in the foreseeable future--military construction, military payroll and
associated funding transfers. Moreover, defense industries have become
the coin of the economic development realm. Events like North
Carolina's procurement conference are set up, said organizer Al
Calloway, the state's assistant director for Business Assistance,
because "last year we knew that by the first quarter of 1982 we'd
actually see trickling down to smaller businesses . . . [here Calloway
paused to reassess his choice of verb] . . . we'd see hard money
coming in from DOD."
          Hard money also brought in three hundred or so curious business
owners to North Carolina State's McKimmon Center to buttonhole defense
prime contractors like Western Electric (which takes in a quarter of
all North Carolina's military contracting dollars) and Teledyne (which
operates the South's biggest titanium forge--in Jesse Helms's hometown
of Monroe). "We've seen machine 

shops come out of the woodwork like
I've never seen before," said Allen Trippeer of the Defense Contract
Administration Services Atlanta office. "They've read in the paper
about DOD getting all this money. There's definitely an increase in
interested contractors."
          If the North Carolina conference is any guide, DOD is busily
compiling waiting lists of suppliers. With economists, nutritionists,
custom glassblowers. flagpole repairmen--and one soul trying to
merchandise a "space device" which detonates land mines from
orbit--prowling contractors' and supply directorates' booths, DOD also
has a willing reserve to meet its most esoteric needs. As Bill Page,
one of Seymour Johnson Air Force Base's contract officers said, "As
far as competition and availability go. for what we need at Seymour
Johnson we don't have any problems. I think there's a good base out
there to supply DOD. Just about every time a small business fails a
new one takes its place."
          Members of Congress and military installation chiefs have all been
throwing procurement conferences for decades. Nor is North Carolina
now alone in the South in intensifying its pressure on businesses and
communities to buy into DOD's brand of support and obligation. Georgia
has made major additions in the past three years to its aerospace
economy, including a Boeing plant in Macon. a United Technologies
facility in Columbus, and Atlanta's Rockwell International plant which
makes the GBU-15 winged bomb. But in 1981, the state joined forces
with the city of Warner Robins and Robins AFB for an industrial
development campaign the intensity of which eclipsed those earlier
efforts.
          The campaign began when Maj. Gen. John Paulk took command of Robins
AFB in 1980. A native of Willacoochee. Ga., Paulk hit the ceiling upon
learning of the relatively small portion of Robins' two billion dollar
boodle which went to in-state contractors. According to Robins
contract officer Bob Beckmann. Paulk relayed his dissatisfaction to
Governor George Busbee and other industrial development
figures. Within months. Beckmann. Georgia Industry and Trade
Department official Emmett Mann, and a leader of (Georgia's state
Chamber of Commerce. Penn Worden, had concocted a statewide series of
meetings on the glories of sub-contracting for Robins. "We kind of
brought the mountain to Mohammed." says Beckmann. Officials of the
Small Business Administration and C&S Bank, Georgia's largest,
pitched in with financing and administrative help. In the space of
twelve months, 1,229 firms signed up to do business with Robins
AFB. In-state procurement for the base rose from thirty-nine million
dollars in fiscal 1980 to seventy-nine million dollars in fiscal
1981.
          Tennessee's Economic and Community Development (E&CD) Office
explicitly targets military contracting at the head of its recruiting
priority list. "Right now I'm on 

top of every defense contract that's
let," says the state's top industrial recruiter, Assistant E&CD
Commissioner Bill Long. Long's research staff combs Commerce 
Business Daily and the Pentagon's Defense Marketing Service 
listings 
for recruiting or expansion opportunities. But, due to their boss's
background, they also go an extra mile.
          Although Long rents out a farm and co-owns a couple of east
Kentucky strip mines, he acquired most of his business experience
during a twenty-eight year stretch in the Marines.
          Long's assignments included three years in the White House honor
guard and duty as the first Marine liaison officer to Congress before
mustering out in the mid-seventies. "I've got contacts," Long
volunteers, "and I'm trying to renew contacts. But it's all above
board. They wouldn't even talk to me if it wasn't. I get the same
information as everyone else. But I might get it a little bit
earlier."
          With his informational edge, Lang says, "we feel we have a good
shot at getting a lot of component parts to weapons systems, so that's
what we're going after. We've gotten into everything from consoles
[for tracking systems--a potential $25 million investment] to radar
systems. I was in Washington last week and met with six
contractors. We have a shot at getting them. We got a letter last
week, 155mm launching tubes for guns. Laser homing devices,
air-delivered clusters of mines, visual tracking systems. We haven't
culled anything out."
          
            II
          
          "Erosion" alarms may not serve the truth but they do serve to
conceal the defense reindustrialization campaign's political
content. Military industries remain alive and well but they sometimes
don't happen to be what or where interested parties want them to
be.
          Jacqueline Mazza's office in the U.S. House of Representatives
Annex Building in Washington is festooned with collaged advertisements
from New York magazine. The wail resembles a graduate
student's efforts to hang on to some sense of humor during the degree
grind. Ray Gillen's cubbyhole, just around the corner, is decorated by
a single photograph of a long-dead South Carolina senator named Burnet
Rhett Maybank. Graduate student analogies come easy because Mazza and
Gillen are as young, friendly and manifestly privileged as the dozens
of other people who work with them at the NortheastMidwest Institute,
an organization which supplies sectional lobbying ammunition to more
than two hundred members of Congress.
          Jackie Mazza spends her time pasting together the "Frostbelt"
lobby's plea for more military bucks. In 1980 she authored The
Unprotected Flank, an Institute book which details how few
defense dollars flow into Northern states relative to their share of
the country's population and tax burden. It also argues, among other
notions, that more American troops should be training in climates that
approximate those of Western Europe--like upper New York State. "A lot
of Congressmen from the North have been anti-defense," she says. "They
wouldn't go near those committees. But they woke up all of a sudden
when their economies were doing poorly."
          Mazza and company have certainly rung the alarms for an awakening
which has made Northern Congressmen with liberal and moderate
credentials a decisive force behind the further militarization of the
U.S. economy. In 1981 she arranged a meeting between Defense Secretary
Weinberger and a Northeast-Midwest delegation that her co-workers
label "historic." "Weinberger as much as said he had to establish a
better regional balance if he wants to keep a defense consensus in
this country," 

Mazza says. The Unprotected Flank joins
the industrial base debate by alleging that defense production has
migrated South to the point of "giving an opponent an 'easy target'
end rendering the U.S. more vulnerable to attack." The Frostbelt
lobby's problem is not just that the defense industrial base is
eroding, but that it is allegedly no longer in the Frostbelt. That's
where Ray Gillen and H.R. 5540 come in.
          Gillen has labored to undo the handiwork of Burnett Rhett Maybank,
a Charleston aristocrat who amended the 1953 Defense Appropriations
Bill to prevent military monies from being targeted for depressed
areas. Routinely protected by Southern seniority, the Maybank
Amendment was added to Defense appropriations bills thereafter. In the
late 1970's it became a focus for the Northeast-Midwest attempts to
load funding formulas in their favor. The "Sunbelt" lobby, including
the Southern Growth Policies Board and the Southern Governors
Association, used armed services committee clout to preserve the
status quo. (A regionalism as equally spurious as that of the
"Frostbelt," Sunbeltology is the self-interested science of connecting
Tuscon's suburbs to Letcher County, Kentucky.)
          The Sunbelters argued that using defense procurements as an "urban
policy tool" would court inflation. Procurement spending annually
amounts to thirty to forty percent of DOD's budget. Jackie Mazza and
the Northeast-Midwest strategists see procurements--as opposed to
military payroll or construction--as the most pragmatic route to
increasing the North's share of the Pentagon's pie. In 1981, after a
four-year battle, the Frostbelt forces finally rounded up enough
non-Frostbelters whose districts included "labor surplus areas," the
current euphemism for areas of high unemployent, and repealed the
Maybank Amendment. The winning coalition enacted a substitute which
allowed the Defense Logistics Agency to make preferential awards to
non-weapons contractors in distressed areas.
          Hard on the heels of this win, Northeast-Midwest partisans began
pushing a vastly more open-ended effort to raise their regions'
defense manufacturing stakes--this year's H.R. 5540. Sixty-one
representatives, nearly all from the North, co-sponsored the bill as a
series of amendments to the Defense Production Act. That Act contains
thirty year's worth of ground rules for America's military manufacture
and serves as a catch-all for other boondoggles enacted in the name of
security, like the Synfuels Corporation.
          H.R. 5540 would dole out fifty billion dollars (fifty billion by
some estimates) in outright loans, loan guarantees and purchase
agreements to the "small and medium-sized" contractors that the
defense establishment has designated at the really "deteriorating"
tier of its supplier base. Fifty billion dollars represents two
hundred Lockheed loans or several dozen Chrysler bailouts. But that's
not all 5540 offers. This is the bill that also defines "colleges,
universities and other institutions of higher education" as
"industrial facilities" in dire need of "updating equipment." The
Frostbelters have designed 5540 to close the American academy's lab
equipment window-of-vulnerability and to "provide incentive for
faculty to remain in academia and encourage students to pursue higher
degrees in a quality environment." Finally, in pursuit of strategic
minerals, 5540 proposes to further militarize America's policies
regarding the natural belt growth coalition than any Twentieth Century
predecessor, ostensibly opposes 5540 as inferior to its brand of
recovery-oriented "free market" military spending. Budget director
David Stockman delivered an official statement of opposition by
defending "the Defense buildup, tax reductions, improved depreciation
schedules. . . and reduction of regulatory burdens" as "broad measures
to strengthen the economy."6 Within a few days 5540 is scheduled to go
to the House floor for a vote. Despite the Administration's public
posture. Staffers from the bill's parent Economic Stabilization
Subcommittee say that its chances "look very good."
          By itself, the distribution of military production dollars can be a
misleading issue--in fact, when pressed, regional lobbyists agree that
procurement is spread pretty evenly. The important question is what do
all these dollars buy? The answer reflects the South's particular
position within the defense industrial base. Again the trouble is
hardly one of "erosion," it's one of too many socks.
          Traditionally, the South has supplied DOD its textiles, tobacco,
coal and food. The South has also supplied ships, C-130 airplanes and
the fruits of the Army Missile Command. But even today Newport News,
Marietta, Pascagoula, and Huntsville remain anomalies on the defense
contracting landscape. Even when subcontracting is counted, most
Southern states sell DOD comparatively little weaponry.
          The Department of Defense estimates procurement spending to be its
fastest fattening budget line.
          Between fiscal 1981 and 1985, procurements are destined to expand
sixteen percent a year in real terms while other military outlays will
increase only five percent per year. From fiscal 1979 through fiscal
1981, the growth in procurement spending was concentrated on
non-weapons purchases. Non-weapons contracts increased eighty-six
percent during that period, twice as much as weapons contracts
(unadjusted dollars). Non-weapons items grew from a quarter to a third
of total procurements during the same years. But as the
Reagan-Weinberger team reinforces choices made by Jimmy Carter and
commences its weapons-buying binge, those procurement ratios will be
reversed. Thus, the Northeast-Midwest Institute's strategy of going
after more Maybank-related spending in the short term and
"geographically-distributed," HR 5540-subsidized weapons spending in
the long term. 7
          As the Southern lobby defended its disproportionate share of
Pentagon outlays, it unwillingly protected its lead in the types of
spending (i.e., non-weapons) which have been more predictable and
stable (both locally and regionally) than the weapons program
roller-coaster. But the fact that traditional Southern defense
industries have been a sub-set of traditional Southern industries has
remained a largely uncounted--or unanalyzed--advantage. Now, it's
being counted less all the time because Southern development partisans
increasingly believe that while their states can't live without their
traditional industries, they can't live by them alone. Just like their
Northern counterparts, these boosters see defense procurement as a
vehicle for nourishing science-and technology-based industrial growth,
hence an economic fix. But clearly, the Yankees got there first.

          "They're calling it 'The Route 128 Boom'," says Sandra Kramer of
the Sunbelt Council, combatively, referring to the electronics
companies circling the Boston area. In 1981, Kramer, formerly the
Southern Growth Policy Board and Southern Governors Association's
chief Washington lobbyist, helped former Alabama Congressman John
Buchanan pull together the Sunbelt Council's 119 congresspeople. In
early 1982, Kramer reflected on the military budget and regional
development. "We were just up in Maine for the holidays," she
said. "The Boston Globe ran a series on how this defense spending is
going to hit them up there. You know they're strong on high tech. And
the South just doesn't have high tech. That's our problem . . . to get
some mental expansion . . . not be the ones always supplying the foot
soldiers but the brains, too."
          What the South does have is Tennessee's Bill Long and a flock of
other state development officials all desperate for jobs, tax base and
quick fixes. Jim Cotham, Long's former boss at Tennessee's Economic
and Community Development Department, says that defense "is a very
large part" of the high tech recruiting campaign he and Governor Lamar
Alexander committed the state to in 1981. The Tennessee efforts led to
plans for a "technology corridor" modeled on North Carolina's Research
Triangle Park and based in Oak Ridge--the granddaddy of nuclear-type
economic development. Florida, which already had the foundation for
high-tech growth that Tennessee lacks, recently granted industrial
development funds to woo the New York-based Moog, Incorporated, to the
St. Petersburg-Clearwater area. There Moog intends to build a
performance control equipment plant to supply the F-15, Trident and
M-60 tank programs.
          
            III
          
          Desperation characterizes the states' and regions' raids on and
imitations of one another and their scramble to hop aboard the next
development train--regardless of destination. And the Reaganites'
apparent belief that pure desperation mobilizes consent better than
5540's blandishments finds its surest measure in people like David
Patterson, who don't think of themselves as consenting at all.
          Patterson, a TVA economist, was one of the Tennessee technology
corridor's earliest proponents and has, with the help of state
Economic and Community Development officials, helped nurse it to its
present stage. Patterson got into the development business from a
background in civil defense. He wrote his dissertation for the Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency, worked for the Institute for Defense
Analysis, and upon arrival in Tennessee, consulted at Oak Ridge on
civil defense "from an economic standpoint."
          "I remember when I was at Indiana when the movie
Dr. Strangelove came out," Patterson says. "I really
went to pieces in that movie. I had just spent a year reading
everything that had been written about the impact of that sort of
thing in preparation for writing a dissertation proposal. Everybody
else in the moviehouse was laughing. I was sitting there shaking."
          "I spent too much time in my life studying the so-called
possibilities of recovery after a nuclear war. I got sort of burnt out
on the area I guess. I learned too much about what it can do--nuclear
war. And you sort of come to a point in your life whenever you get
involved with something like that when you have to decide, ok--I give
up. Or, I've really got to do something. And I couldn't see where
there was anything I could do."
          Being an economist as well as a refugee from the Armageddon wing of
his profession, Patterson has some problems with military spending
increases. "Justifying defense spending on the grounds of its
potential spinoffs is like justifying death because it returns
phosphorus and other needed chemicals to the soil," he says. "Saying
you're going to put money into defense because it'll stimulate the
economy . . . you can do exactly the same thing,
much more effectively by paying half the unemployed to dig holes and
the other half to fill them up. It's exactly the same thing. Because
you're buying nothing."
          If Patterson had his druthers, Tennessee's technology corridor
"would be looking for industries that had potential beyond defense or
in addition to defense because military defense budgets come and
go. In fact, I would be looking to industries that had primarily
civilian-oriented market potential. " At the same time, Patterson is
trapped by the military mobilization imperatives that all South-

environment and international trade. 
4
          HR 5540 takes its stand on regional development by amending the
Defense Production Act's "Declaration of Policy" to read, "It is the
policy of the Congress to encourage the geographical dispersal of the
industrial facilities of the U.S. in the interest of the national
defense and to discourage the concentration of such productive
facilities within limited geographical areas which are vulnerable to
attack by an enemy of the United States."
          Thus 5540 seeks to trap the Pentagon. The bill offers valuable
instruments for industrial constituency building and for reconciling
differences between some national industries, union leaders and balky
members of the financial community. At the same time it confronts the
traditional power of Southern armed services committee chairmen with
its statement of redistribution. Historically, DOD has been loathe to
bite Southern hands that feed it. Richard DeLauer, a TRW executive now
vacationing as Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and
Engineering (he was also a member of the Defense Science Board's
"erosion" panel and a featured speaker at the May Harvard gathering),
told Congress in 1981: "National defense is not and never has been
intended as an income distribution mechanism or system providing equal
allocation of funds to states, cities or countries . . . The purpose
and goal of defense spending is to keep the American people alive and
free--and in the process it is possible that defense spending will
necessarily be unevenly distributed geographically." 5
          Moreover, this Administration, less tied to the Frostern
development officials now labor under.
          "You know if we got an opportunity to get a Lockheed plant located
here, we'd probably bust our balls to get it," he acknowledges. "I
don't think we'd do it because it was a defense industry per se. In
fact there'd probably be some people saying, 'Wait a minute, that's a
bummer. Let's spend our efforts on something else.' But others would
say, 'Look, it's a bird in the hand. Get what you can.' And I guess
I'd be in that latter group."
          
            IV
          
          For sheer numbers of questing small business owners, phalanxes of
corporate executives who run 95-507 Programs (federally mandating that
all prime contractors prepare "small business plans"), and for overall
spit, polish and hardware, nobody throws a procurement conference like
the Army Missile Command (MICOM) at Huntsville's Redstone Arsenal. But
then no place is quite like Huntsville, the Southeast's
longest-standing monument to aerospace high-tech and, in fiscal year
1981, the recipient of twenty-seven percent of Alabama's total defense
contracts.
          At the outset of Huntsville's most recent Small Business
Opportunities Day, MICOM's current commander, Major General Robert
L. Moore, upheld the local corporatist-in-uniform tradition by
welcoming his guests as "ladies, gentlemen and fellow businesspeople."
One week after the Harvard and North Carolina conferences,
Huntsville's modernistic Von Braun Civic Center had been transformed
into a Casbah of hardware and hardsell by the six dozen military
supply directorates and prime contractors invited to peddle to
prospective small business partners. Raytheon buyers dispensed bright
red, missile-decorated tote bags. Hughes representatives earnestly
explained cutaways of their aircraft. Nearly every other prominent
name in America's military-industrial supply-side--Lockheed, Martin
Marietta, General Dynamics--hawked away. The conference drew twelve
hundred participants from thirty-six states, lured by fifteen thousand
invitations.
          In the midst of all this anxiety--the small business equivalent of
five thousand unemployed people standing in line for one hundred
jobs--Huntsville's conference also offered glimpses of an eerie
intimacy. Chatting with an equally young bank officer at the local
Chamber of Commerce booth, Tom Stramiello, a Chamber researcher craned
his neck and smiled at the sound of a Hawk missile" firing in the
Raytheon promotional film across the aisle. "That's my daddy's
missile!" Stramiello crowed. The man from People's Bank nodded. The
engineering generation of Stramiello the elder created the
entrepreneural atmosphere in which its sons and daughters now
orbit.
          "It fluctuates," said the banker in response to a question about
Huntsville's contracting cycles, "but overall it's pretty
steady. You'll have a bad month and a good month but it's not like a
bad year and a good year. Bad times aren't long enough to really
damage somebody unless they're kind of fragile to begin with."
          On the other side of the room, Fred Flores, a General Dyanmics
buyer from the West Coast explained that his company had "ample"
machine shop subcontractors. Nor did the assembled small businesses"
lack of diversity trou-

ble General Dynamics: "If they're too unique you
can't use them," Flores said. What about "erosion?" Flores waved his
arm at the Von Braun Center crowd, "If you ask most people in these
booths they'll tell you they've been approached by numerous shops in
desperate need of business."
          Ralph Autery, lead engineer for the new FOG-M (fiber optic guided)
missile, held down one of MICOM's numerous booths across from
Flores. "They wanted to show that we still had the inhouse capability
to do the FOG-M," Autery said of MICOM's command. "We've had other
programs where you buy everything and do all the engineer-assembly and
integration testing and you go out and fire one and it flies good and
some company down the pike that you bought just the airframe from
takes credit for it." MICOM's in-house capacity may also show that
America's missile complex has engineers to spare, not the impending
shortage advertised by the erosion lobby. Does Autery think all this
"deterioration" talk is a little overblown? Autery smiles, "Yeah, we
have a lot of people that're willing to work. Scheduling may be the
problem more than being able to get something."
          Even if the "erosion" hysteria is a bit on the mendacious side, it
ought to create jobs since small businesses will gain and everyone
knows that small business generates most jobs--right? Well, maybe
not. Listen to Bob Ingram, director of MICOM's small business programs
talk about "productivity" and mobilization. "You can ride up and down
the highway and find small businesses that might be doing business
with the government and you say, 'Hey, can you handle any more?' 'Why
absolutely we can handle more. We can have output three hundred
percent of what we're doing right now and wouldn't have to hire
another men.' You'll find that in many instances."
          Does this mean that building up the defense industry's small
business tiers may not boost employment at all? "Very definitely,"
Ingram answers, "Let's take an isolated situation. You got a little
plant here, a man and his wife and three sons are running it. And they
manage to pick up two or three contracts with DOD each year. Total
work is, say, fifty thousand dollars. They have a lathe, they've got
several drills, they've got grinders, welding capacity, this type of
thing. I'm saying that in a lot of these kinds of cases you could pump
$300,000 worth of work in there and they could handle that and never
hire another man."
          Some economic development specialists see an important corollary to
this--one the "erosion" lobby has ignored or downplayed. Military
contracting's ups and downs have left the industry drenched in excess
capacity. Unlike gung-ho gyrene Bill Long of Tennessee's Economic and
Community Development office, Sandy Jordan, Assistant Commissioner of
Georgia's rival Industry and Trade Department, sees military producers
expanding only moderately--despite Georgia's success in luring
aerospace companies. "Most of the companies that are looking for
defense contracts," says Jordan, "have a great deal of plant space,
infrastructure and machinery in place. They're not doing a great deal
of site-searching because of contracts that have been awarded or
anticipated. Because of cutbacks in previous years, they've got the
facilities they need."
          MICOM's Bob Ingram has a very military solution to the issue:
redefine "excess." "We're not saying the (industrial) base has
deteriorated," Ingram claims, "we're saying it should be a broader
base, there should be more redundancy there. Rather than one shop that
manufactures printed circuit boards, there are literally thousands of
them around the country. And we should have them ready, willing and
available to call on in the event we need them."
          But call on for what? The long war? Another scenario? And what
about our nuclear arsenals, poised and aching to be used? "I wouldn't
get into that debate," Ingram laughs. "If it's a total nuclear war,
mox nix on the industrial base. You're not going
to have time to do anything anyway. But if the powers can agree to
say, 'Well, let's shoot at each other with conventional weapons,' then
yeah, you could have a need for it. So that's a matter of
philosophy. And philosophy means discussing something you don't know
anything about, so I steer away from it."
          
            V
          
          Making the defense industrial debate less philosophical requires
that "reasonable people" expand, not narrow, the boundaries of
disagreement. We could start by disagreeing with the belief that a
global war of annihilation will be good for jobs in the region, state
or district. We could move on to scrutinize the extent to which
development decisions drive or simply substitute for military
policy. Or we could examine more useful brands of public works
programs and industrial initiatives than those of 

the
military-industrial community. The harder state governments try to
square the Iron Triangle of Congress, Industry and Pentagon, then the
more accessible the issues become in Raleigh, Nashville and Atlanta
and all the communities affected by our public, but undemocratic,
development bureaucracies.
          A reasonable debate would also encompass the costs--human,
environmental and financial--that military production exacts from
workers and communities who supposedly benefit from Pentagon
spending. A disproportionate share of those costs have been borne by
have-not Southerners such as asbestosis victims in Tidewater shipyards
or uranium-bullet factory workers and their neighbors exposed to
radiation hazards in Appalachian Tennessee. The seemingly benign
notion of "targeting contracts to distressed areas" in practice
frequently means lending DOD's authority to minimum wages, lethal
workplace hazards, union busting and job insecurity.
          The preponderance of non-weapons contracts in the South only hints
at the Pentagon's real domestic power--its unrivalled reach into every
corner of our economic life. The Department of Defense provides
eighteen thousand dollars for a rural sheriff's department to drive
past a Corps of Engineers Dam several times a week in Southwest
Virginia. It furnishes $150,000 to prop up a marginal strip miner in
East Kentucky. It sends along $200,000 to rent recruiter's space in a
failing hotel in a Tennessee town. The military reindustrialization
campaign promises to extend DOD's grass roots power. Unless we
understand the web of Pentagon dependencies, we shouldn't expect to
change the shape of the South's pre-war economy.
          
            Footnotes for Shaping the South's Pre-war 
Economy
            
              "Conference Outline: 
Improving National Security by Strengthening
the Defense Industrial Base," Harvard University Center for Science
and International Affairs, May 10-12, 1982.
            
            
              "Semiconductor Support 
of Military Programs," presented to the
Defense Science Board Task Force on Industrial Preparedness by Jerry
Junkins, vice-president of Texas Instruments, Dec. 19, 1980, Appendix
B, page 8. "The cost to subsidize mandated U.S. production," Junkins
claimed, "might be considerable and more than the military can
afford."
            
            
              "Could We Mobilize 
Industry?" Fred C. Ikle', Wall Street
Journal, Dee. 26, 1979.
            
            
              Congressional Budget 
Office Cost Estimate and Dissenting Views of
Representatives Ed Bethune and Ed Weber on HR 5540 from House Report
97-530, May 17, 1982, pages 26-29, 61-62.
            
            
              Richard DeLauer to 
the House Banking Committee's Subcommittee on
Economic Stabilization. Hearings on "Revitalization and the
U.S. Economy," July 15, 1981, Part 11, page 332.
            
            
              Stockman letter to Representative J. William Stanton, May 5,1982,
in House Report 97530, page 63
            
            
              Procurement spending 
estimates in "Annual Report to Congress, FY
1983," Caspar W. Weinberger, Secretary of Defense. page B-2.,
            
            
              Weapons vs. Non-weapons spending comparisons from "DOD Prime
Conract Awards by Region and State, FY 1979,1980,1981," Department of
Defense, Directorate for Information, Operations and Reports (DIOR),
pages 15-17.
            
          
          
            Tom Schlesinger is a carpenter and freelance writer
living in Tennessee. He currently works with the Highlander Center's
Strategic Minerals and Defense Industry Project.
          
        
        
          A Few Proposals: From Black Agenda To National Policy
          By Piliawsky, MonteMonte Piliawsky
          Vol. 4, No. 4, 1982, pp. 11-16
          
          Upon initial consideration, the offering of policy proposals which
grow out of a "black agenda" might appear to be a futile
exercise. Given the prevailing conservative mood in the United States,
black political leaders currently exert insignificant influence in the
formulation of national public policy. Congress, for instance, totally
ignored the 1983 counter-budget offered by the Black Congressional
Caucus.
          New Right ideologues recently have attempted to hold 

on to the
white lower middle and working classes, whose support was decisive in
the election of both Carter and Reagan, through the elaboration of a
full-blown conspiracy theory. This thesis posits an alliance between
the "new class" of what William Rusher calls a "liberal verbalist
elite"--leaders in the educational establishment, media and
governmental bureaucracies, and "a semi-permanent, welfare
constituency, all coexisting happily in a state of mutually sustaining
symbiosis." The argument is particularly persuasive, for, as David
Edgar points out, it combines "in one acceptable construct the radical
instincts of the vast middle layers of society (those instincts of
hatred and resentment directed at the rich above them) with a
rationale for retaining their superiority over the masses of the poor
below them."
          Black leaders are clearly on the defensive in combating this appeal
from the right. The white lower middle class, concerned that real
take-home income is eroding, is inclined to accept the underlying
premise of Reaganomics: that the only way to rescue the national
economy is to reduce the federal budget by sacrificing social
programs. Given this context, black spokespersons appear to be
representing only a narrow-interest group.
          However, an opportunity exists for blacks to press their public
policy demands, if they can persuade their potential white allies that
these policies are in the latter's self-interest. Rightwing
demagoguery can be countered with a populism of the left, in which
blacks form coalitions with other minorities and with whites who are
also feeling the pinch. As Vernon E. Jordan Jr. expresses it,
"Reagan's programs won't work for us, but they also are not going to
work for a lot of white people, and I think there will be a mutuality
of interest, even absent brotherhood and love." This
coalition-building strategy is supported by Barbara Williams-Skinner,
executive director of the Congressional Black Caucus:
          
            The Caucus has got to come across as representing the interests
of black Americans by showing white Americans how their interests
coincide with those of black Americans, instead of winning over white
Americans based on the concerns of black Americans. You've got to win
people based on their interests, based on a common struggle.
          
          The current prospect for coalition building is promising, given the
falling relative incomes for the lower middle class. In the decade of
the 1970's, the share of total income going to the poorest twenty
percent of American households remained essentially constant at 4.2
percent; however, the next lowest forty percent of households
witnessed their share of total income decline from 28.5 to 27.2
percent. MIT economist Lester Thurow suggests that as the earnings of
the lower middle class fall, relative to the groups above them, "what
may also be canceled is the social tolerance of low- and middle-income
groups for the large income gaps that have always marked the American
distribution of income."
          Without doubt, Reaganomics has jeopardized much of the President's
initial support among the lower middle class. Duped in 1980 by
candidate Reagan's slogan, "Get the government off our back," many
working people have come to resent President Reagan's favoritism to
the wealthy. Black leaders must graphically point out to those four
whites for every black who feel the impact of Reaganomics, exactly how
they are being victimized. As Williams-Skinner puts it, "We've got to
develop better research on the impact of the Reagan budget on
non-black, non-poor small business people, which is the majority of
what Nixon used to term the 'silent majority' voter."
          While the white lower middle class is the group most susceptible to
the wooing calls for coalition, some support seems likely from
disaffected portions of the middle class. A Newsweek
poll in early 1982 revealed that by overwhelming three-to-one margins,
Americans want federal spending to be increased
in the following areas: aid to education/college loans, medical and
health care, aid to states and cities, and job training. The same poll
also showed that a fifty-two percent majority of Americans' express
fear that their own financial situations will decline because of
Reagan's supply-side economic policies.
          In the following few pages I offer several policy positions
primarily for consideration in a national agenda. This agenda and its
particular suggestions must be seen as complementary to strategies
aimed at other levels of power. At every level, coalition-building
faces substantial obstacles: entrenched interests and enmities of
class, race and sex.
          One limitation to my agenda is that it does not touch 

specifically
on roles which black Americans must play in enhancing their own
lives. Even as they direct attention to broad advocacies, blacks need
to plan actions which stress self-sufficiency and independence. Blacks
should organize to take control of local resources. In the rural South
the focus should be on securing control of county governments and
their spending authorities, as well as local institutions such as
rural electrical cooperatives. In urban areas, blacks should seek to
control neighborhood institutions by having some of the powers
exercised by the city, such as in the areas of education, housing,
employment and health, transferred to a neighborhood corporation. Also
promising are current economic campaigns, backed by the potential of
boycotts, which negotiate jobs, training and re-investment from
corporations doing business with blacks. As we have learned, exclusive
reliance on national remedy leaves blacks vulnerable to the
vicissitudes of shifting popular majorities in American politics.
          
            Increase Political Participation
          
          Since the passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, blacks have
dramatically demonstrated their voting strength. The number of black
elected officials in the U.S. has increased in that time from fewer
than five hundred to 5,038 by July of 1981. In addition, when there is
a high black voter turnout, coalitions of blacks and whites have
elected progressive candidates in the South even in constituencies
where blacks are a numerical minority.
          In August 1981, a huge black turnout provided the razor-thin margin
of victory (50.6 percent) for Democratic candidate Wayne Dowdy in
Mississippi's fourth congressional district, a seat held by
Republicans since 1972. In March 1982, a black turnout of seventy-five
percent--higher than the white turnout--re-elected New Orleans' black
mayor Ernest Morial. Referring to Virginia's November 1981
gubernatorial election, New York Times columnist Tom
Wicker wrote: "That an upsurge of black voting has so materially aided
the gubernatorial victory of Charles Robb in what has been the South's
most solidly conservative state does argue that the elements of the
old liberal coalition can be re-invigorated in the right
circumstances."
          However, many barriers impede the forging of populist voting
coalitions. For one thing, extralegal obstacles to full black
political participation still exist in the South. In 1974, the
U.S. Civil Rights Commission reported: "Acts of violence against
blacks involved in the political process still occur often enough in
Mississippi that the atmosphere of intimidation and fear has not
cleared." In the companion essay to this one, Alex Willingham has
outlined the continuing practices of Southwide resistance at the local
level through both direct and indirect intimidation. Although blacks
comprise popular majorities in over one hundred counties in the South,
they effectively control only ten, often because of ingenious
gerrymandering. In addition, a factor such as low educational
opportunity is generally associated with a high sense of political
powerlessness.
          Both the black and white poor have reacted to generations of
politicians' unkept promises by developing considerable
alienation. Nor does the election of black mayors in Southern cities,
such as Tuskegee, Alabama, and New Orleans--to cite two particularly
revealing instances--necessarily translate into an improved quality of
life. As Julian Bond notes, "these mayors and aldermen and
commissioners often remain accessories beside the fact of actual
governance of their towns counties and states." Perhaps reflective of
such cumulative reasons for disaffection, the percentage of eligible
Southern blacks who were registered to vote declined from 63.1 percent
in 1976 to 57.7 percent in 1980.
          Although they do not directly address deeper patterns of
disinterest, long habits of powerlessness and the corrupting influence
of private money in campaigns, structural changes in voting laws
coupled with intensive registration drives can increase voter
turnout. Citizens are required to register before they can cast a
vote. This aspect of the American electoral system is unusual, for in
most democratic countries the government assumes responsibility for
enrolling all citizens on the permanent nationwide electoral
register. Indeed in this country, registration is often more difficult
than voting, for as Steven Rosenstone and Raymond Wolfinger note, "it
may require a longer journey, at a less convenient hour, to complete a
more complicated procedure--and at a time when interest in the
campaign is far from its peak."
          The weightiest structural impediments to voter turnout are early
deadlines for registration and limited registration office
hours. Allowing citizens to register up until the election day itself
and adopting the practice of having the registration office open in
the evenings after normal working hours and on weekends would raise
voter turnout among working people considerably. An even more helpful
change would be to permit citizens to vote without registering in
advance. In 1976, the four states 

which utilized election-day
registration showed presidential turnouts of nearly seventy percent,
well above the national average of only fifty-four percent.
          Congress ought to pass legislation providing for nationwide
election-day registration. Bills to this effect were introduced five
times since 1971, culminating with President Carter's unsuccessful
1977 attempt. All of these bills foundered on opposition by
Republicans and Southern Democrats, who argue that liberalizing the
registration laws would increase proportionately the turnout of
low-income and less educated citizens, resulting in a windfall of
votes for the Democratic party.
          Also, Presidential and Congressional election days should be
declared national holidays. State and local elections should be moved
from Tuesdays to weekends. Based upon available empirical evidence,
these electoral reforms would result in a significantly enlarged
electorate, more representative of the entire American population. For
example, 85.9 percent of those registered cast ballots in the 1981
runoff French presidential election which was held on Sunday, an
enormous turnout by American standards. Voter turnouts of over seventy
percent are routine in those U.S. elections, such as the Democratic
party primaries in Louisiana, which are conducted on Saturdays.
          
            Combat the Assault on Public Education
          
          The United States has always considered public education to be the
primary means of achieving its commitment to equal opportunity. The
critical function of education was forcefully articulated in the Brown v. Board of Education decision:
          
            In these days, it is doubtful that any child may reasonably be
expected to succeed in life if he is denied the opportunity of an
education. Such an opportunity, where the state has undertaken to
provide it, is a right which must be made available to all on equal
terms.
          
          Perhaps the greatest social calamity being perpetuated by the
Reagan Administration on black and working class white youth is the
federal government's abandonment of its commitment to adequate, free
and equal public education. Simply put, school systems are going broke
due to drastic reductions in federal aid. Secretary of Education
Terrel H. Bell has openly declared that the federal government intends
to totally withdraw support of public education, stating that
"education should be to state governments what defense is to the
national government."
          The federal government's retrenchment from education is especially
painful in light of the encouraging progress made by black public
school children during the past decade. The gap between blacks and
whites in educational achievement test scores narrowed from an
eighteen percent differential in 1970 to only thirteen percent in
1980. Many experts credit the improvement to Title I of the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act, designed to support compensatory
education programs. Nevertheless, the Reagan Administration cut Title
I's funds in 1982 by six hundred million dollars; his 1983 budget
proposes an additional reduction of four hundred million dollars, or
forty-five percent.
          Equally devastating is the President's proposal to provide tuition
tax credits to private schools, a scheme which would cost $1.5 billion
by 1987. Senator Ernest Hollings's critique of the plan is on the
mark:
          
            The tuition tax cut proposal would turn our nation's educational
policy on its head, benefit the few at the expense of the many,
proliferate substandard segregationist academies, add a sea of red ink
to the federal deficit, violate the clear meaning of the First
Amendment of the Constitution, and destroy the genius and diversity of
our system of public education.
          
          The drastic reductions in federal financial aid for college
students proposed in the Reagan Administration's 1983 budget, which
include a forty percent cut in the Basic Equal Opportunity Grant,
imperil the future of U.S. higher education. The students who stand to
suffer the worst, of course, are low-income students, who are
disproportionately black. It is estimated that enrollment in the
traditionally black private colleges will be halved if the
administration's plans are fully implemented.
          Blacks and the poor must demand that education regain is rightful
place on the national policy agenda. A critical legal struggle should
be made to reverse the Supreme Court's five to four decision in 1973
(San Antanio School District v. Rodriguez) which
permits school districts to spend widely discrepant sums for public
education. Indeed, the inequitable system of financing public
education makes a mockery of the intent of the Brown decision: to
assure equal expenditures for educational purposes for all pupils
regardless of race.
          
            Implement Work Program
          
          In mid-1982, eighteen percent of adult blacks and fifty-three
percent of black teenagers are unemployed, more than double the
percentage for their white counterparts. According to the National
Urban League's total unemployment index, which includes the
discouraged unemployed who have stopped their job seeking, black
unemployment equals the highest national unemployment level during the
Great Depression of the 1930's, when one-quarter of all Americans were
out of work. To address this crisis, two government programs should be
implemented immediately: a public works program and employment
vouchers.
          During the Depression, the national government put three million
people to work building roads and public buildings that are still in
use. The present depressed condition requires a comparable
solution. Ideally, a public works program to provide jobs for the
unemployed would be structured to rebuild the decaying sections of
cities. Program costs could be offset by the savings of ten billion
dollars in federal services now spent for every percentage point of
unemployment. One component of the public works program should be a
public service work corps offering a more socially constructive
alternative to military service.
          Public works should be supplemented with a long-term system of
employment vouchers. As envisioned by Harvard economist Robert
B. Reich, unemployed (and low-skilled) workers would receive federal
vouchers that they could cash in for on-the-job training. The
companies that accept the vouchers would have half their training
costs paid by the government, for up to three years. Workers who
develop skills as machinists, computer pro-

grammers and operators would
obtain permanent jobs, while industries would secure workers with
needed skills. However, any system of providing industry with
government subsidized workers would have to be accompanied by
requirements that companies remain in present locations and maintain
present work forces, rather than write off their old plant and
equipment and move.
          
            Expose the "New Federalism"
          
          The program of "New Federalism" outlined by President Reagan in his
1982 State of the Union message is hoax. It is little more than an
ideological veneer to package an assault on social programs, as well
as a callous abandonment of the practice of the federal government,
since the New Deal, of providing grants-in-aid to equalize resources
among the states. These budget cuts hit the needy hardest; and the
needy are disproportionately black.
          Blacks and the poor are victimized by both the taxing and spending
policies associated with New Federalism. The Administration's
twenty-five percent cut in federal taxes for fiscal 1982 was
exclusively a reduction in corporate and personal income taxes, the
only progressive taxes in the entire governmental taxing
schedule. These shower-the-rich tax cuts are projected at $442 billion
over three years.
          As state and local governments now decide whether they will assume
some of the axed federal programs, they must also decide whether to
increase their taxes to offset the loss in federal revenue. With
property owners resisting increases in property taxes, any new local
taxes will likely be higher sales taxes. For example, in May 1982, New
Orleans' voters, with blacks providing the margin of victory, chose to
raise the city sales tax to a whopping eight percent in order to keep
the transit service in operation.
          Whether by the curtailment of services or by the burden of
replacing progressive federal taxes with regressive local ones, blacks
and the poor suffer. In mobilizing public support against New
Federalism, black leaders should expose the reality of this seemingly
benign concept. As Nick Kotz puts it, "The new federalism represents
an extension of the strategy of the budget cuts: shrink federal social
welfare and then place responsibility with the states, where it is
certain to shrink further."
          
            Unionize the Unorganized
          
          In the anti-union South where the majority of blacks live, union
members make significantly higher wages than their nonunion
counterparts. In New Orleans, for instance, black (union) bus drivers
have higher incomes than white (nonunion) police officers. One of the
most dramatic examples of the benefits of union representation is
found among clerical workers in Atlanta. In 1981, Southern Bell
Telephone's unionized clerical workers earned from $7.57 to $9.39 an
hour after forty-eight months on the job; their counterparts in
Atlanta's nonunionized firms brought home $4.18 to $6.67 per
hour--forty-five percent less.
          Significantly, black workers benefit from union representation even
more than whites. In 1974, the last year for which such information is
available, all groups of workers--black, white, male and
female--gained financially as union members. In the South, black men
profited the most, earning thirty to fifty percent more, while black
women earned seventeen to twenty-four percent more than nonunion
workers of the same race and sex; white men gained fifteen to nineteen
percent, with white women slightly higher at sixteen to twenty
percent.
          Labor unions presently protect many middle class workers. In
addition to higher wages, union members receive job security, a
grievance procedure, seniority rights, health insurance, and generally
improved respect and personal dignity. According to Leslie
W. Dunbar:
          
            The case for unions that could bring self-defense, and
self-reliance, to the poor and powerless is overwhelming. . . There is
simply no other expectable way in our economy for these bottom-rung
workers to become self-sustaining except through collective
bargaining.
          
          Especially in the South where business and government conspire to
oppose and obstruct organization, we need laws which encourage
unionization. In addition, we must support Southern black and white
workers' efforts to organize their own hospital, food service and
clerical unions. Here again, endemic racism looms as one of the basic
obstacles to organizing the un-organized. A recent study by Herbert
Hill, former director of the NAACP Legal Defense Education Fund,
concludes that the AFLCIO leadership has "refused to accept the
perspective of interracial unionism," a factor which has contributed
significantly to the nationwide decline in workforce unionization from
thirty-six percent in 1955 to only twenty-one percent today.
          
            Question Pentagon Spending
          
          While the Reagan Administration has drastically reduced the federal
government's commitment to social services, it has concomitantly
reversed a twenty-year trend of gradual decline in the military
proportion of the budget. For fiscal 1982, military spending was
increased by $28 billion, to $199 billion, the largest peacetime
one-year increase in absolute dollars in U.S. history. Reagan's
program for an accelerated military buildup calls for a total of $ 1.6
trillion over the next five years! Black leaders must question the
dire economic consequences of military spending of this magnitude.
          Even the political aims of military policy require a sound and
healthy domestic economy. A report released in 1982 by Employment
Research Associates of Lansing, Michigan, shows the contrary to
long-held and popular belief, military spending is not
good for the economy, for it 

inhibits economic growth and
actually generates unemployment. According to the study, defense
spending--because it produces no socially useful goods or services,
and because it is peculiarly capital intensive--leads to more loss of
employment and more inflation than any other category of government
spending. The net loss of jobs disproportionately affects black
Americans, because they are overwhelmingly involved in the production
of durable goods, services and state and local government--three of
the hardest-hit categories of the economy when military spending is
high. Specifically, the study finds that every one billion dollars
spent in the Pentagon budget results in fourteen thousand fewer jobs
than if the money had been spent in the private sector, and a net loss
of thirty-thousand jobs as compared with spending the money in the
state and local government sector. The report concludes:
          
            The deep problems of the American economy cannot be ameliorated
until the military budget is cut and the money either is left in the
hands of citizens through tax cuts or spent on economically productive
activities by the government--federal, state or local.
          
          A significant and growing constituency does not believe that the
rapidly escalating military budget buys extra security for the
U.S. Already the grass-roots movement for arms control and nuclear
disarmament has forced even the bellicose Reagan Administration to
consider negotiations on strategic weapons. The political climate in
now ripe for blacks and the poor to take the lead in integrating
anti-nuclear sentiment into a unified opposition to the buildup of
military weapons. In challenging the Pentagon's budget, we must deal
with specific items by always raising the question: Does spending for
this particular weapon advance a valid concept of national security,
or does it represent, like the B-1 bomber, waste and "overkill"?
          
            Extend Democracy
          
          Present supply-side economic policies have enabled the wealthy to
luxuriate in tax cuts or stash them in shelters, while corporations
have used their windfalls to bid against and buy up one
another. Instead, the national government should be encouraging
private investment in new and modernized production capacity and
placing public investment into the rebuilding of cities and the
development of skills. Long-term gains can accrue through government
investment in education and job training to both revitalize basic
industries and pursue high technologies.
          Finally, however, a fairer distribution of social wealth is
essential. The major problem is that of controlling the arrogance and
ruthlessness of trans-national corporations. Recent proposals for
economic democracy and for greater worker control include the
requiring of public shareholders in major corporations, encouraging
employee-owned businesses, using union pension funds to achieve labor
influence in corporate decisions and restricting corporate mergers.
          To date, the most comprehensive working class alternative program
to the current climate of accommodation and "givebacks" by labor
unions in which workers sacrifice wages and benefits for so-called job
protection, is the "Campaign for Corporate Concessions" spearheaded by
former Oil, Chemical and Atomic Workers union vice president Tony
Mazzocchi. The underlying assumption of the Mazzocchi plan is that
workers must assume responsibility for the management of the national
wealth themselves by having unions demand bargaining power over
corporate investment, plant location, supervisory staffing,
etc. Specifically, Mazzocchi's program calls for a three-year freeze
on the following: overseas corporate investment; unilateral investment
decisions by management; further reductions in workers" incomes;
increases in management compensation; the hiring of more supervisors;
and a freeze on unnecessary mergers and on speculations.
          As Mark Green, former head of Ralph Nader's Congress-watch, states,
the fundamental issue of the 1980's is "how to generate and distribute
wealth in a new era." The other face of the continued growth of
corporate wealth and power is the significant growth in poverty
rates. A minimum of fourteen percent, or thirty-two million people,
are now impoverished in the United States. More than sixty percent of
the poor are black or Hispanic and more than half are children. There
is no more compelling agenda for the politics of the coming years than
to reduce the upward trend in misery.
          
            Suggested Bibliography
          
          Ackerman, Frank. Reaganomics: Rhetoric
vs. Reality. Boston South End Press, 1982.
          Auletta, Ken. The Underclass. New York: Random
House, 1982.
          Ferguson, Thomas, and Rogers, Joel (eds.). Hidden Election:
Politics &Economics in the 1980 Presidential Election. New
York: Pantheon, 1981.
          Gill, Gerald R. Meanness Mania, The Changed
Mood. Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1980.
          Green, Mark J. Winning Back America: Alternatives to
Reaganomics. New York: Bantam, 1982.
          Hayden, Tom. The American Future: New Visions Beyond the
Reagan Administration. New York: Washington Square Press,
Inc., 1982.
          Lekachman, Robert. Greed Is Not Enough:
Reaganomics. New York: Pantheon, 1982.
          Piven, Frances Fox, and Cloward, Richard A. The New Class
War. New York: Pantheon, 1982.
          Preston, Michael B., et al. (eds.). The New Black Politics,
The Search for Political Power. New York: Longman, Inc.,
1982.
          Wolfe, Alan. America's Impasse. New York: Pantheon,
1982.
          
            Monte Piliawsky is an associate professor of political
science at Dillard University. He is author of Exit 13:
Oppression and Racism in Academia.
          
        
        
          Biting the Budget At Legal Services
          By Looney, GinnyGinny Looney
          Vol. 4, No. 4, 1982, pp. 19-22
          
          In the first budget that Ronald Reagan proposed as President, he
recommended the elimination of the Legal Services Corporation. Reagan
wanted legal aid for the poor provided through block grants and
voluntary efforts of private attorneys. Michael Horowitz, counsel for
policy analysis and law at the Office of Management and Budget, said
in an interview with the New York Times, "The bar has a fundamental
responsibility to undertake that which its own set of ethics
imposes. And we think it somewhat troublesome that a bar whose
members' total gross income now substantially exceeds $20 billion year
needs to lobby for a wholly federally funded program in order to
exercise its own admitted responsibility to represent the poor."
          While unsuccessful in abolishing Legal Services, the Reagan
Administration has struck devastating blows. Funding cutbacks,
proposed restrictions on program activities and appointment of some
members to the board of directors who are hostile to the program's
purpose have left the Corporation suffering.
          That Reagan was unable to end Legal Services was due to strong
support for the program in Congress. In rejecting the view of Senator
Orrin Hatch of Utah that Legal Services attorneys spend "millions of
dollars in what we call lawyer activism for liberal social programs
instead of working for the common needs of the poor," Congress voted
to appropriate $241 million to the Corporation in 1982. Defenders
argued that the program was needed to provide a basic right to those
unable to afford it and to prevent more violent resolution of
disagreements. "True constitutional conservatives support legal
services for the poor because they believe that where government is
based on laws rather than the edict of a few men, there must be access
for all to the applications of those laws to resolve conflicts," said
Representative Neal Smith of Iowa. Representative M. Caldwell Butler,
a key Republican supporter from Virginia, said, "I think the question
is if you believe in the rule of law, in reasonable access to the
legal system."
          The 1982 appropriation represented a twenty-five percent cut for
Legal Services from the previous year, while opponents had proposed
appropriations from zero to one hundred million dollars. For 1983, the
House Appropriations Committee has recommended that the Corporation's
budget remain the same.
          Local programs have responded variously to the cutbacks. Some have
closed offices; others have limited the types of cases they
handle. Staff have been laid off, positions left unfilled, eligibility
requirements changed and efforts increased to involve private
attorneys in the representation of poor people. In Georgia, two
offices were closed and the staff statewide was reduced by
seventy-five people, says John Cromartie, executive director of
Georgia Legal Services. Now two hundred and fifty persons are on the
payroll, which includes every office in the state except the Atlanta
Legal Aid Society.
          Since some state's programs had surpluses from previous years to
enable them to complete cases if funding ended, their financial
problems will become more acute next year. In Mississippi, Michael
Raff, director of that state's Legal Services Coalition, says "there
has been so much expansion of Legal Services with four new programs
just getting built up that the cutbacks haven't had as drastic effect
as they will. In 1983 I see more staff going and more selection in the
types of cases to be handled."
          Because of the reduction in funding and the stiffening of
eligibility requirements in other social programs, the limitations
forced upon legal aid have come at a time when the need is
greatest. As Laurence M. Lavin, director of a South Carolina program,
said in January, "When you have people who are going to have their
food stamps or their Aid to Families with Dependent Children reduced,
then the number eligible for our services is going to increase. At the
same time, our resources are being cut back." Cromartie cites the
elimination of people with mental health disabilities from Social
Security benefits as one example of increased need. "For this year and
next we have set public assistance benefits as a major priority. This
has been a confusing year for clients and there is a lot of fear," he
says. "We have generally viewed our role as helping clients find out
what their rights are."
          Not only federal budget cuts and program changes have increased the
demand for legal aid, but high unemployment has brought more clients
seeking help. These clients--what one attorney called the "new
poor"--present problems like unpaid hospital bills and house
foreclosures which are different because "the established poor never
had enough money to buy a house," says Imogene Walker, a staff
attorney in Georgia. "We also have more calls on how to get
disability, not because the person can't work, but because they can't
get the kind of work they need."
          Except for divorce, Walker's office is still handling the same
types of cases it did a year ago: health care, housing, social
security, consumer complaints, public assistance benefits,
unemployment compensation and civil rights cases. "We have tried to
figure out what kinds of cases clients can't handle for themselves,"
she says.
          But Walker points out that many besides the poor look to Legal
Services for help. "The program has been so simplified in people's
minds to mean free legal advice,"' she says. In talking with potential
clients on the telephone, she quickly finds out whether they are
financially eligible for the program--income for a family of four must
be below the federal poverty level of $9,300 a year. When the caller's
income is too high, she does not hang up, but tries to respond to
their problem.

          
            Congressional Restrictions
          
          Budget cuts have presented the most immediate problem for Legal
Services programs. Next year, however, the Corporation may have to
cope with further prohibitions placed on representing the
poor. Although bipartisan support in Congress has prevented the
complete dismantling of the program, even the strongest defenders
concede that many of the restrictions proposed in House Resolution
3480 must be passed for funding to continue. While a bill
reauthorizing the Legal Services Corporation is not likely to pass
this session because Senate backers Lowell Weicker of Connecticut and
Thomas Eagleton of Missouri are busy with reelection campaigns, the
limitations proposed are expected to become effective in the next
year, probably by being attached to a resolution for continuing
funding.
          The most damaging provisions of HR 3480 curtail lobbying, class
action lawsuits against government, and representation of known
illegal aliens, such as Haitians and Cubans. Legal Services attorneys
are already prohibited from handling criminal or fee-producing cases
and from seeking desegregation or "nontherapeutic" abortions on behalf
of clients.
          "At the moment that state legislatures are enacting new regulations
to enforce block grants and decide how to appropriate the money under
them, that is the moment Legal Services is no longer being able to
represent clients before the state legislatures," Bernard Veney,
executive director of the National Clients Council, said at the July
convention of the National Bar Association in Atlanta. The proposed
restriction on lobbying allows Legal Services staff to give
information only when specifically requested by a lawmaker. "Anyone
familiar with the legislative process knows that just doesn't happen,"
says Jim Martin, former legislative advocate for Georgia Legal
Services. "Legislators want and expect to hear from the affected
parties and if they don't, they asume there is no problem with the
bill."
          In anticipation of the policy prohibiting lobbying, Legal Services
in Georgia stopped its legislative program in January. As a result,
says Martin, legislative representation of the poor has
suffered. During the regular session of the Georgia General Assembly,
for example, a bill passed which reduced in half, to seven days, the
time a landlord must wait between serving an eviction notice and
putting a tenant's belongings on the street. "After the bill was
introduced," Martin explains, "there were not sufficient legislative
requests for information that would have allowed us to explain all the
reasons the bill was bad. What we would have done in the past is
contact the author and committee members and members of the House and
explained the consequences of the bill. All we could do this time is
respond to the author of the bill and members at the committee
meeting."
          Equally onerous is the proposed provision in HR 3480 which
prohibits class action lawsuits against government. agencies. Class
action suits, less than one percent of the cases filed by Legal
Services, are important because they allow relief at once to large
numbers of people rather than forcing attorneys to return to court
again and again to enforce the same right for each individual. Class
action suits in California blocking the importation of Mexican workers
and $210 million cuts in Medicaid led then Governor Reagan in 1970 to
attempt to block federal funding for legal representation of the
poor. Similarly, class action suits against the state of Georgia in
the mid-seventies caused the General Assembly to end funding for Legal
Services. The program had just won a case establishing that a
self-employed painter who broke both legs while working and a diabetic
woman who was not able to work were both entitled to benefits under
the Vocational Rehabilitation Act. Georgia Legal Services had also
sued the state to end co-payments required of Medicaid recipients.
          In an interview with the New York Times, a former
president of the Corporation explained the necessity of suing the
government. "Legal Services lawyers don't sue to increase benefits,"
said Thomas Ehrlich. "They bring suit to insure that poor people get
what they are entitled to under the law. When a legal aid lawyer is
successful in such cases, it means that a public official has not been
doing his or her job the way he or she should."
          
            The Reagan Board
          
          When the Congressional restrictions are passed, they will be
enforced by a Reagan-appointed board of directors. Because they were
appointed while Congress was in recess--a move questioned as illegal
by 133 House members in a letter to the President--the nominees do not
have to be confirmed for a year. However, the White House agreed to
submit their names to the Senate. Eight have been approved by
committee and await only a vote of 

the full Senate. The ninth, George
Paras, a former California judge, has not been considered because of
an Administration request. Once, in a letter to the former director of
the California Rural Legal Assistance Program, Paras wrote, "You must
ever champion the 'oppressed,' meaning those who so designate
themselves, such as criminals, handicapped, welfare recipients,
demonstrators, minorities and miscellaneous other have- lots
. . . Your problem is that you feel it is your obligation to be a
professional Mexican rather than a lawyer." Only one Carter appointee
remains on the board, a client representitive.
          As in many of Reagan's nominations in other departments of
government, he has named people to the Legal Services board who in the
past have opposed the program. William Olson, who received an
eight-to-seven committee confirmation vote, was head of the Reagan
transition team on Legal Services which reportedly advocated the
abolition of the Corporation. Such appointments violate the
legislative mandate that nominees should be "fully committed to the
role of legal assistance attorneys and support the underlying
principle of this legislation that it is in the national interest that
the poor have full access under law to comprehensive and effective
legal services."
          Not only the philosophy of a few new board members but the timing
of their appointments has caused ill will. Seven were appointed on the
last day of 1981, in time for a board meeting and a vote to stop 1982
grants until they could be reviewed. Their vote came too late,
however, since the funds to local programs had been awarded and the
contracts already mailed.
          In deciding how to implement Congressional restric-

tions. the Reagan
board w ill no doubt take a more narrow view of what Legal Services
programs can do. It may also seek to provide legal aid to the poor in
ways other than the present predominant use of staff attorneys. During
the 1981 funding battle, Reagan aide Edward Meese suggested that law
school clinical programs should be used to counsel the poor while
public funds served as seed money to encourage innovative programs.
          In fact, a shift to more involvement of private attorneys in
representing the poor has already begun. Last year the board mandated
that ten percent of each program's funds were to be used to provide
opportunities for private attorneys to assist the poor through such
means as organized pro bono programs, contracts with specific
attorneys, partial compensation through a judicare system or lawyer
referral services. The amount of the set-aside could be raised.
          Local programs already work with private attorneys in some
communities. In the Douglasville. Georgia. regional office just west
of Atlanta. persons seeking help who are not eligible for services are
referred to three attorneys in private practice. A questionnaire was
mailed last year to lawyers in the ten counties served by the office
to determine who would take referrals and what kinds. "Now that they
are getting inundated with calls from poor people. some have asked to
be taken off our list." Walker says. "Basically we're talking about
pro bono work because our clients are so poor that they can only pay
$10 or $16 a month. If they can pay the filing fee and court
cost. then the lawyer is doing the work for free."
          "This is a period of slow change for Legal Services." says state
director Cromartie of Georgia. "It is obvious that the new board is
not of the same philosophic bent as the old but it also is not yet
clear that the extreme right wing hold the balance. Several new
members are moderates: there's a school of thought that they are
fair-minded people. If so. we won't see shocking changes."
Mississippi's Raff agrees: "There are members who are sincere and
sensitive and looking to be educated about Legal Services."
          The shifting political climate is having a restraining effect on
Legal Services as the program accommodates itself to limited resources
and anticipated guidelines. Legal Services' staff speak cautiously
about changes which have taken place in the past twenty months and are
reluctant to predict actions of the new national board--no need to
provide further ammunition for damaging the program. The deputy
director of the Atlanta office said she had to check with the public
affairs office in Washington before speaking for publication because
they were trying to "coordinate press relations." A report on voting
rights contracted by Georgia Legal Services was issued publicly
without any information identifying it with the organization. Legal
Services supporters are making compromises and concessions in order,
as Representative' Barney Frank of Massachusetts said last year, to
"keep this alive for a better day."
          Both Raff and Cromartie are confident that the Legal Services
Corporation will survive. "I think Congress has spoken: Legal Services
is here to stay," Raff says. Yet, as advocate Martin of Georgia points
out, Congress has been making major changes in federal programs
through the larger debate on the budget without allowing votes on
individual programs. He says Legal Services could get eliminated in
this squeeze, even though deleting its small appropriation would have
little effect on balancing the overall US budget. If no bill passes
this session of Congress, the fight to reauthorize Legal Services must
begin again next year. A Presidential veto is also possible.
          Rather than outright elimination, however, Raff is concerned about
the toll on staff and clients caused by the reduction in resources and
restrictions on activities. "What clients will be represented? What
cases won't be taken? Who stays on the staff and who goes? I'm more
worried about that than whether we will survive." But, he might as
easily have asked, at what point do the cutbacks and prohibitions on
representation ultimately disable the work of Legal Services?
          
            Ginny Looney is a writer and researcher living in
Atlanta. She is the author of Preparing Students for Work: An
Evaluation of Co-op Programs in Georgia, available from the
Southern Regional Council for four dollars plus handling and
postage.
          
        
        
          Laying By
          
            Hays, BrooksBrooks Hays: 1898-1981
          
          Vol. 4, No. 4, 1982, pp. 17-18
          
          My grandfather was a Republican. To some this may not sound like an
arresting statement, but to one born in 1898 in the impregnable
Democratic South, and destined to spend a lifetime in politics, the
fact was of profound significance.
          I made my first race for governor of Arkansas in 1928, when Civil
War memories were still emotion-charged factors in politics. I had not
realized what a handicap I was under until I arrived at Mammoth Spring
for a speaking engagement one hot August afternoon, and was greeted by
a worried chairman: "Brooks, our opposition is claiming that your
grandfather was a Republican! It's not true, is it?" I admitted it was
true, and in my speech I met the difficulty head-on: "My friends, I
hear there is a rumor going around that my grandfather was a
Republican and a carpetbagger. He was indeed a Republican. And it is
unfortunately a fact that he and Grandmother Hays did not get to
Arkansas till 1879. They came here seeking a better opportunity in
life; and I am sure that when they packed their few belongings to
journey halfway across the continent in response to the warm welcome
that Arkansas promised to those who would come here to settle and help
build the state, they never dreamed that fifty years later it would be
said that their grandson should not hold public office because his
grandfather did not reach the state till 1879!" Thereafter the Hays
family's Pennsylvania background was no issue.
          My mother's father, Dr. William Butler, a native of west Tennessee,
was so opposed to slavery and secession that he took the hard and
unpopular course of changing his party. And I am no prouder of my
great-great-grandfather, who apparently fought in Washington's army,
than I am of this simple country doctor and Baptist preacher who acted
in accordance with the dictates of his conscience. In 1873 Dr. Butler
moved into Arkansas with his wife, my grandmother, and settled in
Logan County. Some ten years later he unsuccessfully ran for the
Arkansas state senate.
          *  *  *
          During the period of my grandfather's moderate political activity
in the 1880's, when he ran for the state senate, there was not much
interest in politics. People were occupied with routine tasks and
political decisions did not appear important. There was no serious
challenge to the state Democratic party, partly because the opposition
had bungled its chance to produce an attractive alternative to
Democratic rule. Still, that Republican opposition did not deserve the
imprecations heaped upon it. The outstanding Reconstruction governor
Isaac Murphy had, as a representative from Madison County, opposed
secession, and was responsible for some splendid progressive measures,
some of which were beneficial to both the white and black
races. (Madison County produced another governor, Orval E. Faubus,
nearly a hundred years later.) Public schools received the first
serious attention of state political leaders and, if race feeling had
not obstructed progress, the Republicans might have laid the basis for
a long political tenure. But power brought a form of
intoxication. Their excesses in expenditures and the downright
corruption of some officials, coupled with failure to plan a
constructive participation by the emancipated Negroes in political
life, led to disfavor and a long political drought.
          There is no sadder chapter in the history of Southern politics than
the cruel and highly effective measures adopted by the white majority
around the turn of the century to close the door to the Negro's
political participation. The principal mechanisms adopted for this
purpose were the poll tax, a complicated ballot, and the white
primary. The Republican and Populist opposition to these measures was
feeble or altogether lacking, so the Democrats were gleeful. They were
not to atone for this mistreatment of the black community for another
half century. True, there were sensitive white leaders who knew that
what was happening was wrong, but there were not enough of them to
provide resistance.
          State government under the Democrats, like the federal government
under the Republicans, was a sort of noblesse oblige--mild aids to
farm production, but never bearing the impress of radical change in
marketing, credit, or land tenure policies that were essential to any
substantial improvement of conditions.
          And organized religion. as I have intimated, was too absorbed in
unrelated and irrelevant questions to help the distraught lower
classes--small farmer and town laborer. The plight of the black people
did not appear to trouble the white Christian conscience very
much. "The panic" (mid-nineties word for depression) therefore caused
much suffering. Radical Populists offered nostrums of a questionable
kind. The historic social ethics of the churches could have helped,
but, again, their intellectual energies were being dissipated in
meaningless dissertations. A debate between the favorite orators of
the Baptist and Methodist churches and those of the new and burgeoning
Disciples of Christ would always draw a crowd. The subjects most often
adopted were: "Is baptism essential to salvation?"; "Is foot-washing a
biblically required ordinance of the Church?"; "Is security of the
saints taught in the New Testament?"; "Can a saved person fall from
grace?" The "doctrine of hell" was a common subject of discussions,
and grave decisions were known to rest on individual beliefs on the
subjects. The following somewhat familiar story originated in this
period. An 

engaged daughter said, "But, Mother, I can't marry George;
he doesn't believe there's a hell."
          "Well," said Mama, "You go ahead and marry him, and between the two
of us, we'll show him that there is."
          *  *  *
          The word welfare was not in the political
vocabulary of the 1880's. Family responsibility was, however, a basic
virtue among the frontiersmen, and neighborliness was often expressed
in volunteer nursing for the sick or needy and in providing food for
them. Quilting and barn raisings were not only a part of the
community's sense of concern for its members but provided outlets for
the festive spirit that craved a temporary escape from individual
labors in favor of group assemblying.
          Only the poor families had to have outside help when serious
misfortunes struck. There were simple patterns of social security that
the bread winners were expected to follow. The maiden aunts, for
example, never secure in the modern sense. rarely lacked a place to
live. My Grandfather Butler doubtless gave his sister Tabitha every
evidence that she was as much a part of the family circle as when he
and she were growing up together in Tennessee. And Aunt Bitha carried
her part of the routine work of the household.
          The new opportunities for women in our century are certainly a vast
improvement over this type of security, but the affection which the
Aunt Bithas received in the earlier period was a compensating
factor. In turn she exuded a love and devotion for the family that
adopted her.
          There is an obscure passage in Albert Beveridge's volume on Abraham
Lincoln's youth that celebrates this aspect of pioneer life. Tom
Lincoln was able to provide only a crude shelter for his family in the
Indiana wilderness, and when Nancy Hanks was stricken, Abe and his
sister nursed her with only the-help that their nearest neighbor, a
kind-hearted woman, could give them. She trudged through the snow two
miles daily on her missions of mercy. It was frontier life at its
best.
          Today, such sacrifices are not required, but it seems to me that
society has yet to extol properly the compassion that is reflected in
the elaborate and professional aids which every level of government
provides for ailing people. The Indiana wilderness has vanished, but
doubtless there are people in trouble today in the same spot where,
Abe Lincoln tried to make his mother comfortable in he' last
illness. Today the visiting nurses and welfare workers have become
symbols of a corporate compassion, just as the Lincoln neighbor
symbolized an individual kindness upon which the Nineteenth Century
society had to depend.
          Sorrow had often struck the Ellsworth community, the well-to-do and
the poor alike. Eight of my mother's sisters and brothers died in
infancy or early childhood, most of them victims of
epidemics. Diphtheria was the chief enemy. Mother's story of the
passing of her younger brother and of her twin sisters when they were
just six years old strongly affected my feelings about the desperate
health needs of rural Arkansas. It also gave me an insight into the
power of religious comfort in the presence of death. The Bible may be,
for some, a mere talisman, but its truths became a buttress for me. I
was old enough to appreciate the comforting elements in these truths
long before I discovered that the Bible is also a prod to give comfort
as well as receive it. The Old Testament was as comforting as the
New. The poetry and philosophic depths of both buoyed me in the sorrow
which my mother's story of her family's suffering induced.
          *  *  *
          Thus the forming of a matrix of my political, social, and religious
philosophy began in western Arkansas nearly a century ago. An observer
of the Washington political scene during my service there viewed with
mild criticism some provincial aspects of my philosophy, but he
credited "Mr. Hays" with advancing far beyond the culture of the rural
South "which nurtured him." This was in the context of early civil
rights struggles, and my part in those struggles did not obscure the
deep sentiments that I feel for the people and the places which are
identified with my life and career. It was obvious that my opinions on
the Little Rock school desegregation crisis of 1957-1958 were "an
advance" over the conventional views of my constituents, but just as
obvious, I hope, is my appreciation of the genuinely admirable things
about the ways of life of Arkansas village and farm people.
          However, I must concede that the rural South has lagged in erecting
adequate educational standards, that the rural South has held on to a
dubious theology, and that the rural South has a paucity of practices
calculated to improve the total society; in short, that there is in
certain areas a shocking mediocrity. My hope for the South is based
not on blindness to these facts, but on an underlying faith in the
South's actual and potential goodness--in its aspirations, as
distinguished from its achievements, and in the toughness of mind as
well as of body of the sons of the soil and their women folks.
          I trust that my story reflects an authentic hope for triumph by
them over adversity; also that their respect for moral and legal
authority, entertained in the face of many affronts by political
establishments to their human dignity and pride, will be
maintained.
          
            "Laying By" is an occasional feature of
Southern Changes which commemorates special lives and
labors. Laying by signals no shuffling off of memory nor casting off
of purpose. In the South it means that time, late in summer, when folk
pause from their work, consider what has gone before, and anticipate a
harvest.
            This article is adapted from Mr. Hays's autobiography
Politics Is My Parish, published in 1981 by the
Louisiana State University Press, and reprinted here with
permission.
          
        
        
          Laments on the Demise of Tom Turnipseed
          By Gaillard, FryeFrye Gaillard
          Vol. 4, No. 4, 1982, p. 31
          
          I hated to see it a few weeks ago when ole Tom Turnipseed went up
in flames. Turnipseed, of course, was a candidate for lieutenant
governor of South Carolina, who lost a primary runoff to Mike
Daniel.
          Daniel may make a terrific lieutenant governor. Turnipseed might
have been a disaster. But it seems to me that his demise--and there
are those who predict this was his last campaign--is part of the
depressing homogenization of modern politics.
          In both North and South Carolina, we've always had our
mavericks. Today, they're still around in the form of Thurmond, Helms
and East, but the color and the flair are not what they could be.
          Helms and East are mostly just peculiar--stodgy ideologues with
kamikaze instincts.
          Thurmond may still be wrestling with Reconstruction--a quaint
anachronism in 1982--but he's gotten so pragmatic about it that he
even voted to extend the Voting Rights Act.
          Turnipseed is different. As a South Carolina state senator in the
late 1970's, he was dapper and charming, outrageous and
impolite--affronting his legislative colleagues by, among other
things, appearing with a couple of disc jockey buddies on the floor of
the Senate and singing country songs about rising gas prices.
          He was a brilliant rock-thrower with some self-destructive
tendencies--declaring a war he couldn't win on special interest
groups, particularly utilities, and on a semi-corrupt system of
legislative seniority.
          But it seems to me that Turnipseed's importance goes beyond the
dash and color of his quixotic crusades. He made, I think, an
ideological pilgrimage that's not uncommon in the South.
          As it happened, he grew up on the same street that I did. He was
older, and I didn't know him until later. But when you're from Mobile,
Ala., raised in privilege in the dappled shade of live oaks, amid
people who regret the outcome of the Civil War, you're apt to see the
world in strange colorations.
          You'll have a strong sense of privilege, of your own special place
near the center of things. And unless you're extremely lucky, blessed
with a quirky and aberrational understanding of fairness, you'll also
be a racist.
          It's easy and natural for sons of the Old South, and neither
Turnipseed nor I escaped the maladies of our birthright. But chances
are also strong that one day it will hit you, often with a shattering
suddenness, that you're hideously wrong about the things that you
believe.
          A way of life that seemed easy and genteel and supremely civilized
becomes abruptly horrifying, and you develop a tendency toward reverse
social climbing--toward a compensatory identification with the
underdogs around you.
          I became a newspaper reporter with a righteous impulse to write
about injustice. Turnipseed became a populist politician, a champion
of have-nots, whose stridency, in the end, was his undoing.
          He was once the campaign manager for Alabama's segregationist
governor George Wallace. But the truth finally hit him in South
Carolina and he tried to build a coalition of blacks and whites--of
ordinary people victimized by the institutions around them.
          He campaigned against the death penalty, rising utility prices and
legislative apportionment plans that effectively excluded blacks. None
of those causes are easy ones to win, and Turnipseed's ratio of
success was not impressive.
          He was angry and shrill, and even some of the people who agreed
with him finally wished he'd go away. He tried to change his style for
his last campaign, but it was apparently too late.
          So he lost.
          That's a shame, however, because politics can do with a little more
passion. And particularly so when that sense of being right comes, as
Turnipseed's did, from a deeply felt knowledge of what it means to be
wrong.
          
            Frye Gaillard is an editorial page writer for the
Charlotte Observer, where this article originally
appeared.
          
        
        
          More Than Steel Mills Are Silent
          By Dowe, KellyKelly Dowe
          Vol. 4, No. 4, 1982, pp. 3-5
          
          Several times, thinking about it all, I've been taken back to the
First Presbyterian Church in Montgomery.
          It is a particular Sunday in the early 1960's that I remember. I
must have been eleven. I was waiting in our pew in the middle section
of the cavernous sanctuary for services to begin, my family nested
around me. My mother and my brother sat on one side, and two
great-aunts, whose husbands, my uncles, were an elder and a deacon in
the church, sat on the other. The air was cool and still, and in the
enormous room with its high ceilings and dim light, where
stained-glass and brass appointments forever needed polishing, I felt
an abiding sense of security. That was when the commotion began.
          Not much happened that I could see, but it centered on the main
entrance behind us and sparked a crackling tension among the
worshippers. Several heads swivelled toward the rear of the church,
only to turn quickly around again. Several of the men strode with
quiet purposefulness toward the rear doors. I could see nothing, but
in a few minutes I knew the excitement had ended. The men returned to
their seats. The organ prelude began on schedule. It was only after
church, probably when we were driving home, that I learned what had
happened: a small group of black people had tried to attend our Sunday
service. They were turned away at the door. Someone, perhaps one of my
uncles, had simply told them they were not welcome. They left without
incident. Everyone seemed to think the situation had been handled
masterfully. The church had behaved correctly and in the best possible
taste.
          That was twenty years ago. The incident re-emerged in my mind with
startling clarity this spring, when I learned that Birmingham's
Downtown Rotary Club, one of the most exclusive organizations in the
city, had quietly voted to continue its policy of excluding black
members. Specifically, when Rotarian Angus McEachran, editor of the
Birmingham Post-Herald. asked the membership to remove
the word "white" from the Constitution's membership requirements--"Any
white adult male person of good moral character"--he was voted down,
one hundred twenty to ninety. It was the culmination of a three-year
campaign McEachran had waged within the club to bring about the
change. He resigned shortly afterward.
          The club's reaffirmation of its barrier against blacks, erected
when the club was founded in 1913, made national headlines and
prompted an outcry from Rotary International and Rotary clubs around
the globe. On June 3, nearly a month after the original May 12 vote,
the membership reversed itself and voted overwhelmingly to ask its
board to reconsider the ban on black members. But when the Rotary
board of directors met, it voted unanim-

ously not to delete the word
"white," but to drop the club's sixty-nine-year-old bylaws and to
adopt the consitution of Rotary International which makes no mention
of race.
          Despite having their feet held to the fire, the Rotarians, like we
Presbyterians years ago, had remained firmly in control and behaved
correctly and in good taste. They could pretend the club had made no
error, not even in basic practicality, and no one had to apologize or
recant. They obfuscated the real issue--their decision, as an
institution, to practice deliberate racial discrimination in choosing
members. Many Rotarians later said they had not voted against having
black members, but against overruling the board of directors. That,
they said, was not how Rotary works.
          The more I thought about the Rotary vote, the angrier I became. I
was angry at the corporate board chairmen, the bank presidents, and
the lawyers who recorded their bigotry. I was angry at all forms of
institutional racism--the all-white country clubs with their columns
and black footmen, the segregated churches, debutante societies and
service guilds. I was especially angry at those Rotarians who knew
better but were too complacent to speak out. Six are ministers or
rabbis. One is president of a Baptist university. Did they feel no
tearing sense of injustice? McEachran had already taken the lead. All
they had to do was add their voices to his.
          I was angry at the Rotarians for obliging all those people who
think Birmingham is the national headquarters for racism. Many
Rotarians do not even live in Birmingham, but in affluent, outlying
communities. The run-of-the-mill Birmingham resident, who might live
in an integrated neighborhood or send his kids to an integrated
school, didn't seem to deserve this new black eye. In the Birmingham
school system, which is seventy-five percent black, test scores are at
and above national averages and integrated PTA's are strong. Through a
network of ninety-three neighborhood organizations, blacks and whites
have come to city government jointly with successful appeals for
improved drainage, better lighting, and more recreational
opportunities. Under Richard Arrington, the city's first black mayor,
the crime rate has dropped, the budget remains balanced, and the city
has worked with developers and merchants to revitalize the downtown
business district. Obviously the city has a long way to go in race
relations, but it has come a long way since 1963.
          After a while my anger gave way to cooler questions. Why had the
Rotarians put their racist posture on paper, when they could just as
easily keep blacks out by the exclusive nature of the club? "Extremely
difficult" was one Rotarian's description to me of the process of
getting any new member into the club. "To get somebody in the
Birmingham Rotary Club would take about six months.
          You must have so many people to nominate you and so many people to
second it. Some of these people pride being in the Downtown Rotary
Club more than they pride being in a country club," he said. And the
chances of a black person's admission by the current membership?
"Practically impossible."
          Why would the likes of the head of the local Merrill Lynch office,
I wondered, the president of the First Alabama Bank of Birmingham, and
the president of the Alabama Power Company find it so difficult to
have lunch alongside a black federal judge or a black insurance
company executive? And in bad economic times, why would Rotarians
jeopardize the city's already shaky image with a written ban on black
members? Unemployment now stands at thirteen percent. Did the members
believe news of their vote would not get out? Displaying awesome faith
in Rotarian discretion, eight former Rotary presidents mailed a joint
letter to each club member a few days before the original vote, urging
defeat of the proposed change. "As everyone knows, it is a very
controversial and complicated subject . . . The fact that it is even
coming before the entire membership is not only damaging to our club,
but also our community," they advised.
          The scuttling about before the vote would have been funny, in
retrospect, had the outcome not been so dismaying. One particularly
prominent parson cornered McEachran at a cocktail party to wish him
luck. "I wrote to the board for you. And I'm going to vote with you,"
he said. McEachran replied, "I'm counting on you to do more than
that." The minister backpedaled. "Angus," he said, "when you've been
here as long as I have, you'll learn that in Birmingham you have to
pick your fights."
          Even the image of Angus McEachran taking on Birmingham's business
upper crust is funny. McEachran, who constantly battles extra pounds,
who routinely hangs up the telephone when kept on "hold" more than
thirty seconds, whose reporters make fun of his stoop-shouldered gait
and grunting speech, hardly seems like a wedge of social
change. Deficient in the skills of small talk, impatient with
diplomacy, he is apt to end prolonged debate by tossing a verbose
dissident from his office. But in the Downtown Rotary Club, where
acceptance of the business elite deterred the voice of objection for
sixty-nine years, McEachran alone was willing to be consistently
recognized as breaking rank.
          You could name a dozen reasons why individual Rotarians might have
wanted to retain their color ban. Many are elderly and longtime
residents of the city where change has never come easy. The average
age of the eight former presidents who mailed the letter, for example,
was seventy-four. Many, with their executive positions, their homes in
all-white suburbs like Vestavia and Mountain Brook, and their
memberships in all-white country clubs and churches, probably expected
to continue their racial isolation. Some, seeing the Downtown Rotary
Club not as a service organization, but as an exclusive social club,
perhaps saw no more reason to admit blacks to it than they would to
their country club.
          The phenomenon is not that a few, wealthy, conservative men are
able to isolate themselves from the realities of a changing world and
insist on systematic exclusion of 

non-whites. Southern history is full
of affluent people who, while they didn't ride in the night with
torches and whips, urged on those who did with their voices of
approval. James Armstrong, a black Birmingham barber who saw his
entire family arrested in the 1960's after attempts at integration,
summed it up best. "The Klansman doesn't always wear a hood. Sometimes
he wears a tie," he said. "It took me a long time to realize that."
          The depressing thing is that racists are allowed to prevail in
1982. That's what makes me most uncomfortable of all. Because the
people who allow it are not confined to Birmingham's Downtown Rotary
Club. They are all of us whites who fail to bring black families to
our churches, who don't ask black couples to consider buying the house
next door, who don't include blacks regularly in our socializing, for
fear of offending our friends who are not so right-thinking as we.
          "The ultimate tragedy of Birmingham was not the brutality of the
bad people but the silence of the good people." Martin Luther King
Jr. said it in his 1963 book, Why We Can't Wait. It
still hits too close for comfort.
          
            Kelly Dowe is a freelance writer living in Birmingham,
Alabama.
          
        
      
    
  