
          Bad Blood: The Tuskegee Syphilis Experiment. By James
H. Jones. New York: The Free Press, 1981. $14.95.
          By Beatty, BessBess Beatty
          Vol. 4, No. 6, 1982, pp. 17-19
          
          In 1972 the Associated Press broke the story of the Tuskegee
experiment, a forty-year study of the effect of syphilis on six
hundred Macon County, Alabama, black men. Nine years later James Jones
published Bad Blood, a history of what he describes as
"The scandalous story of the Tuskegee experiment--when government
doctors played God and science went mad." Jones' book is a thoroughly
researched and dispassionate, although indicting, account of this
experiment.
          The story has a background imbeded in centuries of "racial
medicine." By the twentieth century syphilis had come to be considered
by many physicians as "the quintessential black disease," and, despite
the insights of modern medicine, some continued to believe that it
affected blacks differently than whites. Ironically the Tuskegee study
grew out of changing attitudes, at least among public health
officials, toward black health generally and syphilis particularly. By
the 1920s contempt and neglect were beginning to give way to
realization that scientific and medical insights should be applied
equally to all races.
          In 1929 the Julius Rosenwald Fund, renowned for its efforts on
behalf of black education, began funding Public Health Service
programs for blacks. The pilot program, planned to demonstrate control
of veneral 

disease in five Southern rural counties, included Macon
County, Alabama, which was eighty-two percent black and which had,
despite the presence of famed Tuskegee Institute, the highest syphilis
rate uncovered by the study. Although of short duration, the Rosenwald
program eventually inspired a nationwide campaign to test and treat
syphilis--an effort that excluded six hundred Macon County men who
were involved in the original study.
          The Tuskegee experiment, in which they were now involved, grew out
of frustration at the termination of Rosenwald funding. Director
Taliaferro Clark, who "would have preferred to . . . treat rather than
to study syphilitic blacks," settled for a less expensive project, The
Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male, which was to
become "the longest nontherapeutic experiment on human beings in
medical history." Dr. Clark planned to study empirically the long held
notion that syphilis affected blacks differently than whites by
comparing his findings to a study of untreated syphilis in white males
in Oslo, Norway. Clark expressed no ethical qualms as he prepared for
the "unparalleled opportunity," but neither did he envision that the
men would go untreated longer than the six months he expected the
experiment to last. To assure local black support, the Tuskegee
Institute was made partner of the Public Health Service and its name
was applied to the study. Dr. Raymond Vonderlehr was selected to be in
charge of field work and Eunice Rivers, a black nurse, was appointed
to assist him. Initially some minimal treatment was included which
would eventually evoke the scientific criticism that the experiment
was invalid as a study of untreated syphilis.
          But it was the ethical dimension that would eventually condemn the
Tuskegee study as the most infamous episode in the history of
government medicine in the United States. The program was couched in
deceit from the beginning. Patients were told that they had "bad
blood," not that they suffered from a particular disease that was
contagious and transmitted sexually. Those brought in for painful and
dangerous lumbar punctures which were strictly diagnostic were told
that they were receiving "special treatment."
          When Dr. Vonderlehr, who was making a career out of the Tuskegee
work, was named to replace Clark, the decision was made to continue
the study indefinitely. His plan entailed low-cost examination of each
man, facilitated by Nurse River's personal contact, until each could
be "brought to autopsy." Their efforts to keep the men involved in the
study were facilitated by continued deceit, non-effective medication
such as asprin, burial stipends, and occasional certificates and cash
awards. The support- of the Tuskegee Institute and area physicians,
both eager to participate in a national scientific study, assured the
experiment's survival. Although poor blacks in Macon County could
rarely afford to see a doctor, the cooperation of area physicians was
still profoundly significant because men who were "potential patients"
were made "perpetual subjects . . . placed beneath a microscope for
scientific observation." How callous the Public Health Service became
toward these subjects is indicated by a letter from Dr. John Heller,
field director of the study, complaining of the availability of Civil
Works Administration jobs for blacks because it "disrupted the
Ethiopian population as regards staying in one place very long."
Heller later recalled, "No one questioned whether the experiment was
ethical; no one even came close to doing so."
          Initially, denial of treatment was rationalized (by those who
bothered to rationalize at all) on the grounds that the treatment
available for syphilis could be as hazardous as the disease. This
justification was rendered more difficult in the 1940s when the
discovery of penicilin offered a safe, effective syphilis treatment,
but by then the study had acquired a bureacratic momentum, a
self-perpetuation, that made it immune from challenge. Leadership
continued to come from within, and no one involved considered ending
the work.
          It was not until 1966 that Peter Buxton, a venereal disease
interviewer in San Francisco, learned about the study and
protested. Officials, still convinced of the experiment's scientific
merit and moral intergrity, rejected Buxton's criticism and vowed to
continue. Finally in 1972 they were overruled when the Associated
Press, proded by Buxton, told the story. A nine-member and it was
disbanded. Out of court settlement awarded the surviving syphilitics
$37,500, with lesser amounts to their heirs and to those in the
control group.
          Beyond the specific appalling story it tells, Jones' book is
important for offering insight into power relationships in American
society. Despite the repeated denials of the officials involved, the
experiment serves as an example of the power of racism and elitism and
as an indictment of the limits to the paternalism and liberalism which
have allegedly served to temper these prejudices. Jones describes the
health officials who originated the study as paternalistic compared to
"the real black-baiters of the day." They were of the progressive or
liberal wing in American society which counseled government sponsored
improvement of the environment for blacks and the poor. But the book
reveals the stark limits to a liberalism and paternalism which views
the dispossessed as more subject than human.
          Bad Blood also demonstrates the dangerous potential

of a science without ethics. The Tuskegee experiment had almost
complete support from scientists within the Public Health Service, and
was not challenged from within even after the Nuremberg trials
sensitized the world to the potential of science gone mad. When the
study was uncovered in 1972, the scientific community was most vocal
in its defense.
          This example of "moral astigmatism" within the medical and science
professions make a strong case for closer government supervision of
medical activity, but the question remains--who will supervise the
government? Most appalling to many people was the revelation that a
federal agency had conducted the experiment. It was, the Providence
Sunday Journal charged, "flagrant immorality
. . . under the auspices of the United States Government."
          Jones also questions why none of the hundreds of individuals
involved protested. Sidney Milgram, in his study Obedience to
Authority, claims that "Pure moral autonomy in the form of
lone resistance to an apparently benign authority is very rare." His
conclusion is upheld by the example of scores of people who could have
protested medical experimentation but did not. Jones makes the
frightening comparison of the Public Health bureaucracy to the
military hierarchy of Nazi Germany which "reduced the sense of
personal responsibility and ethical concern." He is particularly
interested in why so many blacks cooperated with the Tuskegee work and
conjectures that black professionals were responding to "the dilemma
of black middle-class professionals who wanted to succeed in a society
dominated by whites." This was clearly true of Nurse Rivers, the most
poignant figure in the book and the one official involved who had
genuine concern for the welfare of the men involved. She was bound by
forces of race and class as well as a professional hierarchy that
demanded obedience to doctors and sex roles that "reinforced her
ethical passivity."
          Jones' book can be criticized for leaving the men involved as
lifeless as they were considered by the experimenters. Nevertheless,
he has told their story well: "a forty-year saga of lies and deceit,
of unlettered men who had trusted and been betrayed by educated men."
As the major indictment of "the scandalous story of the Tuskegee
experiment," this important book deserves to be widely read.
          
            Bess Beatty is an assistant professor of history at
Shorter College, Rome, Georgia.
          
        