
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 5, Number 2,
	       1983
        
          Ethics and Equations
          By Paddock, PollyPolly Paddock
          Vol. 5, No. 2, 1983, p. 7
          
          I was never much of a math or science student. During high school
and college, I went to great lengths to avoid taking any courses in
those fields beyond what was absolutely required. Why dissect a fetal
pig or struggle with calculus, I figured, when you could be reading
Greek tragedy or studying U.S. history?
          I'm not defending my admittedly narrow point of view. Students
should get just as solid a foundation in math and science as in
language and the humanities, I believe.
          And today, as we plunge into an industrial and technological
revolution that's fast outstripping our production of skilled workers,
the need is greater than ever.
          Still, I'm troubled by the sudden burst of attention math and
science are receiving. There's too much talk about using the public
schools to train workers--and too little discussion of injecting
values and ethics into math and science instruction.
          North Carolina Governor Jim Hunt, as chairman of the Education
Commission of the States, recently appointed a thirty-four-member task
force to reassess the nation's educational goals.
          ". . . The most important thing we can do to increase economic
growth and provide more high-paying jobs," Gov. Hunt said, "is to
provide an excellent education that in strong in areas like math and
science."
          The public schools, he added, must begin to "provide education for
economic growth, not just for citizenship, not just because education
is a nice thing to have . . . "
          Well, OK--nobody can quarrel with the need for economic growth. And
it's logical to assume that beefing up math and science instruction
will help provide that. Students today get too little classroom time
in those fields; the shortage of math and science teachers is
alarming. And the lack of skilled workers in such areas as
electronics, engineering and telecommunications is a hindrance to the
kind of economic development we so desperately need.
          But one of the reasons that education IS a "nice thing to have" is
because it gives you context. The lessons of history, literature,
religion, philosophy and ethics are critical to all fields, especially
science and technology. Without them, we would have highly
trained--but possibly valueless--automatons making vital decisions
about creating and destroying life, altering the environment, defying
what were once considered the immutable laws of nature.
          Surely that's not what we want. Yet educators and public officials
are scrambling so hard to find quick solutions to the math and science
lag that they aren't always looking at the long-range implications of
their actions.
          Pay math and science teachers more than those in other fields, some
suggest; give them a wide range of incentives to stick with teaching
rather than be lured into lucrative industry jobs. Increase the number
of classroom hours devoted to math and science, many argue.
          But what is the effect on underpaid teachers of English, say, or
history? What subject areas begin to get less teaching time? What
statement does our society want to make about how we assess the
relative importance of technology and the humanities?
          Both U.S. Secretary of Education Terrel H. Bell and N.C. State
University Chancellor Bruce R. Poulton have, in recent speeches,
spoken admiringly about the rigorous math and science requirements in
the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe communist bloc
nations. U.S. attention to these disciplines has been far too lax,
both men said; it's hardly a coincidence, they implied, that the
Soviets are beating us in the race to produce engineers and other
scientific experts.
          That may be true, as far as it goes. But the Soviet Union is not
exactly famous for its devotion to the humanities, or for the
encouragement of creative, independent thinking among students. Those
are qualities we claim to value highly in this country, attributes we
deem essential to an enlightened citizenry. We must not lose sight of
that in the mad race to turn out a new generation of science and math
whiz kids.
          In a recent editorial bemoaning the "deterioration" of our math and
science capability. The Washington Post asserted that a "romantic bias
against technology (has) inflicted real damage on the schools and
their students." While I'm not convinced that such a bias has ever
existed, I can't see how substituting a pragmatic bias against the
humanities can possibly serve us well.
          What we need at this point, I think, is a national reassessment of
how much attention our schools are giving to ALL academic
disciplines--and how much in the way of resources we as a society are
willing to provide the schools to do their job. We may indeed need to
beef up our math and science curricula, but ONLY as one part of a
rigorous, total education that focuses on ethics as well as
equations.
          Governor Hunt's task force on educational goals has said it hopes
to involve parents and other interested citizens in its assessment. I
suggest that those of us troubled by simplistic rhetoric about the
math and science lag make ourselves heard; letters should be addressed
to the Task Force on Education for Economic Growth, c/o Gov. James
Hunt, Capitol Building, Raleigh, N.C. 27611.
          
            Polly Paddock is an editorial page writer for the
Charlotte Observer.
          
        
        
          Money on the Mainline
          By Johnson, TimTim Johnson
          Vol. 5, No. 2, 1983, pp. 1-6
          
          Bob Scherer, Chief Executive Officer and Chairman of the Board of
the Georgia Power Company, believes that electric rates should not be
regulated. "Regulation isn't working," he explained recently to a
reporter from Industry Week magazine.
          "If we were deregulated tomorrow," he continued, "and we could
charge whatever we wanted, there would not be, in my opinion, a
disproportionate amount of socking it to the customer."
          Although Scherer did not explain what a "proportionate" amount of
socking it to the customer would be, his company has engaged in a
long-range strategy of persuading the Georgia General Assembly, one
step at a time, to remove authority from the state Public Service
Commission, steadily increasing rates and profits. After all, as
Scherer declares, "We found out that our fundamental purpose was to
raise a reasonable return for our investors."
          In 1980, an election year (Georgia legislators serve two-year
terms), Georgia Power pushed legislation that would have drastically
restricted the PSC: the cost of plant construction work in progress
would be placed into the rate base so that the Company would be
allowed to earn profits on plants that were not yet in operation:
consumers would be prohibited from intervening in rate cases; when the
Company earned state income tax credits, the PSC would pretend that
the taxes had been paid and charge consumers accordingly; rates would
be based on Company estimates for future costs. Several other
provisions would have also proven costly to the ratepayer. Dozens of
citizens, most of them turned out by Georgians Against Nuclear Energy,
lobbied furiously against the bill, and although versions of it
squeaked through both houses of the legislature, it failed to pass
both house and 

senate in identical form before time ran out.
          The Company vowed to return the next session. In the meantime, the
sponsor of the bill--Representative Bob Sise, a natural gas company
executive--was defeated at the polls. The only issue his opponent
discussed was "the Georgia Power Boondoggle," as the bill was
called.
          The next year, the Company was back. This time, it asked for much
less--legislation that would require that electric rates be based on
future costs and that state tax credits and deferrals be ignored in
rate cases (federal law already requires this for federal taxes). With
strong behind the-scenes support from Lieutenant Governor Zell Miller
(who had opposed the Company's legislation the previous year, when he
was running for U.S. Senate), the bill breezed through both houses and
was signed by the Governor almost before citizens could react.
          The sponsor of the bill, Senator Tom Allgood, was elected senate
majority leader in only his second term in the senate. Bob Scherer
sent out a fundraising letter to local business leaders for Miller's
reelection campaign.
          "Clearly, the Company is working toward deregulation of its rates,"
comments Neill Herring, an Atlanta activist. "Their construction
program is so out of hand that they have a choice between admitting
they were wrong and cancelling some of their plants, or intimidating
the state legislature into giving them more of the ratepayers'
money. And they won't admit they made a mistake." Herring is in a
position to know: since 1971, he has been involved with various groups
in opposing electric rate increases.
          In January of this year, Herring and forty-five other citizens
attended an "Energy Strategy Conference" at a Future Farmers of
America Camp near Covington, Georgia, (a campground given to FFA by
Georgia Power.) The conference was organized by the Southern Regional
Council, the Environmental Action Foundation of Washington, and
Georgians Against Nuclear Energy (GANE). Concerned about the same
issues for varying reasons, these groups hoped to bring together a
diverse coalition of citizens to discuss Georgia's energy future.
          "Everybody's affected by higher power bills," points out Sid Moore,
an attorney who has intervened in utility rate cases on behalf of poor
people (for Georgia Legal Services), all residential and small
business consumers (as the state-hired consumers utility counsel) and
retail businesses (on behalf of the Georgia Retail Association).
          Rising utility rates hit the poor hardest, but the middle class,
small businesses, industry and government also suffer when power bills
increase. And because utility rates are set by state agencies,
organizers have a forum for opposing unjustified increases.
          A recent ally of those concerned about rising electric bills is the
environmentalist movement. In the past, many environmentalists
supported electric rate hikes because higher rates encouraged
conservation and conversion to renewable energy resources. However,
because the major cause of rate hikes is the construction of new power
plants, especially nuclear power plants, environmentalists have
increasingly joined forces with those concerned about the economic
impact of electric rate increases.
          "If we're going to stop Plant Vogtle (a two-unit nuclear plant
under construction by Georgia Power), we're going to have to cut off
the money," explains Pam Beardsley of GANE.
          The January Energy Strategy Conference drew representatives of
business, government and citizens groups for a weekend of workshops
and strategy sessions in six areas of concern: the economics of power
plant construction; alternatives to construction; organizing within
cooperatively-owned and city-owned power companies; intervening in
rate cases; the politics of electric utilities in Georgia, and
organizing around utility issues in the black community.
          "Everyone agreed that the major problem facing electricity
consumers in Georgia is Georgia Power's construction program,"
according to Debby Shepherd, the main coordinator of the
conference.
          In the late 1960's and early 1970's, Georgia Power--like other
utilities in the South--undertook massive construction programs
predicated on growth rates projected at ten percent or more per
year. Electricity consumption had grown at this rate through the
sixties, and, using a straight-line projection, utilities assumed that
this rate would continue.
          There were several fallacies in this assumption. As Sid Moore
points out, the utilities drew the straight line without looking at
the reasons behind the growth in the sixties.
          "Residences and offices installed air conditioning in the fifties
and sixties, causing the tremendous jump in summer demand," says
Moore. "But the market was saturated. To assume continued growth at
these levels would mean that poor people would be putting in air
conditioning, since they were the only ones without it."
          Electricity prices had actually declined in the sixties, further
encouraging consumption. The huge construction 

programs of the
seventies, coupled with fuel price increases in the seventies, further
dampening demand growth.
          Contributing particularly to higher prices for electricity was the
construction of nuclear power plants. Once glowingly touted as
offering the potential for electricity "too cheap to meter," nuclear
power turned out to be extraordinarily unreliable and expensive. By
the end of the 1970's, electricity produced by new nuclear power
plants exceeded the cost of electricity produced at oil-burning
facilities.
          "At this rate, it will soon be cheaper to burn money to produce
electricity than to use nuclear power," commented Danny Feig of
Atlanta, an antinuclear organizer.
          Another reason for the slackening demand for electricity was the
increasing share of the market taken by alternative energy
sources. "People are utilizing conservation techniques, wood, passive
solar water and space heating, low-head hydro, and cogeneration
(producing industrial process heat and electricity with the same
steam)," according to Jeff Tiller, an engineer who participated in the
conference.
          In those states where power companies failed to adjust their
construction program to the reality of growth in consumption, the
consequences have been severe. Consumers have usually been required to
pay for new plants whether the plants were needed or not, sharply
increasing rates and further dampening consumption. Georgia Power has
tried to solve this problem not by reducing construction, but by
selling plants to out-of-state utilities. However, these utilities
themselves are usually overbuilt, so only small percentages of Georgia
Power's "overcapacity" has been sold to out-of-state utilities.
          The overcapacity problem in Georgia is particularly severe: a 1978
report by the U.S. House Committee on Government Operations states,
"Georgia Power Company rated first (in annual cost to consumers of
excess generating capacity) with overcharges of $39 million." The
problem in Georgia has become much worse since that time, as several
more plants have come on line and growth has further declined.
          Yet, the construction program of Georgia Power continues.
          In West Georgia, on the Chattahoochee River, two hydroelectric
projects are under way at Goat Rock and two more at Bartletts Ferry
(Georgia Power already operates several facilites at those sites).
          In northwest Georgia, near Rome, the Company is building three
pumped-storage hydroelectric projects on Rocky Mountain. A
pumped-storage facility involves two dams, one at a lower elevation
where water is stored after it flows from the higher, electricity
producing dam during peak hours. During off-peak times, base-load
electricity is used to pump water back up to the higher dam for use
during the peak hours.
          In Monroe County, near Macon, Georgia Power angered residents when
it condemned twelve thousand acres of land for construction of a
four-unit coal facility, the Robert Scherer Plant. Utility officials
once bragged that this would be the largest coal-fired facility in the
world, but became quieter when residents expressed concern rather than
gratitude.
          The state of Georgia is allowing Plant Scherer to be built without
air-cleaning scrubbers, saying that land clearing at the site
constituted the beginning of construction, making the facility exempt
from federal requirements under a grandfathering provision. The
result, according to Georgia Power's own environmental assessment,
will be the following emissions: 37,200 pounds of sulphur dioxide per
hour, 3,100 pounds of I articulates per hour, and 21,700 pounds of
nitrogen dioxide per hour. Such emissions have been associated with
various health problems (including lung cancer) and environmental
problems (including acid rain and crop damage). Plant Scherer is a
base-load plant (designed to operate around the clock) as opposed to a
peaking plant (used only when demand is at its highest), meaning that
the plant is scheduled to operate twenty-four hours a day, seven days
a week, year round.
          Georgia Power's repeated efforts to sell Plant Scherer to utilities
in other states has fueled the bitterness of Georgia natives. One
partial buyer is the Gulf Power Company, which, like Georgia Power, is
a subsidiary of The Southern Company. Gulf Power cancelled a
coal-fired plant it was building on the Crystal River in Florida to
buy into Plant Scherer. The reason? The State of Florida required Gulf
to put scrubbers on its plants, and the cost difference between the
Florida plants with scrubbers and Plant Scherer without scrubbers made
the cancellation economically attractive. Billy Lovett, a member of
Georgia's Public Service Commission who attended the Energy Strategy
Conference, expresses the sentiment of many Georgians when he refers
to the deal as "filtering Florida's air with Georgia's lungs."
          Molly Martin, and Zeke Williams of Macon were among those gathered
in January at the Energy Strategy Conference. They expressed concern
about the air pollution from the plant--one unit of which is
complete--as their primary reason for attending the conference. Also
present were homeowners whose land had been 

condemned for high-voltage
power lines from Plant Scherer.
          "I bought a home in a rural area to get away from environmental
threats to my family," says Rabun Tingle, a small business operator
and the father of six. "I'm not about to roll over and play dead when
they try to condemn my land for dangerous power lines from a plant
they don't even need."
          Tingle pointed out that during condemnation proceedings for Plant
Scherer, Henry Strozier, Assistant Vice-President and Manager of
System Planning for Georgia Power, swore that the plant would not be
sold to out-of-state utilities: "We only build for Georgia," he said
under oath.
          In the same 1974 proceeding, Strozier downplayed the significance
of energy conservation, saying, "The energy conservation kick has
little effect on demand."
          The overconstruction problems at all these sites are dwarfed when
compared with just one construction project: the Alvin W. Vogtle
Nuclear Plant, named after the current president of The Southern
Company. (Jeanne Shor house, a Southern Company stockholder who
opposes Plant Vogtle, once proposed at an annual meeting of the
Company that a currently operating plant be renamed after Alvin Vogtle
"so his ego won't be so tied up in this worthless nuclear plant.")
          Located across the river from the Savannah River Plant (where
plutonium and tritium are produced for the nation's nuclear weapons),
Plant Vogtle is the most expensive construction project ever
undertaken in Georgia. The Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia
(MEAG), a partner in the project, estimated in May of 1982 that its
17.7% share of the plant would cost $1.8607 billion, for total plant
cost of more than $10.5 billion (assuming that Georgia Power could
obtain capital as cheap as MEAG's tax-free municipal bonds, which it
cannot). This cost estimate includes only construction and interest
costs before the plant comes on line.
          In comparison, the Kings Bay Naval Submarine Station now under
construction at Kings Bay on the Georgia coast--the most expensive
peacetime construction project the Navy has ever undertaken--is
projected to cost $1.7 billion, less than one-sixth the currently
projected cost of Vogtle. The Atlanta airport, one of the largest and
busiest in the world, cost less than $500 million--one twentieth the
cost of Vogtle.
          At the end of 1981, the net value of all of Georgia Power's
operating equipment totaled $3.7 billion. Plant 

Vogtle would therefore
cost, at current estimates, nearly three times as much as all plants,
lines, poles, meters and other capital equipment in operation a year
ago combined.
          In 1972, Georgia Power told Moody's investment service that the two
units at Plant Vogtle would cost a total of $731 million and both
would be in operation by 1980. In 1983, the Company estimates that the
plants will be on line in 1988, and admits even this projection is
"optimistic." And MEAG projects that they will cost more than fourteen
times the 1972 projection.
          Environmentalists have long been concerned about nuclear power
problems such as plant safety, waste disposal and
decommissioning. Peace activists have traditionally opposed nuclear
power development because it provides a means for producing materials
for nuclear weapons. It is now clear that, at least in the case of
Plant Vogtle, continued construction is a major economic issue.
          "Plant Vogtle is an albatross," says Al Burrell, a founder of GANE
and editor of its newsletter, The Gainsayer.
          Burrell and the other citizens at the January Energy Strategy
Conference agreed that Plant Vogtle would be a major target of their
efforts.
          "We agreed that focusing on the economic aspects of Plant Vogtle
holds the most promise for stopping the plant," said Debby
Shepherd.
          If Plant Vogtle is completed and placed into the rate base it will
have a devastating impact on electricity consumers in Georgia. Sid
Moore calculates that electricity produced at Plant Vogtle will cost
more than twenty cents per kilowatt hour to produce (not including
distribution or administrative costs), compared with about three cents
per kilowatt hour for electricity produced in Georgia today.
          The cost of Vogtle electricity will be borne by virtually all
electricity consumers in Georgia, since cooperatives and city-owned
utilities own shares in the project.
          To estimate the direct impact on Georgia Power's retail residential
consumers, a relatively simple calculation produces frightening
projections. Placing Georgia Power's share of the facility into the
rate base--$5.5 billion--and paying the Company a 12.5% return on rate
base (less than they now are allowed), then doubling this for the tax
effect (any rate increase must be doubled for the effect of state and
federal income taxes; although Georgia Power does not pay this amount,
state and federal-laws require the PSC to pretend that no tax credits
or deductions were taken) indicates a $1.375 billion rate hike. This
does not include labor, operating costs, distribution costs or other
related costs. The residential consumers' share of this would be about
$460 million, divided among Georgia Power's 1.1 million residential
consumers. Thus, the average residential consumer would pay more than
four hundred dollars a year in higher power bills due merely to adding
Plant Vogtle to the rate base.
          Effects on other consumers--stores, industry, schools and
others--will be similarly startling. What will happen to marginal
businesses? Will industry locate in other states? Money put into
paying school systems' power bills cannot be spent increasing
teachers' salaries.
          "Plant Vogtle is an economic quagmire," says Carol Stangler, former
coordinator of GANE. "It's time to pull out."
          Especially in view of Georgia's glut of electricity generating
capacity (more than forty percent above peak demand with twelve more
plants under construction), it is in the best interest of the state's
economy to stop construction of the Vogtle plant. Experience in other
states similarly indicates that cancellation of Plant Vogtle would be
a wise action.
          It is also in the best interest of the Georgia Power Company to
stop construction of Plant Vogtle.
          As eletricity rates rise, consumers shift to alternative sources of
energy, including conservation. Many industrial consumers now use
their process heat (heat produced in the manufacturing process by
burning coal, oil, gas, wood or another fuel) to boil water, producing
steam which turns turbines, thereby producing their own
electricity. Industrial motors produced today are twice as efficient
as those produced just a few years ago. Residential consumers insulate
their homes and, as they replace appliances, purchase more efficient
ones (household appliance efficiency has quadrupled in the past ten
years). Passive solar energy for space and water heating is already
considerably cheaper than electricity. While few people have the
capital needed at the front-end for these alternatives, lending
institutions are proving more receptive.
          As Georgia Power's electricity becomes more expensive, it will make
even more economic sense to switch to alternative energy
sources. Within a few years--before Plant Vogtle is scheduled to come
on line--electricity produced from solar cells is expected to be
cheaper (including battery storage) than the electricity produced at
Plant Vogtle. As consumers conserve and switch to other sources,
Georgia Power will either have to lower prices in order to be more
competitive with the alternatives (in which case, unless they cancel
some of their construction, they will lose money) or to raise prices
to its remaining customers to pay for idle power plants--an option
likely to drive away even more customers.
          "Georgia Power apparently doesn't plan to stop Plant Vogtle anytime
soon," says Pam Beardsley. "Not if they can get the money the plant
requires." But Beardsley believes that, by drawing attention to the
detrimental effects on the state's economy of high utilty rates and

overconstruction of power plants, new allies will be drawn into the
battle.
          Within the last few weeks, a remarkable coalition has emerged to
challenge the Power Company's latest legislative
maneuverings--attempts to allow rate hikes to go into effect before
full PSC proceedings are completed. Such legislation would provide
Georgia Power with an extra hundred million dollars or more during
each rate case.
          The organized elderly have voiced their opposition through the
Georgia chapters of the American Association of Retired Persons, the
National Retired Teachers Association and the Council on
Aging. Organized labor is represented by the Communication Workers of
America, the United Auto Workers and the Machinists. Residential
consumer advocates are working through Ratewatch, Georgia Action/ACORN
and others. The attorney who represents major commerical consumers on
rate design issues has lobbied extensively, as has John Lewis, former
SNCC organizer, long-time civil rights activist and member of
Atlanta's City Council. All five Public Service Commissioners oppose
such legislation as do the current and two former Consumers' Utility
Counsels (a state office established to represent consumers). The two
Atlanta newspapers, usually advocates for Georgia Power, have, of
late, taken the consumers' side as have several other newspapers
around the state. Two chemical companies have joined the
coalition. And citizens from all over Georgia have phoned and written
legislators to express their opposition.
          The coalition has named itself the Campaign for a Prosperous
Georgia; "It has a Republican ring to it," explains organizer Doug
Teper in explaining the attempt to show that fighting utility rate
hikes is not a subversive activity. A full-time coordinator has been
hired, a small grant has been obtained from the Janet Lowe Memorial
Fund, and more fundraising efforts are under way.
          "The fight is between truth and money," says Rabun Tingle. "We'll
see who wins."
          The Co-Owners Of Plant Vogtle
          Currently, Plant Vogtle is jointly owned by:
          Georgia Power  50.1% Oglethorpe Power Corporation  30.0%
Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia (MEAG) 17.7% City of
Dalton 2.2%
          Georgia Power is an investor-owned utility
serving the majority of Georgia's electric consumers. It is wholly
owned by The Southern Company, which also owns Alabama Power, Gulf
Power (in Florida), and Mississippi Power.
          Oglethorpe Power Corporation consists of rural
electric cooperatives which serve a majority of the land area (though
a minority of the population) of Georgia. It was established in the
1970s to buy into Georgia Power's construction projects and has been
able to obtain extremely cheap money from the federal Rural
Electrification Administration (meaning that taxpayers are subsidizing
the construction with their tax money as well as their electric
rates).
          MEAG was created by the State of Georgia and
consists of 46 city-owned electric systems and one county-owned system
representing about 8. 6% of the state's population. It was created in
the 1970s exclusively for the purpose of buying into Georgia Power's
construction projects, thereby providing lower cost capital for the
construction. This is due to the tax-free nature of bonds it issues
(another taxpayer subsidy).
          The City of Dalton opted to stay out of MEAG but
bought into Plant Vogtle on its own.
          
            Tim Johnson, who has worked for the Georgia Public
Service Commission and the Consumers' Utility Counsel of Georgia, its
an Atlanta writer and organizer.
          
        
        
          Almost Family.  Roy Hoffman. The Dial Press,
1983.
          By Harris, TrudierTrudier Harris
          Vol. 5, No. 2, 1983, pp. 21-23
          
          White mistresses and their black maids have intrigued many
generations of American writers. From the stereotypical portraits of
the nineteenth century, to Faulkner's more individualized but
basically stereotypical Dilsey, to Alice Childress' sassy Mildred,
both black and white American writers have depicted the relations of
the cultural and racial phenomena which inform white women treating
black women "like one of the family." Roy Hoffman's Almost
Family is yet another novel exploring that relationship.
          Set in Madoc, Alabama between 1946 and 1975, Almost
Family is the story of the parallel lives of Vivian Gold and
her maid, Nebraska Waters. It explores the relationship between the
two women as their children age and leave them, as well as the crises
involved in one being employed by the other. Although Vivian initially
scoffs at having a maid, and is frequently uncomfortable with the
situation, her Jewish liberalism will not allow her to deny completely
the trends of the community in which she lives. Whatever she may think
to the contrary, she does have a maid, and she is politely but firmly
diligent in maintaining the ultimate distance between the maid and
herself. The two women might be pregnant at the same time; they may
share the pain both have suffered earlier through miscarriages
(Nebraska has in addition had an abortion); and they may both be
devoted wives and concerned mothers. Finally, though, Vivian is
mistress and Nebraska is maid; Vivian is white and Nebraska is
black. The differences can never be completely overlooked.
          Vivian's position as a minority member in the larger white
community which will not allow Jews to join certain clubs may be
designed to show her potential to understand Nebraska's more extreme
minority position in relation to the white community; however, Vivian
and her husband Edward finally become members of that club and can
ignore their Jewishness (as Edward does in his support of the racist
candidacy of George Wallace) in favor of acceptance. Nebraska, on the
other hand, cannot change her color; nor can she realistically work to
change her educational and economic status. The parallel lives are
only parallel to a point. Vivian has much more room for escape from
oppressing circumstances than does Nebraska.
          Hoffman's novel is not only a chronicle of the lives of these two
women and their families, it also records, through them, the changes
in the political and social atmosphere of Alabama and the country
between 1946 and 1975. There is a scene recounting the stand of George
Wallace at the entrance to the University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa
while Vivian's second daughter, Rachel, is a student there. There is
the account of Nebraska's son Junior losing a leg in Vietnam. There is
a gripping description of the tension and violence which erupted in
Nebraska's neighborhood on the evening of Martin Luther King's death,
and there is irony in the fact that Edward and his son Benjamin have
just drive to Nebraska's house and it is she who is put in the
position of protecting them from angry blacks. There is also the
tension surrounding integration as Benjamin and Nebraska's daughter
Viv (named for Vivian), the result of the parallel pregnancies, grow
up in a world which has not allowed them to truly mix in public
settings.
          The novel is interesting and engaging, and some scenes, such as the
night of King's death and the cones-

quent death of Nebraska's dauther,
Wenda June, are particularly poignant. However, Almost
Family depends primarily upon episodic, sketchy development
rather than upon detailed portraiture of the two women. We see a lot
of the women, over many years, but what we see remains close to the
surface. There is little reflection. Ultimately, for Vivian, life goes
on and, as it does, one needs a maid. Nebraska reveals deep
resentments in blaming the Golds and other whites for the death of
Wenda June, but these too are passed over. Hoffman trades depth for
breadth in his novel, and he draws back from potentially explosive
situations. There is a big crisis in one year which is not completely
resolved, but the next chapter picks up two or three years in the
future and may make only passing reference to that great crisis which
has occupied us in the preceding chapter.
          Hoffman understands the issues surrounding his subject, and he
presents a substantial number of them, but he is ever polite in his
presentation, and he ever strives, sometimes incredibly so, for
peaceful, cooperative solutions. For example, Vivian's liberalism
leads her to invite Nebraska's family to her summer home at the lake
for an outing. When they all show up, tremendously uncomfortable with
each other, Vivian complains about her invitation having been taken so
literally (seven of the Waters family show up), and she does not have
the slightest idea as to what to do with them. Both families are
greatly relieved when the outing-turned-ordeal is over. "It's all too
confusing," Vivian says, "all too confusing.... You try to be a
mother, it's hard. You try to be an employer, it's hard. You try to be
a friend, it's hard. You try to be all three and it's impossible." Or
consider what happens when Wenda June is arrested for trying to
integrate the Woolsworth lunch counter in 1961. Instead of taking her
to jail, two understanding policemen bring her to the Gold home to
Nebraska and Vivian. As they discuss the matter with the policemen,
who have blamed Wenda June's action on her recent nervous breakdown,
one of Vivian's cousins emphasizes that the matter can be settled
because "this ain't the law . . . this is just family."
          But maids, as the title suggests, can never quite be family. Though
claims to the contrary are consistently made by both Vivian and
Nebraska, actions consistently undercut their claims. That is
especially vivid when Benjie, freshly in college, writes an essay
comparing Vivian and Nebraska as his two Jewish mothers. When he
enthusiastically sends copies of his essay to Vivian, and to his
sisters Sarah and Rachel, asking their advice about submitting it to
the school journal, Sarah sends him a special delivery letter
requesting that he not do so. Vivian in turn sends her a cryptic note:
"Dear Sarah, Thank you. Love, Mother." Vivian and Nebraska live
primarily on the surface of polite relations. They dare not face
overly long the distinctions that are theirs.
          These two basically good women are caught in lifestyles and
patterns of behavior which are larger than either of them. When they
try to deny those patterns, it means discomfort and tension for both
of them. Early in her employment at the Golds' home, Nebraska had been
tolerant if Vivian came home with her; then, following the
disturbances of the civil rights days, there is a period of ten years
during which Vivian does not visit. Unexpectedly, one evening when
Vivian drives Nebraska home, she decides to go into the
apartment. Insisting that she is "just family," she rinses a glass and
gets herself a drink, then she "ooos" and "ahhhs" and gushes over the
apartment until Nebraska wants "to burst into tears." Vivian comments
on how well the numerous cast-aways she has given Nebraska look in her
apartment, including one of the "filling-station glasses" that she
"threw . . . out twenty-five years ago." In one brief ten-minute
swoop, Vivian has reduced Nebraska's home to a perverse replica of her
own: "Dear, being in your living room is like. being in a room right
out of my own house! Isn't that something?" It is
truly something that Vivian cannot see beyond the
surface of things, cannot see that it is partly because Nebraska must
work in the financially limiting job of maid that she is forced to
save all the Gold castaways. She cannot see that, in a matter of
minutes, she strips from Nebraska all pride in her home, and she
obviously influences the major decision Nebraska will make shortly.

          Hoffman does see, and he understands considerably more than his
characters do. One of the virtues of Almost Family is
that Hoffman brings a sensitivity to the representation of relations
across cultural and racial lines in the South. He stands back from all
of his characters and recognizes the limitations in them. I get the
feeling that he is also standing back from what he has written,
knowing that there is much more to tell.
          
            Trudier Harris, who teaches English and folklore at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, grew up in
Tuscaloosa. Her book, From Mammies to Militants: Domestics in
Black American Literature, was published by Temple University
Press in December, 1982.
          
        
        
          The Color Purple. Alice Walker. Harcourt, Brace,
1982.
          By Gladney, RoseRose Gladney
          Vol. 5, No. 2, 1983, pp. 23-24
          
          Speaking at the University of Florida in 1962, Lillian Smith
observed that women were only beginning "to break the million year
silence about themselves." "Women rarely tell the truth," she said,
"even in their diaries, about their sex experiences, or their most
intimate relationships; nor do they spend much time asking the
unanswerable questions about the meaning of human life since they have
never been sure they were human." Smith linked in one sentence the
necessity of women speaking the truth about themselves with their
asking the unanswerable questions. In the same speech, she suggested
that for women to tell the truth "might radically change male
psychology."
          Although her own writing often challenged her culture's rigid
concepts of gender, Lillian Smith did not live to enjoy the literary
flowering of the most recent phase of the women's movement in
America. For some fifteen years Alice Walker's poetry, fiction, and
essays have been-a major part of that flowering. In The Color
Purple she has reached a new pinacle. You can rest easier now,
Lil, the truth about women is being spoken.
          Walker's novel takes the form of letters between two sisters:
Nettie, who is a missionary to Africa, and Celie, who is trapped in a
brutally oppressive marriage in a Southern black farming
community. Their correspondence spans the thirty year period ending in
World War II.
          A major theme in all of Walker's writing has been the struggle of
black women to create lives in the face of racism, sexism, and the
inevitable self-doubt which accompanies generations of patriarchal
oppression. In The Color Purple the struggle achieves
fruition, but not through a gradual evolution over centuries or even
decades, and not through mass organization of the oppressed against
the oppressor. Furthermore, although the presence of white racism is
quite evident throughout both sisters' narratives, it is not the
central theme. Of primary importance is the effort of black women to
create their own lives with and without black men. The power to do so
comes through the love and support of women for each other, expressed
in a variety of ways.
          Walker's choice of form, letters between two sisters, allows each
sister's perspective to mirror and reinforce the other's. Nettie's
description of life among the Olinka tribe echoes Celie's accounts of
her own life in rural Georgia. In both societies the "traditional"
ideas regarding sexual division of labor and personal relationships
between men and women insist on male dominance. Nettie writes:
          
            There is a way that the men speak to women that reminds me
too much of Pa. They listen just long enough to issue
instructions. They don't even look at women when women are
speaking. They look at the ground and bend their heads toward the
ground. The women also do not "look in a man's face " as they say. To
"look in a man's face " is a brazen thing to do. They look instead at
his feet or his knees. And what can I say to this? Again, it is our
own behavior around Pa.
          
          In both societies the real strength of the community can be found
in women's friendship with each other. Even as Nettie's letters tell
of the friendship among Olinka wives of the same husband, so Celie
finds her greatest love and support from her husband's lover, Shug
Avery. The quality of the relationship between Celie and Shug is the
key to Celie's liberation from her role as "mule of the world."
          For Celie to free herself she must find her own voice, speak her
own thoughts. Most importantly, she must replace the ideas of male
dominance, the ultimate symbol of which is the image of God as male,
with a new understanding of power. Shug is able to help because she
understands the real power within every individual, part of the spirit
of life itself. The turning point in Celie's journey comes in her
conversation with Shug about the nature of God:
          
            Here's the thing, says Shug. The thing I believe. God is
inside you and inside everybody else. You come into the world with
God. But only them that search for it inside find it. And sometimes it
just manifest itself even if you not looking, or don't know what you
rooking fort Trouble do it for most forks, I think. Sorrow,
lord. Feeling like shit. 
          
          
            It? I ast. 
          
          
            Yeah, It. God ain't a he or a she, but a It. 
          
          
            But what do it look like? I ast. 
          
          
            Don't look like nothing, she say. It ain't a picture

show. It ain't something you can look at apart from anything else,
including yourself. I believe God is everything, say Shug. Everything
that is or ever was or ever will he. And when you can feel that, and
be happy to feel that, you've found It.
          
          Echoing Shug's understanding of God as key to liberation, Nettie
writes:
          
            God is different to us now, after all these years in
Africa. More spirit than ever before, and more internal. Most people
think he has to look like something or someone--a roofleaf or
Christ--but we don't. And  riot being tied to what God looks like
frees us.
          
          Freed from her old concept of God, Celie begins to view all of life
differently:
          
            Well, us talk and talk about God, but I'm still
adrift. Trying to chase that old white man out of my head. I been so
busy thinking bout him I never truly notice nothing God make. Not a
blade of corn (how it do that.?) not the color purple (where it come
from.?). Not the little wildflowers. Nothing.
          
          
            Now that my eyes opening, If eels like a fool. Next to any
little scrub of a bush in my yard, Mr.______'s evil sort of
shrink. But not altogether. Still, it is like Shug say, You have to
git man off your eyeball, before you can see anything
a'tall.
          
          For Alice Walker, the power of sisterhood leads not to a separatist
female community, but to a fuller life for both men and women. Under
patriarchy men have feared women's creative power and have sought to
suppress it. In doing so, they have denied much that is creative in
themselves as well. When women have managed to resist patriarchal
definitions of themselves, the fruits of their love and support for
each other have transformed the lives of both sexes.
          As Celie begins to "chase the old white man from her head," she is
no longer subject to her husband's abuse.
          With Shug's help, she finds the means to support herself. After
Celie and Shug leave him, Albert begins to change his ways. Later,
freed from former definitions of power, Celie and Albert come to know
each other as friends, to work together, even to discuss the
differences between men and women and ask the unanswerable
questions:
          
            Anyhow, he say, you know how it is. You ast yourself one
question, it lead to fifteen. I start to wonder why us need love. Why
us suffer. Why us black. It didn't take long to realize I didn't
hardly know nothing. And that if you ast yourself why you black or a
man or a woman or a bush it don't mean nothing if you don't ast why
you here, period.
          
          
            So what you think? I ast.
          
          
            I think us here to wonder, myself. To wonder. To ast. And
that in wondering bout the big things and asting bout the big things,
you learn about the little ones, almost by accident. But you never
know nothing more about the big things than you start out with. The
more I wonder, he say, the more I love. 
          
          
            And people start to love you back, I bet, I say. 
          
          
            They do,  he say, surprise.
          
          Alice Walker's writings pay tribute to a heritage of black sisters
and foremothers: artists all, whether named or anonymous, a great host
of witnesses from the rural American South to Africa, from the
unlettered and unsung, to famous poets, story-tellers, healers and
musicians. A major source of Walker's power comes from her
faithfulness to the richness of women's spirituality. In her fiction,
varied African and American Indian religious traditions sometimes
merge and sometimes conflict with the concepts and beliefs of
Christianity, but spiritual power remains fundamental. The
Color Purple contains Walker's best writing on the nature of
God. It is also one of our finest testimonies to the power of
sisterhood.
          
            Rose Gladney is associate professor of American Studies
at the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa.
          
        
        
          Union Power, Soul Power: The Story of 1199B and Labor's Search
for A Southern Strategy
          By Fink, LeonLeon Fink
          Vol. 5, No. 2, 1983, pp. 9-20
          
          Hospitals are one of the last centers of employment in the United
States to be touched by unionization. Efforts to organize hospital
workers had barely begun by 1960, and by the end of that decade, few
areas outside the biggest metropolitan concentrations on either coast
were under union contract. Along the East Coast, the first real
breakthrough had been the astounding success of New York's Local 1199,
Retail Drug and Hospital Employees Affiliate of the International
Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union (RWDSU). In less than ten
years (19591968), some thirty thousand workers in the voluntary
hospital system of the metropolitan area had organized and raised the
minimum weekly wage from twenty-eight to one hundred
dollars. Primarily based upon low-skilled, black and Hispanic service
workers, Local 1199's achievement relied on three basic ingredients: a
genuine mobilization of the hospital workforce, preparation for a
militant and, if necessary, lengthy strike, and finally, a political
campaign aimed at arousing support for the workers from the
surrounding community, including the ultimate intervention of public
officials in favor of a settlement. 1199's combination of workplace
and community mobilization coincided with and directly reflected the
rising expectations unleashed by

the civil rights movements among northern blacks. Indeed, union
partisans had come to believe that the joining of "union power" and
"soul power" had unlocked the secret to a whole new tide of labor
organizing among America's poor and unskilled.
          Still, there was cause for skepticism. New York City was, in
several respects, peculiarly well-adapted to what had emerged as
1199's style of crusade-like organizing. Historically, hospital
management there had been more tolerant, public officials more
liberal, the black community better organized, the state more willing
to subsidize social services than elsewhere in the country.
          Drawing on an enthusiastic membership, 1199's leaders--such as
President Leon Davis and Director of Organization Elliott
Godoff--immigrant Jews who had entered the labor movement as left-wing
radicals in the 1930's, had learned to make the most of their
terrain. But could lessons learned in New York be applied
elsewhere?
          As it happened the first "national' test of the union power-soul
power strategy came in 1969 when a group of hospital workers in
Charleston, South Carolina sought 1199's protection. The formula which
had begun to pay rewards in the North suddenly came up against a new
antagonist--and one equipped with a time-tested record of resistance
to social change. The result--a 113-day strike at the Medical College
and Charleston County hospitals leading to approximately one thousand
arrests--was one of the most disruptive and bitter labor
confrontations since the 1930's. In the South it stands as a watershed
for Dublic sector labor relations.
          Union organization in the South as a whole had experienced a
precipitous decline since the ill-fated, postwar Operation Dixie
(1946-1953). In South Carolina, unionization had never made much of a
dent. While the state's non-agricultural sector included the highest
proportion of manufacturing workers in the South, this fact had not
rebounded to the benefit of unions. Indeed, during the 1960's, South
Carolina's percentage of organized workers hovered around seven
percent, lowest in the nation. Aside from a cluster of white building
trades and railway brotherhoods, its fifty thousand union members were
concentrated among black longshoremen l and the black labor force of a
dwindling tobacco industry. Anti-unionism was one issue which bound
Upcountry industrialists, like the J. P. Stevens Company of the
Greenville-Spartanburg area, together with their usual political
competitors from Lowcountry Charleston. A statewide business and
political consensus reinforced a right-to-work law and an official ban
on public employee strikes with an extra, unofficial anti-union
vigilance. Even state port authority workers who had possessed a
statutory right to collective bargaining since 1962 had not been able
to secure official recognition.
          The origin of the labor troubles in Charleston may, on one level,
be understood as the political climax to postwar economic and social
change in the area. At a time when the city of Charleston, on the back
of defense, trade and tourist dollars, showed signs of shaking off a
long history of stagnation and lethargy, the fruits of recovery
trickled down unevenly to the city's residents. Forty percent of black
families in the Charleston area lived below the poverty line according
to the 1970 census, with another ten percent living just barely above
this measure of modern subsistence. For black women, especially, who,
in the period 1950 to 1970, left domestic and farm-related employment
for the expanding service sector (in which hospitals formed the core
group of employers), expectation and hope for improvement collided
with certain realities of the workplace. In addition to a sub-minimum
wage of $1.30 an hour, hospital workers, many of whom had. grown up in
all-black island communities, daily encountered the residual impact of
a racial caste system.
          In 1968-69, the Medical College Hospital, presided over since 1964
by Dr. William McCord, son of American missionaries to South Africa,
had not one black physician on its staff, not one black student in its
School of Nursing. Blacks filled the ranks of low-paid nurses aides
and service workers. Never displaying much tolerance for shared
decision making in general, administrator McCord's reaction to the
revolt of the hospital workers, when it came, was not surprising. In
the midst of the strike for union recognition by black nursing
attendants and service workers, McCord exploded that he was "not about
to turn a 25 million dollar complex over to a bunch of people who
don't have a grammar school education."
          The hospital's relation to the community reproduced the social
separation apparent among its own work force. Sharp distinctions
characterized the care offered private (mainly white) patients
vs. non-paying (overwhelmingly black) patients. Bed and waiting room
assignments were divided along racial lines. Even the legacy of dual
restrooms remained. Certain practices seemed openly to reflect
assumptions of black racial inferiority: Black husbands, for example,
were not allowed in delivery rooms, while whites were.
          The racial subordination perpetuated in the hospitals reflected
long-standing social patterns of the surrounding society. South
Carolina, with blacks representing forty percent of the population,
had not elected a black state" legislator since Reconstruction;
indeed, fewer blacks proportionately were registered to vote in South
Carolina 

than in any other Southern state. And Charleston, where older
black males still doffed their caps to white passersby, seemed to fall
well within Robert Coles' characterization of the entire state in
1968: "No southern state can match South Carolina's ability to resist
the claims of Black people without becoming the object of national
scorn."
          In Charleston, relative social calm throughout the civil rights era
owed its longevity to several factors. Modern-day Charleston
patriarchs had committed few of the rhetorical or physical excesses of
a Bull Conner in dealing with rising black expectations. Instead, they
tended to smother dissent in an appeal to civic unity while
maintaining a sure hold on all centers of power in the city, including
conciliatory gestures to an elite of ministers, contractor-realtors
and funeral home directors within the black community.
          By the late 1960s, the Charleston establishment had reason to think
that it had effectively weathered the worst years of social unrest. In
the 1950s, the city itself had largely been spared agitation as civil
rights activists like Esau Jenkins and Septima Clark concentrated
their education and voting rights efforts on outlying Johns
Island. The city's only real trouble had come in the 1963 summer
desegregation campaign aimed at local merchants. Lunch counter
sit-ins, mass demonstrations, and night marches organized by the
"Charleston Movement," including one major confrontation with police,
finally led to a non-discriminatory agreement by the city's major
stores. Tensions had evidently eased in the city by the following fall
when, following a successful suit by the NAACP and under a court
order, eleven black 'children attended previously all-white public and
parochial schools without major incident. Peaceful, if still largely
symbolic, integration came to the entire city school system the next
year.
          The first organizers of the Charleston hospital workers were a
small circle of young "black power" advocates grouped loosely around
their elder stateman, thirty-seven year old William Saunders who in
1968 was working as a foreman in a local mattress factory. Saunders
had come out of the Army after Korea in 1954 determined to change
things for his people. His passage through voter registration and
integration fights on Johns Island had convinced him that the
nonviolent philosophy of the civil rights movement was a "sham." He
openly quarreled with older leaders. "The situation got bad enough,"
says Saunders, "until in 1966 or '67 I was elected to the OEO
Commission and a group of black leaders got a petition against me that
went to the governor and he would not certify me as an elected
commissioner."
          By 1967, Saunders with his Low Country Newsletter
represented the voice of rising anger within the black community. Two
important influences on him were Malcolm X and SNCC. Saunders hosted
SNCC leader Stokley Carmichael on a Christmas visit to the Charleston
area in 1967.
          Together, Saunders and Black Muslim Otis Robinson fashioned a
tight-knit, semi-secret self-defense group complete with code names
and weapons. The level of daily fear reached its highpoint in 1968
after the killings of three students at South Carolina State College
in Orangeburg and the King assassination. At that point, remembers
Saunders, "We all planned to die."
          Community organizing on Johns Island put Saunders in touch with
several hospital workers at Medical College Hospital (MCH) including
Mary Moultrie, the twenty-six-year-old daughter of a Charleston navy
yard worker, who had returned from New York City in 1966. Unhappily,
although Moultrie had worked as a licensed practical nurse at
Goldwater Memorial Hospital in New York, the MCH would not recognize
her credentials and slotted her at the less responsible and lower paid
position of nurse's aide. While Mary Moultrie had worked with Guy
Carawan of Tennessee's Highlander Center and Esau Jenkins on community
projects, Saunders was waiting for her and others at the hospital to
recognize that "they had a problem" at their own workplace. It did not
take long.
          In February 1968 a white nursing supervisor gave orders to a group
of black workers (three LPNs, two nurses aides) without showing them
patient charts. Incensed at this violation of custom, the workers left
work and were summarily fired. This incident was ultimately and
successfully resolved by the intervention of black community
leaders. It represented the beginning of continuous, although still
informal, organization among the city's hospital workers.
          Soon, a group of workers began meeting regularly with Otis Robinson
and Saunders. "The thing that I think had the biggest impact,"
Saunders remembers, "Jesse Jackson used it, James Brown too, we
stressed that you are somebody: 'There's no such thing as
non-professional hospital workers. You are professionals. It takes a
surgeon fifteen minutes to operate but you are there twenty-four hours
a day with the patient. You are the most important part of the
hospital.'"

          The idea of a hospital workers "union" emerged slowly. Saunders,
for one, initially had "very little interest" in unions. "I saw very
little difference," he says, "between George Meany and Richard
Nixon. I felt labor management was ripping off the workers." Instead,
Saunders and friends first envisioned a kind of broadbased association
of community owned businesses aimed at getting blacks into the
"economic mainstream."
          Mary Moultrie, who had had only distant contact with a union local
while at Goldwater Memorial, agrees that "at that time we didn't have
a union in mind to affiliate with or anything like that. We just knew
we had to do something to protect our jobs. We didn't want to be
picked off one by one. So we sorta kept it a secret. We'd go round and
whisper to people and we'd catch people during break time and on lunch
hour. We kept it out of the ears of the whites. After we started
having the weekly meetings we used to get community people to come in
and meet with us. When the idea for a union came up exactly, I don't
remember. I feel like its a union whenever people get together."
          A key community contact on the way towards formal organization was
Isaiah Bennett, president of Local 15A, RWDSU, which represented a few
hundred workers at the American Tobacco Company in Charleston. This
union beachhead dated to the 1945-46 Food, Tobacco and Allied Workers
strike, in which an old spiritual first became the movement song, "We
Shall Overcome." Bennett loaned the hospital workers Local 15A's
meeting hall and activated a network of community support to try to
establish some form of representation and airing of grievances for the
MCH workers.
          Meanwhile, hospital administrators took counter measures, hiring
Greenville textile counsel and antiunion specialist, Knox Haynesworth
(brother to federal judge Clement Haynesworth, who, later in the year,
would receive and fail to be confirmed in a Nixon appointment to the
US Supreme Court). The hospital offered to discuss work-related
problems only with small groups of workers selected at random. The
first official response to the unionization effort came in the form of
a crude cartoon picturing a fat, white, union boss enjoying wine,
cigars and shapely female company at workers' expense. To resist the
union, the hospital's administration promised to use "every legal
means at our disposal." The only concession offered the protesting
black workers prior to the strike was an extra holiday on Robert
E. Lee's birthday.
          In late September or early October, 1968, New York City's Local
1199 responded with interest to an appeal from the Charleston
workers. Only months before, in establishing a National Organizing
Committee (NOC), the hospital union had set its sights on territory
outside the state of New York and the city's metropolitan region,
"along the Eastern seaboard in the main."
          The turning point in the New York union's mind was a visit to
Charleston by 1199 vice-president and former dietary aide, Doris
Turner. She was scheduled to meet with organized workers one evening
at the tobacco workers hall. With delays, her plane did not arrive
until after midnight. Before she went to her hotel, she decided to
stop by the meeting hall just in case someone had remained behind. She
found the hall full of Charleston hospital workers.
          The national union decided to call its first out-of-state local
1199B. Over four hundred hospital workers elected Mary Moultrie as
president of the local, formally replacing Bennett as leader of the
organizing campaign.
          Once the union made a commitment to the workers to fight for
recognition, the struggle at MCH took a more conspicuous turn. Worker
delegations besieged local and state lawmakers, protesting vehemently
the refusal of the McCord administration to even meet with the
employees. While meetings with Gov. McNair, a self-styled South
Carolina "progressive," and key legislators were courteous, no
progress was made. In response to what Moultrie would tell Columbia
legislators in February, 1969 was an "explosive" situation, state
officials could only point to plans for a long-term re-classification
of all state jobs that might be completed within a year. "We're tired
of asking and begging. Now we are demanding. We want union
recognition," Moultrie told the legislators. "We warn you time is
running out," added Bennett. But while state officials allowed that
the legislature had the power to place the hospitals within the state
labor law, no one emerged to champion such an option.
          The precipitating event for the strike came on March 18. At the
urging of Mayor Palmer Gaillard, McCord agreed to meet with a workers'
delegation that included union members. Seven workers including
Moultrie were notified to attend an 11:00 a.m. meeting in the hospital
auditorium. When they arrived, however, they found that McCord had
selected eight "loyalists" to balance out the meeting. Soon nearly a
hundred pro-union workers had packed into the auditorium. An
administrative assistant emerged to explain that McCord would meet no
groups 

larger than fifteen, that the workers were being disruptive so
that the session had been adjourned and workers must return
immediately to their jobs. Instead, the workers met outside with
Bennett, before re-entering the hospital. The next day twelve union
activists including Mary Multrie, were formally dismissed for
dereliction of duty. One day later, March 20, after consultations
between 1199B leaders and national union vice-president Henry
Nicholas, the strike began. The strikers made two demands: union
recognition and the rehiring of the twelve fired workers.
          As picketers massed in front of the MCH entrance, they were
immediately faced with a reality which distinguished the Charleston
confrontation from any other strike in which the union had so far been
engaged. It was not just a rigid hospital administration that the
strikers faced but an entire city in which every formal lever of power
and influence was overtly hostile to the union effort, The union's
legal problems, for example, began March 21 with a temporary state
injunction severely limiting the strikers' physical presence. The
original terms of the injunction banned all picketing, but on the
advice of State Circuit Court Judge Clarence Singletary the order was
quickly amended. Picketing was limited to ten persons spaced twenty
yards apart over a distance of two hundred yards. "According to the
injunction," Mary Moultrie later told rally in Stony Field Stadium,
"we could put only five people on this field from goal post to goal
post. I think even the governor, as slow as he is, could get through a
picket line like that."
          Nor, the union quickly learned, could it expect to mollify the
court decisions by the intervention of elected state
officials. Governor Robert McNair, though shielded from day tb day
direct contact with the Charleston strike, set a simple and
straightforward pattern of response: "no agency of the state can be
involved with unions." From this view the strike was seen as a threat
to law and order, a provocation which would lead first to the
deployment of city police and agents from the State Law Enforcement
Division (SLED), then to the dispatch of National Guard troops in full
riot gear on April 25, and finally to the May 1 state-declared
emergency and dusk-to-dawn curfew.
          Before the South Carolina Bar Association on May 10, Governor
McNair reaffirmed his position: "In a sense this is not a simple test
of will or a test of strength. This is a test of our whole
governmental system as we have known it in South Carolina." Judge
Singletary, retrospectively, set the context for the state
position:
          
            In the 1960s South Carolina was among the leaders in the
South in attracting industry and our technical education program
. . . and our development board had become a model for other southern
states. Our governor and officials were going all over the world
seeking industries and one of the inducements, obviously, was
productive labor without the labor union problems that other areas of
the country were experiencing. So I think that that was one of the
reasons that we didn't want to give up. When I say "we," I think of
the political leadership . . .
          
          Since the anti-union commitments of Southern employers and
governmental officials were matters not only of public record but of
popular legend, what is perhaps most surprising about the hospital
faceoff in Charleston is why a small outside organization like Local
1199 would undertake such an effort.
          1199's support of the Charleston strike was, in fact, based on more
than a wing and a prayer. The 1199 stewards recognized that a
conventional organizing drive in Charleston was doomed to
failure. "The first key decision was to have a strike," recalls Moe
Foner of 1199's National Organizing Committee. "The second key
decision was that this strike could not be won unless it became a
national issue. But before you could make it a national issue, it had
to be made a labor-civil rights issue. The only way to do that was to
create turmoil in Charleston. And the only way to do that was to
convince SCLC to come in."
          The decision to enlist the SCLC as co-organizers of the Charleston
campaign seems to have been made very early. Despite different
backgrounds and areas of operation, history had already brought the
two groups to an overlapping set of goals and organizing strategy. The
organization of 1 199's National Organizing Committee in 1968 with
Coretta King as presiding chairman, and Rev. Ralph David Abernathy and
Andrew Young as signatories, signalled the intention of a close
working relationship between the two organizations. Martin Luther King
had come to the aid of earlier 1199 hospital campaigns--in 1962 and
during the 1965 Bronxville strike. The union, for its part, had
frequently endorsed SCLC mobilizations with funds and picketers. On a
personal level the bonds of trust between the civil rights and labor
organization were secured in the close, longterm friendship of
attorney Stanley Levison and Moe Foner. Levison, a former communist,
still shadowed by the FBI, for years had served as an advisor to King
and Young. With enduring commitments to both the labor and civil
rights movement, Levison was as an able go-between, increasing the two
organizations uncommon regard for each other.

          For the SCLC, the Charleston campaign offered the chance for
renewed purpose and strength out of growing internal disarray. The
movement which had sprung up from the Montgomery bus boycott of 1955
and provided the focus for a non-violent direct action approach to
civil rights through the mid-1960s had by 1967 already embarked on a
new course.
          A shift in focus from the statute books and city halls to the
marketplace, with its implied class as well as racial analysis of
oppression, had hardly solidified when King and SCLC were called to
Memphis to support the sanitation worker's strike. After King's
assassination on April 4, 1968, Rev. Ralph Abernathy's attempt to
renew SCLC's campaign was set back amidst the mud, indiscipline and
generally unfocussed strategy of the Resurrection City encampment in
Washington. Organizationally, SCLC was in sad disrepair, internally
feuding over Abernathy's leadership, when the strike in Charleston
broke out. Through the mediation of Stanley Levison, Moe Foner made a
strong appeal to SCLC to relocate its entire staff and make Charleston
its priority battleground. The black leaders of the organization
agreed. Andrew Young remembers:
          
            "We had decided that was the next frontier of the civil
rights movement before Martin's death. We began to see that having
made significant social and political progress, we'd have to take on
the economic question of full employment, of the right to organize, of
increasing minimum wage, of guaranteed annual income. Those were
things we talked about in '67, '68. And what led us into the Poor
People's Campaign was a specific effort to try to call the attention
of the nation to the plight of some forty million people who were
below the poverty line--many of whom were working. Hospital workers
came into the category of the working poor. Now of that forty million,
the majority of them were white. And so the Poor People's Campaign was
also the first opportunity we had in a national way to try to reach
out, to form a coalition between blacks, Hispanics, American Indian,
the trade union movement, and, say, white workers in Appalachia and in
the inner cities. It was really an attempt to overcome racial and
cultural differences and move into a common economic effort to get our
nation to eradicate poverty.
          
          In certain strategic respects, the SCLC approached Charleston as it
had Birmingham, Selma, and other places where it had faced a closed
fist of opposition. "When you could not get the government to
negotiate, either the state government or the local government," Young
recalls, "you had to mobilize the entire community, the churches and
the high schools students in a total program of non-cooperation or
economic withdrawal. So we had a boycott on Charleston for one hundred
days, and we had demonstrations conducted by the high school kids and
by and large, we kind of kept the city on edge until they were willing
to come around and talk about justice for these hospital workers."
          For the duration of the strike the SCLC made Charleston their main
organizing focus. For staff members, Carl Ferris, Andrew Young, James
Orange, and Hosea Williams, Charleston became a second home, while
Rev. Abernathy also spent considerable time there as the lightning rod
for mass mobilization, and Coretta King arrived at carefully selected
moments of greatest impact. Once involved, the SCLC drew on a network
of several hundred contacts gained through what Young called the
"underground work" of the state's citizenship or voter education
schools. To these natural allies the SCLC added an immediate outreach
to area churches.
          Dave White, sent from Brooklyn by 1199 to be Charleston community
relations liaison, recalls the conspicuous shift in focus as the
strike became a social movement:
          
            When they came in the first thing they did was to contact
all the ministers in the city and start lining ~p churches so we could
have mass meetings in the evening. They also contacted ministers and
got them to loan us their churches during the day to organize the
young people, kids all the way down to around eight and ten years
. . . and they organized activities for these 

kids, classes where we
had lectures on black history. I found out in Charleston that without
the church you can't do a fucking thing. And everything we did was
through the church, whether you believed in religion or
not.
          
          Entry of SCLC and a command post of civil rights movement
strategists had a mixed effect on Charleston events. Undoubtedly, the
collective experience and resources gathered there contributed to the
success of the campaign, reaching and mobilizing the black community
of Charleston as never before. But the outside help came at a certain
cost as well. More moderate figures, shy of the projected strategy,
tended to be pushed aside.
          A number of local figures who would ultimately figure prominently
in maintenance and resolution of the strike were alienated early from
the actual direction and leadership of events. They were the
indigenous leaders who would have to pick up the pieces once the major
drama was over. Isaiah Bennett, for example. He had sought to issue a
blanket invitation to all civil rights groups to help the strikers,
including the NAACP and the Urban League. "I was overruled by 1199. I
didn't know they had a working agreement with SCLC. I had no objection
against the SCLC, but, like Martin Luther King, he involved
everybody."
          1199 officials saw Bennett as too cautious on community organizing
strategy. Not long after the strike began, he was removed from an
official role in the campaign, and, although he continued to press for
a settlement from the mayor and other local authorities, his
activities were watched suspiciously by 1199 organizers.
          Directed at once to militant mobilization of the local black
community and to the sympathies of an outside, liberal white audience,
SCLC's aim was to force through shame, fear or property loss, some
relenting from the official position. As Young put it at the time, "It
is only when you create the same kind of crisis in the life of the
community as you have in the lives of workers that the community will
give in."
          SCLC leaders began their work in Charleston with confidence. Mass
marches through the central business corridors started April 21 as
Rev. Abernathy promised to "sock it to Charleston" and were repeated
at short intervals. Demonstrations were staged in the city's historic
district and at the Old Slave Mart museum. One Saturday morning scores
of teenagers dribbled basketballs down King Street, the city's
commercial thoroughfare.
          The intensity of the movement grew in late April and May. April
ended with ten marches in six days. Abernathy called for a boycott of
classes by school children. A May 11 Mother's Day March, led by
Abernathy, Coretta King and Walter Reuther brought out an
overwhelmingly black crowd of ten thousand. Finally, on May 24, SCLC
escalated an economic boycott of King Street businesses by conducting
"shop-ins" in which demonstrators would clog grocery aisles and cash
register lines.
          The coordinated actions on the ground in Charleston depended above
all on the unyielding determination of the strikers
themselves. Risking arrest and family hardship day after day, the
hospital strikers included some of the most dedicated union women ever
encountered in an American labor dispute. Letters from the workers,
some written from jail in the waning days of the strike attest to the
personal meanings of the struggle. For Mrs. D.P. Heyward the union was
"like an oak tree in a petrified forest." She saw the strike as a
matter of getting "all the little people together to decide now or
forget forever the hope of becoming a real American citizen." Lattie
Mae Glover, an aide at the Medical College, jailed once, wrote, "I've
seen sometimes in 1199B meetings and picket-lines Satan comes our
way. But appears to me that whenever Satan comes, 1199 B has prepared
a way to deal with him."
          Claire G. Brown, obstetrics technician at MCH, had five children,
some of whom joined her during two strike-related trips to jail.
          
            It was one of the most exciting, hardest, and important
periods of my life. The walking, walking, and more walking. The hours
and efforts spent trying to get programs together for mass
meetings.
          
          
            There were days I wanted to cry, I was so depressed, because
it seemed that in spite of all the hard work and sweat, that we
weren't accomplishing anything, . . . but 1199 didn't lie to us, they
laid it on the line and let us know just hard it was going to be
. . . If felt I was prepared . . . For anything else I know if I could
help it, I would never permit myself to be jailed, looking back I know
if I had it to do again I would do the same thing.
          
          Alongside the official union campaign, William Saunders' "black
power" group maintained an uneasy yet not insigificant relation to the
Charleston events. As an informal confidant of Mary Moultrie, Saunders
dispatched an armed "community militia" at strike meetings and
demonstrations, while functioning both as an ally of and watchdog on
the national strike leadership.
          Relationships between the militants and the mass movement leaders
were strained throughout. In Saunders' view the uncontrollable and
unpredictable nature of individual acts--no matter how
reckless--served as a powerful lever against white authority. Strike
organizers, however, took a much dimmer view. At one point they
reportedly paid Saunders and his group to maintain basic compliance
with strike discipline.
          From the beginning, the public image of the strike loomed large in
1199-SCLC thinking. The recipe of press coverage, financial support,
and political intervention 

that had worked so well in 1199's
successful organizing in New York was now projected at the national
level. The worse the picture of the city and state that emerged from
the Charleston strike, and the more aid that poured in from the
outside, so the union figured, the sooner all parties would reach an
acceptable compromise.
          Superficially, the strategy had the earmarks of success. While
running for weeks as national news, the Charleston strike gathered
support both from expected and unexpected sources. Not surprisingly,
New York 1199 members were the first to offer significant aid to their
Southern counterparts. But help also came from the national labor
movement as the AFL-CIO and the fledging UAW-Teamsters Alliance for
Labor Action competed as benefactors to the Charleston hospital
struggle. Moe Foner would even jest to Andrew Young, "If the labor
movement would only split two more ways, well make a profit here."
          The union effort also received a number of political
endorsements. Twenty-five congressmen led by New York representative
Ed Koch and seventeen senators led by Jacob Javits (R-NY) and Walter
Mondale (D-MN) urged federal mediation in this situation which had
become "a test of the principle of non-violence at a time when many in
America are losing faith in that principle as a strategy for social
change." Indeed, the plight of the Charleston strikers unified
northern liberal opinion as did few issues in 1969.
          Neither the endurance of the strikers nor the impressive array of
outsiders who came to their support swayed the hospital administrators
in Charleston or the political officials in Columbia. Six weeks into
the conflict, the parties seemed utterly deadlocked.
          One, although perhaps not the most important, problem for the union
concerned the effectiveness of the work stoppage itself. From the
beginning the Charleston strike probably created more trauma for the
city than real trouble for the struck institutions. Service at both
MCH and County was never severely curtailed. At the beginning of the
strike MCH reportedly reduced its patient load from 450 to three
hundred beds, while County Hospital also cut back by a half. By the
end of the first month of the strike, County had hired some fifty-four
replacements, while the Medical College made do with 250 new employees
in addition to volunteer labor.
          On the political front, as well, the strike was an altogether
different matter within the borders of South Carolina than it was on
the editorial pages of the Washington Post or New York
Times. Never before had the union been so far removed
from its influential friends.
          Governor McNair, considered by the union as vulnerable to political
pressure, simply would not budge on the issue of union
recognition. Instead, he tried to avoid it by offering new material
benefits to hospital workers. An early June news leak thus hinted that
an ongoing review of all state employee relations had decided to
recommend a raise in the state minimum wage for public workers from
$1.30 per hour to the federal minimum of $1.60. In addition the review
promised a serious look at job classifications, holding out the hope
to hospital workers of rational readjustment of salaries and work
descriptions. In the meantime the state legislators effectively
registered their opinion of the strike. In the face of the Charleston
school boycott organized by SCLC, the South Carolina House of
Representatives on May 29 approved a Senate bill making it unlawful
"to encourage or entice a child to stay out of school." The measure
provided for a fine of up to one thousand dollars and a prison term of
up to two years, or both, for a first offender.
          Such resistance to union demands at the state level had its
counterpart in the corporate consensus with which 

Charleston community
leaders handled the direct blows of the union forces. Relying on the
city's experience with the 1963 sit-ins, Judge Singletary and law
enforcement officials used discretion throughout the strike to avoid
violent confrontation and property damage. Several times, for example,
Singletary overlooked or delayed contempt citations; on principle he
kept his rulings to a bare minimum. Chief of Police John F. Conroy, an
articulate ex-marine from Niagara Falls, New York, likewise,
complemented the judicial approach with a cool, patient approach to
the demonstrators. There was no Bull Connor among Charleston
officials, thus depriving the SCLC of the issue of unreasonable,
indiscriminate force by local lawmen which had energized their
campaigns in Selma, Montgomery, and Birmingham.
          If the local white leadership kept a firm but controlled grip on
the strikers, white opinion, except for the lone voice of the
Charleston Catholic diocese, grew impassionately anti-union during the
disturbance. A resolution of the Charleston County Council (which
oversaw County Hospital) thus referred to "the unwarranted strike and
unrest foisted on its citizens by a small group of individuals, many
of whom are unrelated to this area interested only in their own
self-seeking ends."
          For many Charlestonians the assault by the union-civil rights
forces on their city cut deeper than issues of trade unionism or civil
rights. The message of deliverance and freedom carried by SCLC in its
oft-repeated refrains of "I Am Somebody" implicitly castigated the old
ways of a city whose very historic mindedness was both its pride and
chief economic selling point. Something of the resulting reaction of
outrage and hurt was evident in the paid "Letter to Ralph Abernathy",
by a local pastor which appeared in the Charleston News and
Courier, May 7;
          
            Remember what you said when you came to Charleston?--about
not wanting to see any more historic sites? When you said that I do
not think you knew what it could mean to some of our Negro
friends.... You have heard of the famous Gardens. Do you think any
real connoisseur can walk through one of these gardens without
appreciating the know-how and tender care of the Black man that makes
it all possible? Have you ever seen the look of pride on the Black
man's face as he watches these tourists admire these gardens?
. . . What of the colored Mammy? Could all your speeches and marches
ever replace the glow of pride on her face as she watches, day after
day, as her little charge grows into a man of importance in the
world?
          
          Clearly, the immediate struggle of the hospital workers was
projected over a much wider set of issues and symbols. It came to
stand on one side for a rebellion against years of white domination
and black subservience; on the other side the issue summoned up an
almost chauvinistic civic loyalty, an instinctual defense of a way of
life.
          Within the first two weeks of May, 1199 leaders reluctantly (and
privately) reached the conclusion that "we just did not have the
cards." Relying as they were on daily transfusions of outside aid to
maintain their operation, the union forces were faced not only with
the depletion of their resources in Charleston but growing sacrifices
of their commitment to union members back home. The grim reassessment
of the Charleston situation was coupled with an equally difficult
question: having focused so much energy and attention on Charleston,
how now to disentangle themselves without suffering a nationally
humiliating defeat? Publicly, the first change in the union's position
came in a hint by organizing director Elliott Godoff on May 15 that
the union might compromise its demand for direct recognition in favor
of some independent intermediary voice for the hospital workers.
          While the union initiative produced no sudden shift from the
state's refusal to negotiate, it was soon combined with an unexpected,
outside force to raise the odds on a compromise. The new influence
came from the direct intervention of the federal government. Sometime
in the latter half of May, union leaders, through contacts with HEW
Undersecretary James Farmer and former Undersecretary Ruby Martin,
learned that MCH was 

being audited under terms of the federal
regulations governing the millions of dollars in grants going to the
medical complex. On June 4 the strike got perhaps its most important
shot in the arm. In addition to citing thirty-seven civil rights
violations by the MCH administration, the HEW noncompliance report
included in its suggested means of redress the rehiring of the twelve
union workers whose dismissal had touched off the strike.
          Within ten days of the HEW intervention, the basic pieces were in
place to end the Charleston strike. On June 9 the Governor, after
cutting the city's curfew hours in half, publicly accepted the state's
responsibility to comply with the federal guidelines. McCord soon
announced his willingness to take back not only the strikers but to
rehire (in accord with the HEW request) the twelve fired
workers. State and hospital officials, desperate to end the unrest in
Charleston but politically constrained from appearing to appease the
strikers could now blame the feds for forcing concessions. Meanwhile,
the union issue itself might officially be finessed. Without any
formal reference to recognition or collective bargaining, the hospital
would agree to a new gievance procedure allowing a worker to bring a
representative of her own choosing to grievance sessions (i.e. a
procedure which could allow for active union delegates). Given solid
backing by the workers 1199 (as it had in New York City in 1959) might
eventually turn such a deal into a union beachhead. For political
officials as well as embattled hospital administrators, the immediate
moment, however, counted for more. Behind the scenes hopes rose high
in the union camp as the informal signing date of June 12 neared for a
real agreement.
          Then, only hours before the planned meeting, McCord countermanded
his earlier offer to rehire the fired workers. The formula for
settlement had worked perfectly, except for one problem. The Federal
Government, during the Nixon Administration, was not so immune from
political pressures as to allow a free hand to HEW's civil rights
enthusiasts. The Administration, in fact, felt the tug on each
side. On the one hand liberal pressure for compromise and settlement
of the dispute arose form the second-level administrative staff of the
Administrtion. Politically, however the "Southern strategy" of the
Nixon Administration looked to a different constituency and was
therefore susceptible to different pressures. In this case the heat
welling up from a key state and from strategists in Nixon's narrow
1968 electoral victory could not be ignored. Already, state party
chairman, Ray Harris, had made clear that Governor McNair and his
fellow Democrats would be held accountable for any waffling on the
hospital issue. Then, in a powerful one-two punch on the morning of
June 12, Democratic Representative L. Mendel Rivers and Republican
Senator Strom Thurmond prevailed upon HEW Secretary Robert Finch to
back off the threatened fund cutoff to MCH "pending a personal
investigation" once he returned from a planned vacation to the
Bahamas. This signal of retreat from Washington effectively let the
air out of the Charleston accord. Only hours later, McCord rescinded
his pledge to rehire the twelve workers.
          Collapse of the projected settlement set off two more weeks of
rising tension, including night marches, mass arrests, fire-bombings,
and threats to tie up area telephone and transportation arteries. ILA
(International Longshoremen) leaders hinted that the longshoremen
might close the port of Charleston, while 1199 sympathizers talked
opening of spreading the union agitation to the South Carolina textile
industry. The tone of the hour was suggested by SCLC aide Hosea
Williams at a June 20 rally:
          
            White folks are crazy. White America is insane. We have
played around with Charleston long enough. We're going to march in
Charleston tonight or we're going to die.
          
          Again it fell to Washington to break the impasse. Foner links the
final initiative to the behind-the-scenes work of presidential
counselor, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, whom the union leader called on a
tip from New York Post editor, James Wechsler. "I
[Foner] say, 'Look, I'm not going to be responsible, but I think you
[Moynihan] have' to know, the night marches are going to continue, and
this town is going to burn.' He says, 'Thank you and stay in 

touch
with me.' " Through Moynihan's intervention the White House took
advantage of Finch's holiday absence to transfer authority over the
Charleston crisis to Labor Secretary George Shultz. Armed with the
renewed threat of a fund cutoff, Schultz, with Mayor Gaillard's
acquiscence, sent mediator William Pierce to Charleston on June
24. Finally, on Friday, June 27, after a tough call invoking the
national interest to McCord from White House aide and former state
Republican chairman, Harry Dent, the hospital director agreed once
again to rehire the twelve fired workers along with the other
strikers. At the same time Andrew Young paid a surprise, secret visit
to the white nurses at MCH and convinced them to drop their opposition
to the return of the strikers, thus removing the last political hurdle
to settlement. McCord's official statement was terse: "We have
settled."
          For hospital officials the agreement itself ended the drama. Union
leaders, partly because they had been through such wars before, knew
better. The union needed a 'victory,' not just a stalemate. In the
immediate coverage of the strike, they got their triumph. By
selectively leaking details of the settlement and putting the best
possible interpretation on the official language of settlement, the
union salvaged a major public relations victory. As the New York
Times noted on June 28, the settlement "appeared to
meet the major demands of the hospital workers." While no mention was
made of union recognition or collective bargaining in the settlement,
the union pointed to the grievance procedure and proposed credit union
as means by which the union might effecively both represent employees
through a union grievance committee and achieve some form of dues
checkoff. These terms--neither of which were to pan out as
predicted--together with worker raises, and rehiring of fired and
struck workers were what four hundred jubilant, singing strikers were
celebrating the night of the settlement at Zion-Olivet United
Presbyterian Church.
          With money, militancy, and mirrors 1199 had fought itself out of
the Charleston thicket, avoiding disaster saving workers' jobs and
vindicating the determination of their followers. To some local eyes,
Rev. Grant's among them, the Charleston settlement indeed was "more
than a compromise. It was a victory."
          Grant notes even more important side-effects of the strike for the
community; "it was like a revolution," black voter registration "shot
up like mad" (black representation on the city council, for example,
went from one to six delegates in ten years), neighborhoods in
Charleston County were partially integrated, "people were forced to
take notice of the entire black community."
          In 1970 Herbert U. Fielding, Charleston funeral home director,
became the first black elected to the state legislature, while vocal
strike supporter, Rev. Robert Woods, would follow a few years
later. In addition to some positive changes in labor relations at the
hospitals, Saunders, reminiscing in 1979, said that the strike made
whites "respect blacks for having organized. They're a little scared
now and will negotiate before situations reach that same level of
polarization."
          Next to such "benefits" of the strike, however, must be placed its
ultimate failure to organize the Charleston hospital workers into an
enduring and recognized union. When one turns to workers, particularly
strike militants, the victory in Charleston appears comparatively
hollow. At the time of the settlement, many, at least among
second-level 1199 staff left the city still convinced that the
foundation for a successful union local had indeed been laid. Such
confidence proved ill-founded. The Charleston strikers never got their
union, or anything close to it. The battle lines remained for three
more weeks until County Hospital followed up the MCH settlement
practically to the letter, on July 19. After that, the outside support
for Charleston hospital campaign all but dried up. The money was gone,
the issue had lost its national dramatic appeal, and, perhaps most
importantly, the union and SCLC had other priorities. The local
leadership around Mary Moultrie, more national spokesperson than
organizer in any case, proved unable to maintain difficult grassroots
organizing work. The workers had no office of their own and outside
help came only intermittently from New York. Lone SCLC staffer, James
Orange, turned his attention to other community matters including a
city- 

wide organizing drive by black sanitation workers. What was
worse, long-simmering mistrust and differences among workers burst
forth when the real terms of day-today life at work reasserted
themselves. Jubilation and celebration quickly turned to bitter
recrimination and accusation against Moultrie, against Saunders,
against the union itself. Only the hospital administration in this
case was able to capitalize on the post-strike wave of
disillusionment.
          In the months following the strike the MCH administration not only
refused to authorize checkoff through the credit union but effectively
undermined informal union stewardship through the grievance procedure
by limiting the number of times that the same person could serve as
the griever's representative. Mary Moultrie herself, strike heroine,
was ultimately voted out as chapter president and withdrew from
hospital organizing in discouraged confusion. The unhappy end of her
roller-coaster ride into stardom and notoriety with the union was
highlighted in a family trip she made to New York City in 1973. With
one of her cousins, an 1199 member in New York, Moultrie paid a visit
to the attractive new headquarters of the hospital workers union, the
Martin Luther King Labor Center. Her cousin led Mary down one hallway
at the end of which she encountered a giant, blown-up photograph of
herself marching arm in arm with Walter Reuther. Mary left the
building without even making her presence known to officials
upstairs. Moultrie, in the end, felt, "hurt and disappointed with a
lot of people who I had been involved with." "If I had it to do again
I would. But then I'd be careful."
          Beyond the conclusions of the hospital campaign in Charleston--part
vindication part defeat--lay the significance of the struggle for
hospital workers and 1199 nationally. Here the returns for the union
proved much more tangible. In the course of the Charleston campaign
the hospital union, before a nation-wide audience, had proved itself
willing and able to take on any foe.
          Particularly to younger black workers the "union power-soul power"
crusade broke down barriers often separating labor and civil rights
militancy. If such a strategy won concessions in the heart of the
anti-union South, would they not utterly triumph in the
urban-industrial North? In the weeks following the Charleston
settlement, 1199 organizers confidently set up shop in a half-dozen
cities, while in Baltimore the mere threat of "pulling another
Charleston" extracted a union recognition agreement from huge and
prestigious John Hopkins Medical center.
          As Claire Brown declared at the end of the film, "I Am Somebody," a
union-sponsored documentary produced during the Charleston events: "If
I didn't learn but one thing it was that if you are ready and willing
to fight for yourself, other folks will be ready and willing to fight
for you." She was right, of course, but the location of the fight
often proves to be decisive. For those who look forward to the
unionization of the Southern work force, the experience of Claire
Brown and her friends leaves two difficult questions--What more is
required? What more is possible?
          The years since the Charleston dispute have hardly been encouraging
ones for the labor movement in general, let alone for those struggling
in non-union Southern bastions amid restrictive state
legislation. Nevertheless, the Charleston experience may offer a few
strategic clues for the future. The Charleston campaign got as far as
it did by combining militant community organizing work with available
political power levers--in this case the civil rights arm of the
federal government. While those particular levers are considerably
weaker now than they were in 1969 (and in any case are limited by the
demographics of the labor force), the "political" lesson should not be
lost. Short of a national "new deal" of labor legislation, the
hardline anti-union policy of Southern states must be whittled away
both at the workplace and the statehouse. Both "ends" of such an
effort require a greater effort form the national unions. Yet, if
unions are to take a more active role in Southern community life, then
confident talk of a progressive "sunbelt" must come to include a
formal voice for the region's working people.
          
            Leon Fink is assistant professor of history at the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He is author of
Workingmen's Democracy: The Knights of Labor and American
Politics (University of Illinois Press, 198S). This article
was first presented as a talk to the Fourth Southern Labor Studies
Conference, Georgia State University in Atlanta, September 30--October
2, 1982. It forms part of a larger history of the hospital workers'
union co-authored by Brian Greenberg to be published by Harvard
University Press in 1984. The author gratefully acknowledges the help
of Stephen Hoffius and David J. Garrow in his research.
          
        
        
          Mississippi Makes Up Its Mind
          By Barber, RimsRims Barber
          Vol. 5, No. 2, 1983, pp. 8-9
          
          The passage of an educational reform package by the Mississippi
Legislature was an important victory for public involvement. Pushing
the legislature to act on the education issue involved a broader based
public effort than any other issue in recent Mississippi history. Such
interest and effort made the legislature accountable, forcing it to
act in ways that were beyond its normal, narrow political
framework.
          Governor William Winter focused the issues in a manner that
captured the public. He developed a campaign that led people to demand
reforms in education because they were right and good and possible.
          In his state of the state message at the opening of the January
1982 legislative session, Governor Winter had called for creation of
kindergartens, a state lay board of education and passage of
compulsory attendance legislation. Exhorting the legislature to help
move Mississippi out of fiftieth place among the states in per capita
income, Winter called for a long term commitment to improve
education. To pay for the program, he asked for an educational trust
fund generated from the revenues of an increase in the oil and gas
severance tax. "It's boat rocking time," he said, trying to motivate
legislators to vote for a significant change. But the legislature only
gave its approval to the state lay board, placing it on the November
ballot as a constitutional amendment.
          Kindergarten died on the house calendar in February 1982 as Speaker
Buddie Newman adjourned the house even as members tried to gain
consideration of the measure. Black legislator Leslie King condemned
Newman's action in "ignoring the will of this body." Efforts to revive
the kindergarten measure failed and the trust fund was
defeated. Representative Robert Clark, chairman of the education
committee, said that many representatives "turned chicken" on the
issue of kindergarten when the money proposal was before them. He
predicted that "this is the one last chance we'll have in the next six
or eight years to enact kindergartens."
          Clark would be proved wrong, but only after an intense public
campaign initiated by Governor Winter which led to the special session
in December. In the fall, the governor conducted a nine-city campaign
of education forums, emphasizing the need for Mississippi to make a
breakthrough in education or forever be lost in last place among the
states. Almost twenty thousand people attended those forums, building
support that helped pass the constitutional referendum, finally
creating the state lay board of education and setting the base of
support for the education reform package voted on in the special
session.
          People began to work for the changes they believed would bring
about progress for all Mississippians.  To accomplish this, they
overcame their sense of narrow self-interest and saw the
interdependence of all the state's people.
          The governor moved Theodore "The Man" Bilbo's statue, one symbol of
the past, out of the main corridor of the capitol building and the
people helped move the legislature beyond the vestiges of that
past.
          Much of the recent history of Mississippi school matters has been
tied up in the racial dilemma. In the 1950's, the state responded to
the Brown decision with a series of changes in the laws that were an
attempt to stave off the potential effects of desegregation. In the
1960's, school desegregation came and along with it the private school
movement.
          Following legal desegregation of the public schools, segregated
academies blossomed across the state, leaving a fourth of
Mississippi's school districts virtually all-black (although whites
still controlled the school boards). Several districts lowered their
local tax support of public schools. Half the black principals in the
state lost their leadership positions. With significant numbers of
voters no longer committed to the public schools, many legislators
faltered in their support for public education. Resolutions were
passed calling for an end to busing. A try at enacting kindergarten in
1972 failed in the face of race-baiting opposition.
          Throughout this period, many educational leaders continued to call
for reform. In 1967, Mississippi commissioned a significant study
which concluded that "our children are not receiving as effective an
education as they need . . . our economic development goals cannot be
achieved unless we greatly strengthen our total educational system."
Despite this and similar urgings 

that Mississippi make educational
reforms, there was a hardening of the lines of resistance that left
the studies collecting dust.
          Finally, in the 1980s, time had healed some of the old wounds and
the governor seized the opportunity. The victory came in spite of last
minute rantings on the floor of the legislature against the evils of
integrated schools and the clear attempt to make "those people" pay
for "their education."
          A price was exacted by those good ol' boys who would put off the
day when all Mississippians can reap the benefits of a healthy and
common society. Compulsory attendance will only apply to six and seven
year old children this year. Kindergartens will be delayed until 1986
and will stand repealed in 1990 unless the people maintain their
pressure on the legislature. The taxes will fall more heavily on the
poor and the middle classes than on the monied interests in the
state.
          In the end, the leadership of the legislative branch did not want
the political heat that they felt would surely come if they had not
passed the reform package. House leaders had been badly burned in the
spring when their killing of kindergarten received national
attention. ABC-TV's program "20/20" focused on Mississippi's failure
to place the education of children above special interests such as the
oil and gas industry. The legislators" behavior also spurred political
activity with the formation of a progressive political action
committee (Mississippi First) which had the goal of "electing a better
legislature." At the fall education forums, Mississippi First asked
people to sign "Yes, I'm tired of our legislature taking a last place
approach to Mississippi's future."
          The state's press provided clear reporting and strong editorial
support. For the week prior to the special session, the statewide
newpapers ran a series on educational reform issues. During the
session, the Jackson papers promoted passage of the package and
editorially targeted legislators who did not support it.
          The mechanism for significantly improving Mississippi's educational
system is now law. In November 1982, the state's voters passed a
constitutional amendment to replace the ex
officio state school board with a new lay board of education in
1984. The Educational Reform Act contains a means of empowering the
new board to make improvements in school curriculum, accreditation,
teacher certification, professional development and to take a hard
look at the need for school consolidation.
          The Act also establishes an enforceable compulsory attendance law,
kindergartens and teacher aides for the first three grades. This, with
the improved program for vocational education passed last spring,
should provide the framework for progress.
          This is not to say that all the problems are solved. The new state
board of education must have the vision, aggressiveness and
independence to carry out the mission set forth in the new law. The
people must apply their new found strength in holding the legislature
accountable for the general welfare of the community to see that the
reforms are implemented. There must be a fight on financing, for the
law leaves a gap that must be filled. The kindergarten issue must
finally be put to rest with the removal of the repeal provision.
          In Mississippi, people who were never involved in politics are now
involved. They can make the difference not only in improving our
educational system but in areas of health and welfare and justice for
all. We cannot live as a divided people, leaving one segment or
another of our population behind. Perhaps, on this foundation,
Mississippi is now ready to build.
          
            
              Features of the Educational Reform Act
               Kindergarten in all school districts by 1986, supported by
forty million dollars annually
               Compulsory attendance beginning with ages six and seven in
1983 and adding one year until age fourteen
               Salary increases for teachers of one thousand dollars, taking
Mississippi off the bottom rung of the teacher pay ladder
               A performance based school accreditation system
               A study to consider consolidating small schools and small
districts
               A commission to set new teacher education and certification
standards
               A program of professional development for school
administrators
               Authority granted to the state lay board of education to
compel compliance with the new standards
            
          
          
            Rims Barber, a member of the Southern Regional Council,
is project director for Childrens' Defense Fund in
Mississippi.
          
        
      
    
  