
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 5, Number 1,
	       1983
        
          Elephants in the Cottonfields
          By Williams, RandallRandall Williams
          Vol. 5, No. 1, 1983, pp. 19-20
          
          Elephants in the Cottonfields: Ronald Reagan and the New
Republican South. Wayne Greenhaw. Macmillan, 1982.
          The growing strength of the Republican party in Dixie has taken
many Democrats by both storm and surprise, but the
G.O.P. muscle-building did not begin yesterday. Explaining this fact
is only one of the services performed here by author Wayne Greenhaw,
though if he had accomplished nothing else Elephants
would still bee success.
          In fact the book offers a great deal more. Greenhaw has assembled
detailed profiles of the leading personalities behind the Republican
surge; he manages to give us a picture of the situation in every
Southern state, and his interviews with young voters reveal what the
South's political future might be if many Republican dreams--and
Democratic nightmares--are realized.
          In that sense, Greenhaw's book is non-partisan political reportage;
both Democrats and Republicans will come away from
Elephants knowing much more about their respective
parties.
          There is plenty of history here that never gets taught in many
Southern schools. Greenhaw starts at the beginning, with the Southern
reaction to the formation of the Republican party. Then he moves
ahead, through secession, through war, then Reconstruction, then the
return to power in the South of white Democrats.
          Of more immediate interest is the examination of how Goldwater
fever hit the South in 1964. Here Ronald Reagan appeared for the first
time, and Richard Nixon returned, and the groundwork was laid for the
first real two-party politics in the South in one hundred years.
          Greenhaw writes that this was no accident but an indicator of the
polarization within the Democratic party over racial issues. Strom
Thurmond was not the only Democrat converting to Republicanism out of
a belief that the South was being forced by national Democrats into a
Second Reconstruction.
          But as white Southern Democrats abandoned their party, blacks moved
into it. (The quotes by George Wallace--the '64 model--on this
development are intriguing.) More than ninety percent of blacks voted
Democratic in 1964, signaling the extent to which Lincoln's party and
the Democrats had switched roles.
          Elephants is a contemporary story from this point
on, and begins to be peopled by familiar characters. Here for example
is Jesse Helms, who began as "a soda jerk at the local drugstore,
sweeping out the weekly Monroe Enquirer, and writing up
the high school (athletic games)," and eventually became a newspaper,
radio and television personality, which gave him the platform he
needed to become a well-known conservative voice in the "tobacco
valleys of eastern North Carolina."
          Thousands of words have been written about Helms, but few have as
carefully explored his early career and the foundation of his
astonishing political popularity built around a philosophy of
negativism . . . "He has always against something, whether it was food
stamps for the needy, sex education for the ignorant, or
government-paid abortions for women who could not otherwise afford
such drastic measures of birth control." Meanwhile, adds Greenhaw,
"federal support for tobacco farmers was a necessity as (Helms) viewed
it. Besides, his wife had a tobacco allotment."
          Similarly profiled is Jeremiah Denton, the junior senator from
Alabama who rode his reputation as a Vietnam war hero into the
Capitol. Both Denton and Helms are important to any discussion of
Republicans today, but they do not represent the entire party. In
fact, the detail with which Elephants examines the extreme right,
especially the religious right, reveals the serious differences which
exist within the Republican party.
          Representing another faction of the GOP is Tennessee's Howard
Baker, through whom Greenhaw illustrates the "new old Republican
order." Baker's Senate seat adjoins those of both Helms and Denton,
but his brand of Republicanism may as well be from another
planet. While Helms was reading segregationist editorials over the air
in North Carolina in the Sixties, Baker was studiously keeping to the
middle of the road, voting against federal funds for busing but for
all major civil rights legislation.
          Greenhaw's skill as a reporter has never been more evident than in
the chapter he does on Lee Atwater, the South Carolina protege of
Thurmond who ramrodded the Reagan campaign in the South and in his
spare time managed the campaigns of six Republican congressional
candidates (all six won).
          Atwater is the master--and originator, he says--of the Negative
Factor Theory of politics. This theory is put into practice through a
simple technique: Never mind the issues, just raise lots of money,
find dirt on the opponent, then publicize the hell out of it. If no
dirt exists, invent some.
          This chapter should be memorized by any Democrat planning to run
for office in what used to be the Solid South. However, Greenhaw
writes not just about Atwater's strategies, but about the man
himself. In fact, he peels Atwater like an onion, layer by layer, yet
he does 

it in such a way that probably no one will enjoy that chapter
more than Atwater himself.
          Greenhaw makes no projections for the future success or failure of
Atwater and his Republican colleagues. He acknowledges that although
Republicans are growing in strength, Democrats generally still control
the South but with a looser grip than before.
          What will become of the young Republicans who call themselves
progressives, or the New Right apostles who viewed Reagan's election
as a mandate for them? That remains to be seen, of course, but
Greenhaw has given us a good look at the landscape.
          
            Randall Williams, a writer and editor who lives in
Montgomery, is a Yellow-dog Democrat.
          
        
        
          The Smithsonian Collection of Classic Country
Music
          By Whisnant, David E.David E. Whisnant
          Vol. 5, No. 1, 1983, pp. 20-24
          
          The Smithsonian Collection of Classic Country
Music, selected and annotated by Bill Malone (Washington,
D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1981). Eight LP or cassette set, boxed,
with 55 pp. illustrated brochure. $54.95.
          Classic Country Music, prepared by Bill C. Malone
for the Smithsonian Institution, takes one back to the clear
headwaters: the first commercial hillbilly recording (Eck Robertson's
"Sally Gooden" for Victor in 1922); the first big sellers (Vernon
Dalhart's "Wreck of the Ole 97" of 1924, Carl T. Sprague's "When the
Work's All Done This Fall" of 1925, Jimmie Rodgers' "Waiting For a
Train" of 1928); one of the earliest recorded examples of steel guitar
playing (Derby and Tarlton's "Birmingham Jail" of 1927); the first big
hit by a woman performer (Patsy Montana's "I Want to Be a Cowboy's
Sweetheart" of 1935); Bill Monroe and His Blue Grass Boys performing
the Jimmie Rodgers hit (and later bluegrass standard) "Muleskinner
Blues" in October, 1940 (with Monroe on guitar); the first recorded
example of mandolin cross-picking (Jim and Jesse's "Are You Missing
Me" of 1952), and so on. Altogether a hundred and forty-three tunes,
from Fiddlin' John Carson and the Stonemans to Tammy, Willie, Merle
and Dolly. "Funny," as Willie sings, "How Time Slips Away."
          So friends, don't delay. This offer is good for a limited time
only. Send your check or money order for $54.95 TODAY to "Smithsonian,
Washington, D.C. 20560." That's S-M-I-T-H-S-O-N-I-A-N, Washington, D.C., two oh five, six oh. The first one
hundred orders will receive, in addition to these
eight fine records or cassettes packaged in a beautiful fold-out box
you will be proud to display, an autographed eight by ten glossy
photograph of your favorite country singer,
suitable for framing. You'll hear the inimitable Carter Family's
"Wildwood Flower," so beloved by many a parking lot picker; the
Delmores' "Brown's Ferry Blues," made famous later by Merle Travis,
the Louvin Brothers, and Doc Watson; the original
"Orange Blossom Special" by the Rouse Brothers; and the incomparable
Roy scuff's "Great Speckled Bird." You'll thrill to Cliff Carlisle's
wailing dobro, Lulu Belle and Scotty's "Remember Me (When the Candle
Lights Are Gleaming)," and many, many more. It's an opportunity you
can't afford to miss. So send today. If you are
not completely satisfied, your money will be cheerfully refunded.
          Well, I "sent away," as they used to say in the days of boxtops,
and I am indeed (almost) completely satisfied. Bill Malone has done,
on the whole, an excellent job; it would be folly to expect that his
(or anyone's) 143 choices 

(from a few tens of thousands) could ever
satisfy everyone. Someone could always ask why this tune and not that
one? So the task here is not to quibble about individual tunes, but to
ask how well the eight records reflect the complicated and dynamic
history of country music.
          One the whole, very well indeed. Malone's strong and sensitive
commentary, arising from his recollections of growing up with country
music as a poor boy in east Texas, is written with the grace and depth
and gentleness that come from knowing--as most country songs tell
us--that life is both very hard and very beautiful. Malone divides the
history of country music roughly into five periods: the birth of the
industry in the 1920s (Dalhart, Uncle Dave, Gid Tanner and others);
national dissemination and popularization in the 1930s
(southeasterners such as the Delmores, Monroes, Bolicks, and Mainers;
and southwesterners such as Bob Wills, Gene Autry and the Sons of the
Pioneers); the "honky tonk" period, ;94153 (Ernest Tubb, Hank Snow,
Hank Williams); rockabilly and country pop, 1953-63 (Cash, Ray Price,
Chet Atkins, Lefty Frizzell and others); and the current scene since
1960. An additional category--bluegrass and the urban folk
revival--cuts across several of the latter chronological
periods. Malone's historical essay is supplemented by extensive
discographical, historical and interpretative notes on each
selection.
          In his essay and notes, Malone surveys some of the major social,
political and economic factors that have shaped the music:
developments in the radio, recording and television industries; the
Depression and World War II; the urban folk revival; the movement of
country people to the city; the proliferation of small record
companies in recent years; the fusion of southeastern and southwestern
styles; the responses of individual performs to social pressure and
dramatic social change. He also explicates some of the major internal
dynamics of the music: the movement from personally modest solo
performers and small permanent ensembles to high-priced,
self-conscious stars "backed" by large aggregations of anonymous
session musicians; the shift from simple to complex, virtuoso
instrumental styles; the replacement of traditional, public domain
tunes by copyrighted material; the gradual evolution from fiddle,
banjo and guitar to drums, dobro, and pedal steel; and the
technological drift from single takes on wax to twenty-four track
taping, mixing, and overdubbing.
          By selecting carefully from Malone's 143 tunes, one can also
assemble some interesting "sub-histories" of country music. One can
follow to some extent the emergence of women performers, from the Coon
Creek Girls through Patsy Montana and Molly O'Day to Patsy Cline and
Dolly Parton. One can observe the seemingly perennial ambivalence of
the country music audience with respect to rough vs. smooth or
cultivated vocal styles: Uncle Dave, Martha Carson, Molly O'Day and
Wilma Lee Cooper on the one hand, and a rather surprising array of
smooth singers on the other--Bradley Kincaid, Buell Kazee, Vernon
Dalhart (a Texas-born light opera tenor who tried to sound rough
again, but couldn't), Jimmie Rodgers, Red Foley, Eddie Arnold,
Tennessee Ernie Ford, Jim Reeves, and others. Or one can line up the
brother duets (Callahans, Bolicks, Sheltons, Delmores, Monroes,
Kershaws, Louvins, Everlys, Stanleys, MacReynoldses, Osbornes, Lillys)
and wonder whether such duets were, developmentally, a way-station
between the older family-based groups and the newer luxury bus-owning
stars--the last remnant of the close rural family before its final
atomization, the archetypal (Jacob and Esau) binary pair struggling
for unity and harmony against the fragmenting forces of a culture.
          A fine collection, then, and a fine job of selection and
presentation, terms of both and order Malone brings to it, and the
other interpretative orderings it invites. Still, there are some
problems that go beyond quibbling about "significant" (read favorite)
tunes excluded. Malone writes at length, for example, about rockabilly
and country pop, but we get recorded examples of only the
latter. There is no tune by Elvis, Carl Perkins, or Jerry Lee Lewis (a
problem with permissions from Sun Records, perhaps?). And from my
perspective, there are altogether too many bluegrass tunes (two
complete sides; eighteen tunes; nearly thirteen percent of the total,
including three by Bill Monroe; more than twice the number of gospel
tunes--almost half in bluegrass versions). Could that have resulted
from the Smithsonian's exaggerated sensitivity to its local
middle-class audience in Washington--rightly known as the bluegrass
capital of the east coast? As for gospel itself, it seem rather
seriously under-represented in view of its prominence among those
people who gave birth to and sustained country music. Virtually every
country music radio or television show ever broadcast, after all,
included at least one gospel song.
          One also wonders why there is not a single example of country
blues, which admittedly was not featured on the major country music
radio stations or barn dances, but which was every bit as important a
part of the country music scene after 1920--both as separate idiom
as influence on white performers--as were southern mountain string
bands. Indeed, Malone himself treats these performers in his
Southern Music American Music (1979).
          But finally the larger questions beckon: why, toward what ends, and
with what effect has the Smithsonian at long last ventured to dip its
elite toe into the waters of commercial country music? The institution
has been 

there since 1846, after all, and could well have documented
at first hand most of the now long lost traditions from which country
music draws its styles and idioms.
          Why didn't it? Partly because its directors have almost always been
natural scientists with at best a limited interest in humanistic or
artistic matters. The Smithsonian's most significant foray into
cultural work (prior to the 1960s, anyway) was the Bureau of
Ethnology, formed by Major John Wesley Powell in 1879, and even that
enterprise proceeded under the flag of scientific anthropology and
archaeology. Nevertheless, for more than a half-century the BAE
carried out extensive studies of American Indian history and life:
language and literature; material culture; myth, ritual, and
ceremonial life; music and dance. But the Bureau was never able to
take what would appear to have been the logical step of moving from
studying Indian life and culture to studying the rich and diverse
culture of the country's many immigrant and enclaved cultural
groups.
          That did not mean that such studies fared poorly within federal
institutions supposedly concerned with culture. The Library of
Congress established its Archive of Folk Song in 1928, but it was (and
remains to this day) small and poorly funded, particularly in
comparison with analogous European efforts. The cultural projects of
the New Deal for the most part did not survive more than a decade. The
National Endowments for the Arts and Humanities, established in 1965,
were initially oriented exclusively toward high culture, and more than
a decade later had to be forced to begin to pay modest (rather
grudging, as it turned out) attention to traditional, non-elite
culture. The first major policy affirmation of federal commitment to
the recognition of traditional culture (the American Folklife
Preservation Act) was signed into law at the opening of the nation's
two hundredth year.
          Meanwhile, since the mid-1960s, the Smithsonian has been inching
toward a rather tentative involvement with non-elite culture. It
staged its first Festival of American Folklife in 1967, and opened a
neighborhood museum in the mostly black District of Columbia suburb of
Anacostia in 1968. Those stirrings, hesitant as they were, came in
response to both the social upheavals of the sixties (Resurrection
City was set up virtually in the front yard of the Smithsonian) and
the urgings of a few individuals who had become infatuated by
traditional music during the "folk revival" of the preceding
decade.
          If one looks closely at the institution's tentative gestures toward
the culturally unwashed, however, they generally prove to have
substantial ties to the old elitism. The Smithsonian's first major
phonograph record issuing project was its six-record Classic
Jazz package of 1973, aimed at--and bought mainly by, I would
guess--middle class whites, who form the bulk of the jazz listening
audience. (The Smithsonian's jazz recording series now totals about
three dozen discs.) Not until country music--historically the music of
lower and working class whites, primarily in the South--began to be
accorded status by a growing national (and upscale) audience did the
Smithsonian draw it within the institutional pale. Not, indeed, until
country music became chic, and designer-jeaned
and powder blue cowboy-hatted Junior Leaguers began to listen to
bluegrass and pump quarters into mechanical broncos at scores of
Gilley's replicas all across the country.
          Even at that, there are signs that the Smithsonian released
Classic Country Music with some sense of
peril. Consider, for example, the preface to the fifty-six page
brochure, supplied by the Smithsonian's Division of Performing Arts,
which issued the set. It is the only official institutional statement
in the entire package, and therefore presumably an index to the
attitudes of at least some Smithsonian policy makers toward the
project and its subject matter. In the main, the preface attempts to
apply to country music concepts and analytical categories developed to
analyze and interpret elite ("classical") music. Thus we learn that
most country songs are in "AABA form," are "atrophic," and have a
"melodic sequence" that moves from tonic to subdominant and back to
tonic. So far, so good. There certainly is a need to comprehend
country music in terms more precise and analytically useful than those
employed by disc jockeys and fans, most of whom couldn't care less
whether Freddie Fender's "I'll Be There (Before the Next Teardrop
Falls)" is atrophic or not.
          As in so many cases, however, the technical terminology quickly
proves to be something of a mask for value judgments. The preface in
fact uses musicological terminology partly to dignify music which
someone et the Smithsonian apparently still judges to lack its own
intrinsic dignity. Thus country songs, the preface continues, cannot
be expected to display the "cultivated charm or sophisticated wit of
the standard popular song." The accompanying instruments are not
played in a. "classical style," but are "struck," "twanged,"
"scraped," or "flailed," and voices are "rough-edged," without
"artificial refinement." Subject matter leans toward "cynicism and
wish-fulfillment" (rather like Don Juan or
Madame Butterfly, one supposes).
          The most obvious problem with such evaluations is that they simply
will not wash--unless one can reasonably describe Don Reno as
"twanging," Vassar Clements and Clark Kessinger as "scraping," Jim
Reeves' voice as "rough-edged," and Tom T. Hall's songs as lacking
wit. Any reasonably sympathetic hearing of the full range of country
music would confirm that it is characterized by great breadth of
subject, variety of form, and subtlety of theme. And for an untutored
bunch of strikers, twangers, scrapers, and flailers, Eck Robertson,
Lilly Mae Ledford, Bill Monroe, Merle Travis, Chet Atkins, Earl
Scruggs, Vassar Clements and their like manage to achieve a rather
dazzling level of instrumental virtuosity.
          A more important matter, however, is that in modern society, public
institutions such as the Smithsonian have considerable power to
legitimize or de-legitimize certain cultural forms and expressions--to
prescribe how and in what terms they shall be understood, and to
define the very boundaries within which new legitimacy is to be
conferred. In this set of records, it seems to me, the Smithsonian has
sent the public a mixed message: country music is a "truly democratic"
art form (as they tell us) which by now even the more timid an'
conventional amongst us can safely listen to in public, but 

it is
withal a little scrape-y and twangy. And so we must distance ourselves
from it, and confine our admiration of it to those aspects which can
be described in language I (AABAs, subdominants, and vocal lines
decorated with "melismatic effects") whose very use reminds
subliminally that we usually listen to and think about "better"
music. At a certain level, the preface reads a bit like a letter one
might write to a wealthy and sophisticated friend back home in Boston
or Marin County after one's elegant cruise ship has docked briefly at
a funky cultural port. Oh, Millicent, the music of those people was
simply so wonderfully primitive and wild!
          In such a situation, those of us who can't afford the cruise would
do well to keep at least a couple of things straight. Historically,
poor and working people in this country have kept hillbilly, country,
Cajun, blues, and gospel music alive in the face of a
consensus of condescension and disapproval by virtually every
established public cultural institution from the local level on up. At
this late date they hardly need any favors or assistance from the
Smithsonian. One wonders, in fact, if Classic Country
Music would ever have been issued primarily out of concern and
respect for the audience which gave the music birth and sustained
it. It took an avalanche of designer jeans to do that. The weather
vane that tops one of the castellated towers at 1000 Jefferson Drive
isn't there for nothing.
          That is one thing to remember. The other is this: country music has
not only been nurtured and sustained by poor and working people with
precious little assistance or approval from their own tax-supported
public institutions, but it has also until recently been studied,
archived, written about and reissued in much the same way. Like many a
banjo picker or gospel singer, scholars Bill Malone, Bob Pinson,
Judith McCulloh, Charles Wolfe, Archie Green, Norman Cohen and many
others have kept their "day jobs." They have done their writing about
country music mostly at night and on weekends taken interview trips
out of their own pockets, pasted record labels and stapled little
newsletters and journals together on dining room tables, and run
organizations from post office boxes. The spirit behind the
enterprise--one might almost say the political posture that informs
it--is a spirit (and posture) of love, of self-affirmation, of resistance, of advocacy, of
defiant somebody too-ness. As such, it is invaluable and
irreplaceable.
          At length, then, it is less important that Classic Country
Music was issued (re-issues are plentiful, after all) than
that the Smithsonian commissioned Bill Malone to do it. The energy
that Malone has poured into country music scholarship for twenty
years--the very perspective he brings to it--comes ultimately from the
physical, social, and cultural landscape of east Texas. That
perspective both informed his choice of tunes and shaped his
language:
          
            When my brother came home on his last furlough before going
overseas, he, my mother, another brother, and I sat around the Spring
Street Bowling Alley watching the bowlers (pleasures were often simple
and cheap for the poor) and waiting for the Trailways bus that would
take him back to camp. I do not know 
            
            what thoughts ran through his
mind, but the possibility of not returning must have been one of
them.
          
          The brother keeps feeding nickels into the jukebox, listening over
and over to the 1941 hit "When My Blue Moon Turns to Gold Again,"
which Malone calls "a song of parting and of hoped-for
reconciliation."
          If the issuing of Classic Country Music betokens the
beginning of a cultural reconciliation between the Smithsonian (indeed
the whole federal cultural establishment)and the little people
dropping quarters into jukeboxes in bus stations and bowling alleys
all across the land, it is an event of not only musical but also
profound social significance.
          One of the worst sins a reviewer can commit is to judge a piece of
work by irrelevant criteria, or to condemn it for not being what it
does not pretend to be. Classic Country Music was not
designed as a scholarly treatise. If one wants more extensive
biographical, historical or discographical information on country
music, there are places to get it--including Malone's own other
work. If one wants a fuller reissuing job done on the Carter family,
the Blue Sky Boys, or the Sons of the Pioneers, one may turn to the
fine albums produced by the tiny private John Edwards Memorial
Foundation. If it is more intensive analysis one desires, that also is
available.
          The only fair question one may finally ask is whether
Classic Country Music does what it may reasonably be
expected to do to entertain and educate the rather select group who
will even know it exists, and who can afford to lay down the
fifty-five dollars. And beyond that, whether it is a reliable document
to place in the thousands of community and school libraries that will
probably acquire it.
          My own answer--not in any way intended either to belittle Malone's
work or to underestimate the formidable task he faced--is a qualified
yes. The qualification has less to do with any of the objections I
raised earlier (too much bluegrass, too little gospel, no country
blues) than with Malone's having stopped short of raising some of the
more embarrassing questions--as all of us partisans of country music
are want to do upon occasion. Out of many possible examples, I mention
two briefly: what about the "dark side" of country music, and what
about its utility as a creative and correcting force in American
life?
          The dark side is almost impossible not to notice. To put it
bluntly, a good deal of country music has been (and remains) maudlin,
racist, sexist, and jingoistic. Much of bluegrass in particular
accepts (even celebrates) demeaning images of women and puerile
conceptions of relationships between men and women. (Grand opera does,
too, but it is another matter.) The lyrics have been cleaned up a bit
(or have disappeared altogether), but "rigger" songs (of minstrel and
other origins) linger to this day in fiddle and string band
repertoire. And our every domestic or military misadventure produces
its musical apologia on the country charts.
          If one were to condemn every form of creative expression for its
lapses into bad taste, reactionary politics, or inhumane sentiment,
no form would survive (not even grand opera). The
point is not to condemn or to dismiss, but to understand the dialectic. Merle Haggard wrote both "Okie from Muskogee" and "Mama's Hungry Eyes."
Johnny Cash has sung for Folsom inmates and for Billy Graham. Loretta
Lynn's coal miner's daughter memories may live on "in a cabin in
Butcher Holler," but lately she has been doing commercials for Amax
coal company. And Dolly doesn't wear her coat of many colors
anymore.
          To understand country music, the agonizing dialectic must not only
be faced as a feature of particular songs or individual careers; it
must become the very foundation for analysis. Much of that task
remains before us, and we who have grown up with the music must do it,
or relinquish the task to those who know less about our values and
perspectives than they need to to understand what happened between Eck
Robertson and Willie Nelson.
          
            David E. Whisnant is professor of American Studies at the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County. He is the author of
All That Is Native and Fine: The Politics of Culture in an
American Region (University of North Carolina Press,
1983).
          
        
        
          Figures of Speech--Dressed for the H Bomb
          By Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 5, No. 1, 1983, pp. 1-4
          
          By any reasonable and fair-minded standard, our Southern members of
Congress ought to have felt proud of the year they had as military
procurers. Here was close to a billion dollars for Lockheed-Georgia's
beginning production of fifty C-5B Air Force transport airplanes, a
project ultimately to cost eight billion. Here was the ensconcing of
the Rapid Deployment Force at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa and at
the Army's 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, North Carolina--a
force soon to total nearly 500,000 soldiers. Here were a couple of
nuclear powered aircraft carriers (at $3.4 billion each) headed for
assembly at Newport News, Virginia; an attack submarine was being
named after the city itself. And here and there throughout the South
were the scattered small contracts and subcontracts, like that of a
few million dollars to Pineville, North Carolina's Aeronca,
Incorporated, to supply titanium engine shrouds for the B-1 bomber.
          Nor had the vigilance and resolve of these Southern statesmen gone
uncommended. At a convention of mercenaries held late in the year at
Charlotte, General William Westmoreland saluted the signs of a rebirth
of American fortitude. "The odds of war are exceptionally high in the
future," said the former big gun, "but the route to peace lies in the
ability to wage war." His audience tossed their cannisters in
delight.
          Despite such achievements and such blessings, and a $230 billion
military appropriations bill for 1983, the shrewder members of the
Southern delegation felt a few shivers run through their early warning
systems. Even before Christmas recess, these congressmen were seen
nodding to each other. Nodding turned to huddling and then escalated
into closeting.
          Simply put, they had two problems: how to justify and 

secure their
rightful share of the five year $1.6 trillion military build-up that
President Reagan and Secretary of War Weinberger were pursuing, and
how to deploy their counterforce to pin down and negate an
increasingly bothersome disarmament movement.
          When it comes to making military socks and raincoats and to
quartering troops, Southern legislators and contractors have long done
all right by each other and may well continue to do so (see "Shaping
the South's Pre-War Economy," Southern Changes,
August/September 1982). The South has its congressmen setting on ready
in hardened silos of seniority on armed services and appropriations
committees. In terms of total payroll for military personnel, six of
the top seven states are Southern. The South supplies the War
Department with textiles, tobacco, coal and food. Yet, most Southern
states, compared with states in other regions of the U.S., sell little
weaponry.
          Under the Reagan-Weinberger rearmament campaign, an increasingly
larger proportion of the total military budget will be spent for
weapons. For historical reasons (the old story of Southern defeat and
colonialism and their long legacies), the South lacks the highly
technical, capital intensive industries which are essential to the new
generation of hardware the Pentagon seeks. Economist Ray Marshall has
projected, by US Census region, the increase in distribution of
military dollars between now and 1986: a growth of thirty-seven
percent for the Pacific states, sixteen percent for New England,
fourteen percent for the East North Central, but only six percent for
the East South Central and four percent for the West South Central
states.
          There are a few Southern congressmen, perhaps senators Pryor and
Bumpers are the leading examples, whose residence in a state at the
furthermost periphery of Pentagon contracting seems to have had a bit
of a liberating effect. These men have grown more sceptical and more
visible in their questioning of budgets. Betty Bumpers has organized a
disarmament group--Peace Links (Southern Changes,
November/December 1982). Most of the Southern congressional
delegation, however, has been trying to find ways to put their fingers
on weaponry money while they; maneuver to keep their regular military
dependents happy: "We must not let our conventional forces erode,"
they say.
          Even by the mega-boodle standards of corporate-state war
contracting, the hardware that lies within the horizon of the 1980's
is an enormity. By 1985, the Pentagon's budget (measured in constant,
1972 dollars) will surpass that of both the Korean War and the Vietnam
War at their peaks. In the eye of Creation, this is not to be spit
at.
          Not only does traditional pork barrel profit-taking make the
weaponry of rearmament expensive, so does the increasing complexity of
the products, and the extraordinary specialized resources--both human
and natural--required for production.
          In its military or non-military uses, technological change is
directed by human values. For some time now, the arms race has been
propelled and the world jeopardized by the values of white males with
seemingly unlimited appetites for power and vast capacities for
suspicion and mistrust. Sophisticated systems of weaponry become
antiquated at a faster and faster pace. "Security" keeps sliding
away.
          The continued unwillingness of nuclear nations to negotiate
disarmament has allowed military technicians to continue leaping the
fences of invention. As we now stand, state-of-the-art war machinery
is lodging itself ever deeper in the nervous system. For patrolling
the hostile frontier of the microsecond, tongues and heartbeats have
become intolerably slow triggers. B52's hang on trees, clumsy plums of
an outmoded husbandry. Instead, for example, we have hightech's high
refinement, Stealth, a bomber so alienated that radar can't reach
it.
          Trends in the actual production of weapons have moved in tandem
with the costs and the capabilities of the weapons
themselves. Technological modernization (Tech Mod) by means of
computer assisted design and manufacture (CAD/CAM) is putting the
quietus on the forever flawed and fatigued human element. In the rare
Southern locations where these young machines of promise have already
elbowed their way, flesh and blood machinists have begun to feel like
hand loom weavers in early nineteenth century England. "At
Lockheed-Georgia," observes the trade publication Iron
Age (September 1,1981), "The skills of a thirty-year workforce
are captured in a numerical control tape. It is relatively easy to
train a new employee to load a tape and put material in a machine."
Military contracting dollars shape the speed and direction of capital
intensive Tech Mod.
          Tech Mod may be the shaper of things to come, but shell South has
few manufacturers at the level of Lockheed. 

This circumstance, rather
than gun-shyness, makes it a little easier to understand why several
Southern congressmen seem to be moving slowly in giving their
wholehearted support to portions of Reagan and Weinberger's proposed
new weapons systems. Take the MX missile for instance.
          At a late November (1982) news conference in far away Wyoming, that
state's congressional delegation showed sheepish glee. "Senator
Malcolm Wallop Brings Home the Big Bang," read the headline. For a
time, one hundred MX missiles, worth from $26 billion to fifty billion
dollars, seemed headed West. "I think the MX is going to be great for
Cheyenne," said Mayor Bill Nation. "After all, the military has had a
one hundred year relationship with the town, back to the days of the
cavalry and old Fort Carlin. I think it's great." Blessed was the
Peacekeeper.
          The South, however, had little to gain from MX. The project's prime
contractors--Martin Marietta, Rockwell, Northrop, Morton Thiokol,
Boeing, Aerojet--were located in places like Colorado, California,
Massachusetts, Utah and Washington. Realizing their need for Southern
friends in high places, these contractors gave their largest campaign
contributions for the reelection of Florida Democrat and
Appropriations Committee member Bill Chapell ($33,900) and Alabama
Republican Bill Dickinson ($19,500), the ranking minority member of
the Armed Services Committee.
          Despite the contractors' and the Administration's efforts,
production of the weapon has been postponed. The Reaganites failed to
strike sufficient terror or glamor into the hearts of members of
Congress to give depressed Americans the Christmas gift of MX. Perhaps
the contractors should have thrown a few meaty ribs towards Dixie. Was
it coincidence that at the heart of the failure to get MX production
underway was the opposition of two key Southern senators?
          Coincidence or not, South Carolina's Ernest Hollings and Georgia's
Sam Nunn leaped on the Administration's marketing failure with MX,
turning it into an opportunity to assume the leadership and vocabulary
of the contingent of tough-minded friends of the Pentagon, the ones
who do their homework and know the value of a dollar. Here, on the
holy ground of American pragmatism, is where the battles for military
procurement will be waged in the next few years.
          By waving the spangled banner of industriousness, efficiency,
accountability and productivity, Hollings and Nunn (and the
like-minded from other regions such as Ohio's John Glenn and at times,
even Colorado's Gary Hart) seem capable of rallying a consensus and
shifting the weaponry debate into the reductive calculus of
cost-benefit ratios and away from the fundamental questioning of
increased armaments and nuclear war policy posed by the disarmament
movement. With micro-chip wisdom, comparative casualty counts from
this or that weapons system over a spectrum of video war scenarios can
now be fleshed out on the head of a pin. At the arcade of nuclear
gamesmanship, the hooked players look for a winning
strategy and for high and stringent criteria
for waging war. Such absurdity masquerades for realism in a world
where thousands of warheads yearn for their night on the town.
          "Most Americans," says Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, "have begun
to connect military spending not with strength, but with waste." The
ludicrous search for a secure MX basing mode has done much to help the
public make the connection. This is where the punch card pragmatists
log-on. Senator Hollings, who knows that the winds of this mood may
well blow someone into the White House in 1984, recently abandoned his
support of the B-1 bomber and led Senate opposition to the Dense Pack
MX deployment. "Careful, pragmatic and thoughtful decision making is
required," says Hollings, "if we are to maintain a strong, credible
defense posture. Our economy has no room for procurement of a Pentagon
wish list." His solution? Continue Pentagon spending at present levels
plus three percent real growth per year.
          Having gotten his multi-billion dollar C-5B airplane through
Congress for Lockheed and the homefolks, Senator Nunn was also ready
to assume the stance of scrutiny. Adapting his lines from the cliche
of a television wine commercial, he helped to stymie the MX until such
time as it can be properly seasoned. "I've never felt," he patiently
vouched, "like we should buy a missile until we know what we're going
to do with it." Among his colleagues on the Armed Services Committee
and on the Hill, the far-seeing Nunn's opinions wield considerable
throw weight. In order to "fight recession," he is willing to "slash"
defense spending by five or six billion dollars.
          As an example of an imaginative proposal which Nunn says, "is
simply dead in the present sober atmosphere," he cites Georgia
Congressman Larry McDonald's attempt to ride the publicity plume
thrown off by the completion and dedication of the Vietnam War
Memorial on the Mall in Washington. McDonald had advanced a military
jobs program to trench away at North Georgia's Etowah Indian Mounds
and produce a rubble and bone-filled crater as a monument to World War
III. "It should be built now," McDonald pleaded, "so speeches can
justify it and so there will be living tourists to visit it."
          Nunn also disparaged Alabama Senator Jeremiah Denton's "Project
Interface-Off." This would have posed an unblinking, laser killer
satellite eyeball to eyeball in 

space with anything the Soviets chose
to send up. Denton is gathering himself for another try.
          More to Senator Nunn's liking was Strom Thurmond's promotion of a
three billion dollar plutonium blender-reactor at South Carolina's
Savannah River Plant where three reactors already produce the weapons
grade plutonium that goes into all US nuclear warheads and bombs. "I
believe that this reactor will be important to our nation's production
of weapons material and an asset to the state of South Carolina," says
Thurmond, "provided that environmental concerns are properly
addressed." Happily, Thurmond's cautionary quibble reveals no new
found concern for ecology but comes as a theoretical salve to the
embarrassingly unpatriotic disclosures of two Atlanta
Constitution reporters that residents near the Savannah
River Plant have a much higher than normal incidence of Polycythemia
vera, a rare blood disease linked to radiation exposure.
          Other Southern congressmen have also begun to float on the rising
pragmatic tide. Senator J. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana, a Democratic
member of the Appropriations Committee, offers the Multiple Launch
Rocket System, a mobile Army weapon that fires a dozen rockets a
minute at targets eighteen miles away. He seeks as much of the four
billion dollar system for his state as he can swing.
          In Florida, St. Petersburg's Republican Congressman Bill Young,
noting that the bikini swimsuit was a spinoff of the atomic testing
once done in the Pacific, has proposed that a five hundred square mile
section of the Everglades National Wilderness be set aside as a
testing range for the new generation of weapons. His eye, and the eyes
of several Florida retailers, are fixed on the job-creating and
commercial possibilities of the inevitable fashion
aftershock. Already, designers are toying with prototypes of the
"Everglaze," a kind of permanent rain- and swimwear fused to the
skin.
          Even North Carolina Senators Helms and East are coming into phase
with their call for authorization of Fayetteville and Fort Bragg's
annual August Heat and Death Festival as the official 1984 World's
Fair, or, in a compromising mood--as a kind of living, flaming
monument of the sort Representative McDonald seeks at the Etowah
Mounds.
          "We like to close all our shows with a good sacred number." So
spoke the leader of minimalist rock band Po' White Noise one recent
night as it rolled through Atlanta from Japhet, Georgia, lingering in
a local bar long enough to deliver the lyrics:
          
            I'd rather die a red lizard's death on a limb Than ascend in
that hydrogen cloud. *
          
          *"Lizard On A Limb," in lieu of copyright, Square
Root Music, 1982.
          Luckily, Senator Nunn and our elected Southern leadership never
heard this cheap shot of a song from this disaffected bunch of street
jeremiahs. In the land of promise, a way was opening. Death was the
growth industry of the 80's and Megadeath the final index of
productivity. The bacon would yet come home to roost.
          
            Figures of Speech is an occasional feature
of Southern Changes which grants the editor temporary
license.
          
        
        
          Black Boss: Political Revolution in a Georgia
County
          By Hanks, Lawrence J.Lawrence J. Hanks
          Vol. 5, No. 1, 1983, pp. 16-18
          
          Black Boss: Political Revolution in a Georgia
County. John Rozier. The University of Georgia Press,
1982.
          John Rozier's Black Boss is a narrative of John
McCown of Hancock County, Georgia and the political revolution that
most observers felt reached fruition in 1968, the year that blacks
became the majority of members of the county commission. Rozier, a
Hancock native, deserves to be commended for bringing the county to
the attention of scholars as well as a general audience. It has been
fourteen years since blacks ascended to political power, yet the
political science journals have yet to publish any analysis of the
political changes in Hancock. Thus, Black Boss breaks
new ground.
          On leave from his post as Public Information Services director at
Emory University, Rozier manages to do a thorough job of research. He
interviewed numerous black and white Hancock citizens; he combed
through the newspapers that covered the stories; he searched the files
of the Georgia Council on Human Relations; and he examined the
transcripts from the pretrial hearings and other documents relating to
the trials that were held. Rozier had sufficient information to give
his readers a balanced story of John McCown and the political
revolution in Hancock. The book's strength is its wealth of
material.
          Unfortunately, there is a serious problem with Black
Boss. The book has a blatant bias against McCown that
permeates the work and inhibits the author's ability to view the
political, social, and economic dynamics. While Rozier concentrates
solely on the character of McCown, the changes that McCown stirred to
life are more important historically than the man himself.
          Although Rozier acknowledges the "widely varying views" concerning
McCown in his preface, he proceeds to use the negative appraisals of
him as the central focus of the book. He never acknowledges, perhaps
he does not realize, that he is telling one side of an extremely
controversial story. McCown, with his charismatic, unorthodox, and
noncompromising style, came to Hancock in 1966 as a seasoned civil
rights activist. He led the first civil rights march in Colorado
Springs, Colorado, protesting the injustices in the armed forces. He
later worked with CORE, SNCC, and the Office of Economic Opportunity
(OEO) in Savannah. While affiliated with SCLC in Atlanta, he saw the
potential for black political empowerment in Hancock and decided to
move himself and his family there. His childhood in Loris, South
Carolina, and his adolescence in Harlem taught him that only the bold,
aggressive, and self-assured survived. These qualities became an
integral part of his personality.
          Hancock County was fertile soil for McCown to test his theory of
black self-help through political participation. A devout believer in
democratic theory, he emphasized the accountability of elected
officials to their constituents. Moreover, he felt that political
power and economic power were flip sides of the same coin--one could
not expect to make changes in either of these areas without
simultaneously working in both arenas. He took this message to homes,
bars, street corners, and churches. Armed with charisma and expertise
in federal regulations, McCown won the confidence of many Hancock
blacks by showing them that white county officials could be
successfully challenged when they denied blacks benefits that they
were entitled to receive. One person could make a
difference. Moreover, that one person, when organized with others,
could make substantial changes. This is the legacy of McCown which
Rozier totally neglects.
          McCown organized the Eastern Central Committee for Opportunity
(ECCO), a community development corporation, in 1970. By 1974, after
having received approximately 5.5 million in private and federal aid,
ECCO had established itself as the center of economic development in
Hancock County. Blacks held every elective or appointive position in
the county except sheriff and tax commissioner. In their attempt to
salvage whatever political power they could, segments of the white
community appear to have participated in many activities that Rozier
chose to ignore or treat lightly: "white flight" into Sparta and
gerrymandering were two methods used to maintain white political
dominance; the Klan demonstrated on the eve of the 1966 election; the
broodstock at the ECCO fish farm was mysteriously poisoned; the
concrete block plant was vandalized; there was a white boycott of ECCO
fish farm products; death threats were directed towards McCown and
other black elected officials; the harassment of ECCO employees by law
enforcement officers was commonplace; the ECCO threatre was burned;
and, IRS and FBI agents were illegally used to gather information for
the federal grand jury. Moreover, the white communities in neighboring
counties gave assistance in trying to thwart the movement: they
supplied political contributions; black drivers from Hancock were
routinely cited for violations while passing through; and on at least
one occasion, a group of "night riders" entered the county to pay the
ECCO headquarters a visit.
          Much of this white reaction was due to the considerable amount of
political and economic power that the black community was
gaining. Until the school desegregation squabbles of 1969 and 1970, a
small portion of the white community supported ECCO. After the
attempts to desegregate the school however, even this support
disappeared. The battle lines were drawn--the white community was
determined to get rid of ECCO and McCown, while most blacks were
determined to protect both. A good number of citizens, both black and
white, carried guns at all times. For the remainder of the McCown Era,
there would be at least two versions to practically everything that
happened.
          After almost four years of concerted effort to discredit ECCO and
McCown, events began to favor those opposed to ECCO. The Atlanta
Constitution ran a series of 

articles (June 30, 1974 -
July 4, 1974) which seriously questioned the legitimacy of McCown and
the ECCO enterprises; this series had been preceded by a similar
series in the Macon Telegraph. These two series,
combined with years of letter writing and public pressure for an
external audit of ECCO, prompted the Washington office of OEO to
conduct the long desired audit. On July 24, 1974 Senator Nunn's office
issued a press release stating that the General Accounting Office had
briefed Senator Nunn telling him that "their initial report indicates
that the OEO external audit will show substantial discrepancies." As a
result, a federal grand jury investigation of McCown and ECCO was
initiated, contributions came to a halt, and after eighteen months of
a federal grand jury investigation--five guilty pleas to fraudulent
use of federal poverty funds ended the economic phase of the political
movement in Hancock. The man that Hancock whites wanted to convict
most, John McCown, was killed in a plane crash in January 1976. Thus,
the "McCown Era" ended with both sides unsatisfied. The anti-McCown
group had wanted McCown to stand trial while the pro-McCown group felt
that they had no alternative to pleading guilty.
          In Black Boss, Rozier has shaped his first two
chapters, "Hancock County" and "John McCown," in a manner which
prejudices readers thinking about the political movement in
Hancock. First Hancock is portrayed as an unlikely place for a
political revolution: Hancock's early leaders were Whigs and Unionists
who opposed succession although they favored slavery; slaveholders
treated their slaves well; the county had no record of lynchings;
blacks could buy land more easily and they led the state in the number
of black farm owners; and, "Hancock was noted for good race relations
until the troubles of the 1960's." Then in chapter two, McCown is
portrayed as a moral degenerate accused of a wide variety of acts:
lying, stealing, "shacking up" with a German woman, having bad credit,
contributing to the delinquency of minors, and rape. The picture has
been painted clearly: an immoral degenerate comes to peaceful,
idyllic, racially harmonious Hancock County and upsets the balance. In
both instances, Rozier overstates the case.
          Although race relations in Hancock were reputed to be relatively
good, the credit for this state of affairs should not be contributed
entirely to the good will of whites. With an overwhelming black
population, blacks in Hancock have a history of assertion. Although
the historical antecedent is obscure, present day blacks in Hancock
recount many stories about blacks from slavery to the present who
challenged the authority of whites, demanded respect, and fought in
the defense of rights. Conditions were not as peaceful as Rozier would
have us believe.
          Rozier's attempt to point out McCown's alleged moral weaknesses
point to a major weakness in the book--the trustworthiness of
anonymous sources. Moreover, much of the nonflattering information
about McCown, e.g., his speeding tickets, his "shacking up" are simply
nongermane to his role in the movement towards black politcal and
economic empowerment in Hancock. In his attempt to cast a negative
shadow on McCown and the political revolution in Hancock, Rozier
undermines the conclusions he reaches by his willingness to raise
gossip to the status of fact. Although McCown was posthumously
indicted, of course he was never tried--his case was never presented
in court. Rozier writes as if McCown's assumed guilt is a proven
fact. His bias is most blatant when he has the opportunity to decide
who is telling the truth between McCown and some other
party. Illustrative of this is his treatment of the "arms race"
incident and the burning of the Clinch House.
          The "arms race" occurred in 1971 after several years of
tension. After hearing frequent shooting in the night, Mayor Patterson
of Sparta, the county seat of Hancock, decided that McCown and his
followers were practicing for a battle with the white citizens of
Sparta. He ordered ten machine guns for his two man police
force. After McCown and the other county commissioners learned of the
purchase, they felt that the black citizens of the county needed to be
protected from the whites in the city. They immediately ordered thirty
machine guns. The arms build-up continued until Governor Jimmy Carter
intervened. He convinced them both to dispose of their
weapons. Although Rozier offers no concrete evidence that McCown or
his followers were actually the source of the shooting, he writes
under the assumption that McCown started the "arms race."
          The Clinch House, an antebellum mansion, was burned while McCown
was jailed during a disturbance in 

May of 1974. The house had been
recently refurbished by the Hancock County Foundation for Historical
Preservation; "the refurbished home was preserved as a reminder of the
county's past . . ." When the house went down in flames, the mayor
accused 'McCown's followers of burning it. Since most of ECCO's
employees were guarding his jail cell, this was unlikely. In turn,
McCown accused the mayor of "knowing something about the fire." Once
more, without offering a shred of concrete evidence, Rozier accepts
the anti-McCown version as fact.
          Rozier criticizes the Thames Production Company, a British film
company, for bias in their film on the county; he also criticizes the
New Republic for not being balanced in their March 6,
1971 article on the events of the county: "the point of view of the
McCown faction was accepted without question." It is ironic that he
falls prey to his own criticism in reverse--he accepts without
question the perspective of the anti-McCown faction.
          The successful efforts for political empowerment in Hancock were
the source of local as well as national pride. Between 1966 and 1976,
theory progressed to reality as blacks won every county office except
sheriff. The stage was now set to see whether or not political power
could be transformed to economic power. The major accomplishments of
black political empowerment were symbolic, social, and psychological
until McCown became active. During the McCown era, the accomplishments
of the county government were becoming more practical as ECCO was
expanding to offer more jobs through the skillful gaining of
foundation and federal funds. Black I economic independence was
becoming a reality and political participation became less of a threat
to the livelihood of black Hancock citizens. After his death and the
demise of ECCO, the benefits of black empowerment were reduced to the
symbolic, social, and psychological although blacks presently hold the
same number of offices. Although it has not yet happened in Hancock,
black constituents usually grow accustomed to these nontangible
benefits and grow apathetic if the black elected officials cannot
convince industries to locate in the county to provide jobs.
          The veterans of the civil rights movement greatly overemphasized
the power of the ballot to make changes. Although the Voting Rights
Act freed blacks from legal barriers to voting, it did not remove the
threat of economic intimidation. McCown realized that the black vote
would never reach its full potential as long as blacks were subject to
economic intimidation. Because McCown operated on this premise,
Hancock, for a brief period, served as a national model for black
political mobilization, especially in the Black-Belt South. Rozier's
failure to critically examine the merits of this philosophy seriously
diminishes the value of Black Boss.
          
            Lawrence J. Hanks is a graduate student in government at
Harvard University. He is presently studying Hancock County as part of
his dissertation on black political participation in the rural South
since the 1965 Voting Rights Act.
          
        
        
          Myra Page: Daughter of the South, Worker for Change
          By Frederickson, MaryMary Frederickson
          Vol. 5, No. 1, 1983, pp. 10-12, 14-15
          
          On a summer evening this past August, Myra Page sat surrounded by
books, papers and manuscripts in her home of thirty-nine years in
Yonkers, New York, telling the tale of her most recent
demonstration. Her lively eyes belied the eighty-two years that her
face and hands proclaimed. A week before, she had joined a group of
thirty peace activists, mostly women, as they faced fifty uniformed
American Legionnaires in front of Yonker's World War I memorial.
          The men insisted it was "sacriligious" for the demonstrators to
gather at the memorial that steamy Sunday morning on the anniversary
of the Hiroshima bombing. Tension mounted as members of both groups
exchanged comments about nuclear weapons. Several legionnaires proudly
recalled where they had been when the bombs exploded in 1946; some
argued that their lives had been saved, others that it hastened the
end of the war.
          As Page stood near the commander of the group, he whispered that he
didn't want another war either, that he didn't want his grandson to
have to fight.
          The legionnaires moved into formation three deep around the war
memorial. The protesters took positions across the street. As Page
crossed over with her comrades, the Commander spoke to her again. This
time loudly. "Don't worry lady, there'll never be another war!"
          In reporting this event, as she had the many demonstrations and
protests in which she participated during six decades of work for
labor, civil rights and human 

rights causes, Myra Page focused on the
personal, highlighting the irony of a Legion commander disclosing
private feelings about war to a peace activist. This personal
perspective has been at the core of Page's work, as a reformer and
labor organizer in the 1920's, as a reporter for the labor press in
the 1930's, and then as a writer of fiction. Her dual objectives have
been to relate social conditions on a human scale and to place
personal struggle within a framework of broader issues.
          Sustained throughout a lifetime, Myra Page's belief in the priority
of human rights developed during her childhood in Virginia. Myra, born
Dorothy Page Gary, and her younger brother learned their first lesson
in Southern racial mores one summer on their grandfather's farm in the
Shenandoah Valley. Abruptly, they were forbidden to play together with
a black friend. Told that the child would lose his job on the farm if
they disobeyed, Myra and her brother wept with a "great unnamed
misery." She wrote later that "something big and ugly had descended
upon us. Something which awoke in me a vast incoherent questioning and
hate."
          Page's father, the town physician in Newport News, Virginia, was a
humanitarian who served as a volunteer on the staff of the local black
hospital, and treated black and white, rich and poor in an era when a
family doctor was "almost like a preacher." Although opposed to his
eldest daughter becoming a doctor, Page's father took for granted that
his four children, male and female, would go to college. He had seen
enough destitute widows to want his three daughters to have the means
to make their own living.
          Page's mother did not openly oppose the status quo. Regarding race,
she "accepted the traditional pattern in the South," while confiding
to her children that she "thought it was a big mistake." Page saw her
mother and three aunts as leading limited lives marked by ignored
talents and suppressed sadness. She felt that she "couldn't follow the
path that any one of them was following." For her, "the woman
question, without being very concrete, developed very early."
Pressured by her mother to conform to a preconceived pattern of "the
way life should be," Page rebelled against the traditional belief that
daughters "owed everything to the family."
          Page lived in a home filled with "endless books" and with parents
who argued about George Bernard Shawl As a child accompanying her
father on rounds to see his patients, Page saw "both sides of town,
and all that went on." Like Mick Kelley in Carson McCuller's
The Heart is a Lonely Hunter, Page roamed the town,
went to the waterfront piers, met children from the nearby Irish
shantytown, and watched the dockers load ships. In the years before
World War I, Newport News was a bustling town dominated by the noise
of a shipyard filled with crews which built ships twenty-four hours a
day. As Page grew older she heard news stories of lynchings and rumors
about the Klan. But she also attended the meetings of an integrated
community group, the Newport News Joint Committee, established to deal
with public works and educational facilities. Sitting separately, on
opposite sides of the aisle, the black and white group worked to
obtain sewers and a high school for the black section of town. In
addition, black longshoremen in Newport News formed a union during
this period, and then helped organize their white
counterparts. Although in separate locals, the two groups worked
together-and added a different chapter to the long history of craft
unionism in the shipyard. Page's father supported organized labor,
many of his patients were union members, and with them he viewed
labor's platform as one antidote to the high rate of industrial
accidents that plagued workers in Newport News.
          Page grew close to Belle Franklin, the black woman who worked in
her parent's home; they sang hymns and folk songs in the kitchen and
shared Myra's school lessons. Myra was repeatedly told, by Belle, to
be glad she wasn't "born colored." Their bond deepened when Myra
discovered that her ambition to become a doctor was thwarted because
she was born female. The black woman understood, when other adults did
not, about "the injustices and the yearning for things you could not
have." Myra began to rebel against "this bad Southern tradition of
women."
          When Page left home to attend Westhampton College in Richmond, she
carried with her a complex legacy inherited from a society permeated
by racial segregation, divided by fixed class lines, and steeped in a
tradition of inflexible gender roles. At Westhampton, in the
supportive atmosphere of a woman's college, she found allies in her
search for new ideas and ways to change Southern society. On Friday
afternoons at tea in a liberal professor's apartment, Page and a few
close friends read The Nation and The New
Republic, periodicals not allowed in the college library. "We
were pacifists," Page recalled over sixty years later, "and very much
against the idea of going into the First World War."
          A small group of students, including Page, became active in the
YWCA in order to give substance to New Testament concepts of
brotherhood and peace. Page remembers:
          
            It was in college that we first got a chance to know black
students, girls mainly, at the summer YWCA conferences. Up there in
the beautiful rarefied air of Blue Ridge, North Carolina, you know, so
many things seemed possible. At Blue Ridge we were able to be friends,
to ignore color lines and to have discussions.
          
          Following one of the YWCA conferences, Page and a close friend
decided to invite a black YWCA secretary they had met at Blue Ridge to
speak at Westhampton. Over the opposition of "ill-prepared" classmates
who "went by us in the hall as if we had some disease that was
catching," Page and her small group of friends organized and attended
the first integrated meeting on their campus in 1917.
          Through interracial work in the YWCA, by teaching music to young
industrial workers in a Richmond settlement house, and by working with
women at the state reform school, Page met people from many
backgrounds during her years in Richmond. Gradually, she began to
evaluate the regional effects of racism and industrialization, and to
question her own place and function in the society which surrounded
her. A dozen years went by, however, before Page wrote about the
chaingangs she had 

seen as a student in Richmond (The
Nation, 1931) and about her experiences with the forbidden
black playmate, with Belle Franklin, and in the YWCA (The
Crisis, 1931).
          *  *  *
          Page began to write about the South only after she left the region,
a process which occurred in stages, over a period of several
years. Her first step out of Virginia was to attend graduate school at
Columbia University in New York City. Page studied sociology with
Franklin Henry Giddings and anthropology with Franz Boas, sat in on
John Dewey's classes and attended lectures by Harry F. Ward and Harry
Emerson Fosdick: "it was like a whole world opening up."
          In the North, Page continued to be plagued by questions about
race. In her university dormitory the young black woman who cleaned
the rooms talked with the students about literature, and offered to
loan one of Page's roommates her set of Victor Hugo's writings. The
students discovered that the woman had graduated from college with
honors, but could not get a job, except cleaning floors.
          A year later, convinced that "the future of the country would lie
with the workers getting organized and making good sensible reform,"
Page joined the YWCA Industrial Department. As part of what she viewed
as "a real movement of women for democracy," Page agreed to return
home to work with women factory operatives. Still close to her family,
Page wanted to return South, and the YWCA's goals of interracial
harmony and industrial reform meshed with her own agenda for social
change in the region. Page came back to Virginia in 1920, "with a
little sociology theory and Christian philosophy," to a job as YWCA
Industrial Secretary in Norfolk.
          In this non-union town, Page began to organize groups of women
workers and to plan educational programs designed to prepare them for
union membership. There were problems from the beginning. Page had to
seek permission from management to meet with workers during their
lunch hour, and then enter factories to face women who were convinced
that she represented the company. In addition, several YWCA board
members from the business community accused Page of "talking unionism"
and stressed that they would not continue to finance that kind of
socialism through the YWCA. Progressives within the YWCA counseled
Page to proceed gradually, to have patience and look ahead, but to
Page, "suddenly the whole thing was a farce." She wrote later:
          
            We had been trained to believe that social relations would
right themselves through Peace and Persuasion, through changing hearts
one by one. Finally, for me there was no going on. The theory simply
did not work. The system was stronger than individuals, and the
solution depended on changing the system itself.
          
          Page resigned from the YWCA in 1921. Feeling that little social
change could be accomplished in the South, she decided to
leave. Despite close family ties and over her parents' objections,
Page was determined "to break away" from a region totally dominated by
a rigid system of caste and class.
          Page left Norfolk for Philadelphia and St. Louis and~ worked as a
wage-earner in department stores and factories. In Philadelphia she
clerked at Wannamaker's until the management discovered she had a
college degree and suspected she might be an organizer. A stint in the
hat trade, where organized male workers opposed the entry of women
into the union, taught Page about occupational segregation by gender
and demonstrated the consequences for the labor movement.
          After several attempts to get work in the clothing trade, Page went
to the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America's Philadelphia
office. There she met Hilda Shapiro, a staunchly feminist clothing
worker from the New York's East Side. Page and Shapiro worked together
for the next four years as rank and file organizers for the
Amalgamated. The two women organized picket lines and entered open
shop factories to get the workers to come out. In one shop Page
remembered being "scared to death" when the boss came at them with a
hot iron. Page found the whole set-up "like a jungle."
          But the "vicious" experiences she had in unorganized shops
contrasted sharply with her work-life in union factories. For Page,
the union shops were havens in which men and women of different
nationalities and races could work together. She saw herself
participating in "one great movement" of workers, and the answers she
had been seeking in Norfolk began to appear. Through the labor
movement, Page saw the goal of interracial industrial unionism, what
she described later as "a freedom to be fought for and won, black and
white alike," as an attainable end.
          After four years in Philadelphia and St. Louis, Page left the shops
to return to school and train as a teacher in workers' education. At
the University of Minnesota, Page obtained a doctorate in sociology,
taught a course in social movements, joined the teacher's union, and
became active in the Twin Cities labor movement. Appointed head of the
Education Committee of the Minnesota State Federation of Labor, Page
organized speakers and classes for union locals throughout the
state.
          As she taught the history of women in the trade union movement to
women in St. Paul, spoke at cooperatives, and interviewed miners in
the Iron Range, Page thought about her first organizing experiences in
Norfolk. Soon, she formulated a plan to write about textile workers in
the South. To document the "traditional Southern attitudes" she saw as
hampering union organization, Page lived for several months in a mill
community outside Columbia, South Carolina.
          Two books resulted from Page's PhD research on Southern
Textiles. The first, Southern Cotton Mills and Labor
(1929) appeared immediately after a wave of textile strikes had spread
across the Piedmont. The second work, Page's first novel, entitled
Gathering Storm (1932) was a fictional account of the
Gastonia Strike of 1929. In both manuscripts, she provided an analysis
of textile workers which transcended traditional 

accounts. Page argued
that although the culture of Southern textile workers (unlike that of
miners) did not foster collective organization, neither did it
preclude intense class consciousness and overt expressions of
discontent. Taking the long view of textile unionism, she wrote:
          
            Ever since the textile industry has been well established in
the south, there have been intermittent union campaigns there. Usually
these organizing efforts have been initiated by spontaneous strike
movements among southern textile workers, with a national union then
coming into' the field. In consequence, union efforts have often been
rather sporadic and poorly organized. Also company opposition has been
ruthless. Nevertheless, in nearly one half of a century of struggles,
this section of the American working class has shown itself capable of
courage, sacrifice, leadership and endurance that speaks well for the
determination of southern mill hands to conquer all difficulties and
build their union movement.
          
          Page held two basic criteria as crucial for the labor movement in
the South: First, it was essential to "organize black and white
workers on an equal footing in industrial unions and unite them in
struggles for full economic, political and social rights." Second,
Page contended that only a "system of collective ownership and
operation of mills" would provide the fundamental reorganization
required to provide workers with a decent standard of living.
          Page criticized AFL organizing efforts in Southern textiles,
arguing that the United Textile Workers (UTW) repeatedly entered local
strike situations too late and then withdrew active support
prematurely. Moreover, Page continued, the UTW either ignored black
workers entirely or segregated them into separate locals.
          In 1929 Page felt that the momentum for major change had begun and
that "nothing can stop the revolt of Dixie mill hands. now under way."
But the early 1930's proved to be difficult years for organizing and
for the realization of interracial unionism. Nonetheless, as she met
with interracial groups of union men and women she argued that as
Southerners "learned through their industrial struggles the common
economic lot of white and black wage-earners, and the necessity of
common action," they would be freed of racial prejudices.
          During the 1930's Page's work as a reporter for the labor press
took her into Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee
and Arkansas. But it was in Alabama that she began to see the promise
of what the union organization of agricultural workers, miners and
industrial workers could mean.
          Page came to Alabama several times in the early 1930's at the
request of union men and women in "this land of steel, coal and
cotton." She traveled by train into a rural Alabama county to meet
with members of the sharecropper's union and there found "brave people
who were taking so much into their stride." Page had great confidence
in this predominantly black group of men and women who were fighting
to obtain basic control of their worklives in a county where they
comprised eighty-five percent of the population. In Birmingham, Page
met with miners, one-third of whom were out of work, who had "downed
tools" and demanded the right to bargain collectively and to obtain
equal rights for black and white miners on the job and in the
union.
          In 1932, Page wrote phrases which echo fifty years later:
          The big steel mills of Morgan's T.C.I. and Mellon's Republic Steel
Corporations which belch their crimson tongues of smoke and flame
against the night, today are running around forty percent
capacity. Nearly one-third of Alabama's coal miners are without
work. In Birmingham, unemployed are estimated at forty-five to fifty
thousand, affecting one out of every three households.
          As Page left Birmingham to return to her home in the Northeast, she
predicted that "the outbreaks and struggles against Morgan and banking
and landlord rule will become increasingly more violent and sweeping
in character." Threatened strikes among miners and steelworkers meant
to Page that "the working masses in this steel and coal stronghold of
the South are in motion, and as Birmingham goes, so goes the South."
The organizing activity of workers in Birmingham confirmed Page's
belief in interracial industrial unionism, and offered the promise of
a time when the South "will be freed of its shadows; when its toiling
people will march shoulder to shoulder, beyond the color line."
          The optimism of Page's rhetoric in the early 1930's reflected her
belief that out of the ferment of the Great Depression "big changes
were going to take place . . . that the working people were really
going to get more control of their lives, and there would be much more
democracy in the country." Page recalls that in the 1930's, "I could
see that change was coming," and in Birmingham and other parts of the
South that vision was palpable. But there were also unrealized,
perhaps unrealistic, dreams: the belief that black Southerners would
demand and be given distinct regions, or a separate nation; that the
violence against Morgan in Southern steel areas like Birmingham would
spread to workers in other Southern industries, and that the Southern
working-class would oust the economic imperialists who controlled the
region's natural and industrial resources; also unrealized was her
firm hope that the organization of Southern workers was inevitable,
and once accomplished would be the key to labor's strength
nationwide.
          "We were young, enthusiastic, and thought things were going to
happen faster," Page remembers. Today Page remains hopeful--"that one
of these days we will get a working-class party" in the United States;
that racism 

will diminish as the South and the nation become
thoroughly integrated; that the United States has learned and will
never forget the hard lesson of Vietnam; that the "creativity and
determination of the American people" will allow us to solve our
problems.
          During the late 1930's Page took up her pen more frequently and
struggled with questions about the South in her writing. As a member
of the League of American Writers she was asked to come to Highlander
Folk School in 1938 and 1939 to teach classes and workshops. While at
Highlander, Page visited miners' families in the Tennessee
mountains. Later she met Dolly Hawkins Cooper, the woman whose story
she tells in Daughter of the Hills (1978, first
published in 1950 by Citadel Press as With Sun In Their
Blood). Page's friendship with Hawkins grew out of an intense
admiration for the strength of the women whose fathers, husband' end
sons mined coal, and an appreciation of "a woman's part in the coal
miner's struggle."
          During these years Page continued to report for the labor press and
to write radio play scripts and short stories to supplement her
income. She had married John Markey, a fellow graduate student from
Minnesota and then college professor, and they had had a daughter and
a son. Page still felt "a certain pull, a certain allegiance to the
South." But family visits to Virginia in the 1930's were "painful,"
and Page's rejection of the social and political status quo was
manifest in her unwillingness to rear her children in the South.
          In the post-war period, Page traveled South each summer and, again
at Highlander Folk School, shared in the expansion and development of
the civil rights movement. "We had crucial sessions at Highlander,"
Page recalls. "The Southern people working in the field were leading
. . . I took a little part, but not very much, because I wasn't living
and working then in the South." But it was the movement for which Page
had worked since before World War I.
          As Page participated in civil rights work in the 1950's and 1960's,
she noticed many Southern white women who "connected with the
movement." To her, "it was noticeable that so many came north and
worked." Page argues that these were Southern women who saw parallels
between their own limitations and lack of freedom and that of black
people. She believes that many of these white women, as she had done
in 1920, felt a special kinship to the black quest for civil rights
and as a result either "they got out from down there, or if they did
stay in the South, they worked with the movement."
          As the progressive gains of the 1960's became apparent within the
South, Page shifted her attention to include an even wider range of
issues: expanding civil rights efforts, anti-war work against Vietnam,
a growing woman's movement, environmental concerns, and support for
the United Mine Workers of America (to Page "the enduring backbone of
the American labor movement").
          In June of 1980, Page returned to Newport News, Virginia, the town
she had left sixty years earlier. Three months before her visit, the
community's 16,500 shipyard workers had won their first United Steel
Workers of America (USWA) contract with Tenneco. Members of the union
had invited Page to come South. She met with many of the shipyard
workers (black and white, male and female) who had fought for three
years and endured an eleven week strike to win company recognition of
Local 8888 (see Southern Changes, June 1979). The
union's contract with substantial wage increases, a grievance
procedure, a health and safety committee and better medical benefits
and pensions, signaled to Page that "In Tidewater and the South, a new
day has begun" (see Mountain Life and Work, November
1980). The union's victory affirmed many of the principles that Page
had believed in and fought for since she left Virginia to join the
labor movement in 1920 (see Southern Exposure, Winter
1981).
          Over the years Page had seen many of her political dreams and
social ideals flounder; early textile organizing efforts in the South
faltered, the dream of a worker controlled society has not been
fulfilled, a classless social system has yet to be established. On the
other hand, the civil rights movement transformed American society,
and the women's movement has realized many changes for which Page
worked. The union victory in Newport News was both a substantive and
symbolic triumph. Organization of the shipyard workers was a goal that
Page had sought for years, and it validated her theory, considered too
radical in the 1920's and 1930's, that Southern workers could organize
effectively only when black and white joined forces. Symbolically, the
victory held a special personal significance for Myra Page--Dorothy
Markey--because it meant that in a sense she had been able to come
full circle, and to come home.
          
            Formerly a research fellow at the Wellesley College
Center for Research on Women, Mary Frederickson is now assistant
professor of history at the University of Alabama in Birmingham. This
article copyright, 1988, by Mary Frederickson.
          
        
        
          From Southern Cotton Mills and Labor, 1929, 
by Myra Page
          By Page, MyraMyra Page
          Vol. 5, No. 1, 1983, p. 13
          
          The next afternoon I went to see my friend, Marg. Marg was always a
tonic, especially after such an experience as last night. Marg knew
her Bible--you had to or be an outcast in the village--but her
religion didn't bother her much. She thought and spoke for herself,
and few gainsaid her, at least to her face. She belonged to the clan
of Allen--feuders and government-fighters--and believed in Direct
Action.
          "Steps right in, honey," Marg called from her place in the
swing. She pulled her black-and-gray-checkered dress tighter over her
bosom, shifted her powerful frame so as to make room beside her, and
with the hem of her dress wiped away the little brown streams of
tobacco juice which had dried in the corners of her mouth.
          "As I wuz sayin' th' las' time you was here, Hutchins mill ain't so
good for wages, but I've lived on worse hills. Hutchins is got a good
char-ac-ter 'n that means a lot. All mills ain't. I wuz in one, once,
soon after we come down from the mountains. My ole man hed ceasted, so
it wuz jes' me to care for th' babies. Every day I locked 'em in th'
house afore I went to th' mill, 'n every night I run home scairt th'
house'd burned down. I tell you, them wuz hard days, before th' hours
wuz cut to tin.
          "Well, that mill had a bad char-ac-ter, 'n I wanted to git
away. You know, us mill people ain't got nuthin' but our moral
character, 'n we wanna keep on to that. Now you may be a good 'omen,
but folks figger that if you live on a hill's what's got a bad name,
you're no better thin th' res' or you'd move. Well, I coulden
move. N'th' company's house nex' to mine wuz a bad house. Time'n agin,
I tole th' sheriff, 'Jim, make that 'omen leave town.' But he
woulden. 'N I see with my own eyes, policymen goin' in 'n out. Sech
drinkin"n carryin' on, you navah heard. 'N my gal gittin' bigger'n
bigger, 'n me gone all day. So finally I made up my mind I'd take th'
law in my own hands. Our family's used to that.
          "So I gits down my gun, 'n I starts off to th' police office. It
was a Sadday aftanoon, 'n th' room wuz full of officers-of-th'-law,
but I walks right up to th' desk, 'n I slams my hand down, 'n I
says,'Jim,'I says, "I come to give warnin'. If you doan clean up that
bad house before nex Sadday, I will. My gun's ready. And what's more,'
her mountain eyes glittered happily as she told this, 'what's more,
every blue coat 'n every brass button I see, them's my target.'
          "And that's how I cleaned up Selby," Marg concluded. "Come in, Miz
Jones," she called to a little old woman, gnarled like a mountain oak,
who was hobbling up the walk. "You wan some of my herbs, honey. Jes'
help yourself. You know where they is. Brew 'em a little 'n apply th'
warm juice to his rumitiz. It'll help. You might tie a string around
his waist 'n middle left finger, too."
          "Honey," Marg turned back to me, "I tell you what's on my
mind. It's my boy, Tom. He wants to be an electrician, in th' worse
way. Ever since he wuz a littl' boy, he's hankered after machinery 'n
things like that. He's buyed books'n fixin's of all kinds. Well, his
sis'n him 'n me been savin' fer seven year now, so's he cud take th'
course. By corryspondence, they call it. It cost one hundred and fifty
dollar, but seein' as Tom was so anxious, they tole him he cud tek it
for ninty-five. But we jes' can's seem to git that much
ahead. Sickness, or th' mill runnin' slow, or somethin', jes sets us
back. Tom's twenty-seven now, 'n I doan know's he ever will."
          "Couldn't he take it up around here, at school, say?"
          "Naw. They doan learn 'em no trade thar but mill work. I tell you,
honey, these mill owners wans to keep us in th' mills. I knows, I've
a-watched 'em forty-five year now. My gal tells me I shud keep my
mouth shut. But I knows."
          Marg peered through the green vines at another visitor coming up
the walk.
          "That you, Miz Rhoads?"
          "Yes'm, it's me. Kin I hev'n ear o' core?"
          "Help yourself. Only git 'em ripe. 'N wean ye set a spell?"
          Marg lowered her voice. "We live in common like, us six families
here." With her right thumb she indicated the houses fronting the
little square of dirt before us. "Each one's got a littl' patch. Wages
bein' what they is, we coulden git along without. One raises beans 'n
peas, another, yellers' 'n tatters. 'N me, I raises corn. Whin meal
time comes, we jes' go 'n help ourselves.
          "Now, th' drought 'n hot weather is kill in' our crops, 'n th'
mill's only runnin' part time. I tell you, they're gettin' us lower 'n
lower. They wan us on our knees, that's what. We ain't low enuf fer
'em, yit. Millionaires they are, Mr. Hutchins 'n th' res'. 'N I
remember him as a littl' boy so poor he'd no breeches to cover him.
          "They made their money out of us. I look at their fine houses whin
I go to town, 'n I thinks to myself, 'You made that out 'o us. If we
waran so poor, you'd not be so rich."N I rememba what th' Good Book
says about th' rich 'n th' poor. They'll git theirs when they die."
          "Hell?" I asked.
          Marg spit a brown stream neatly between the rails.
          "What else?" she answered.
          "Well, that idea doan satisfy me," I replied, and we were off on an
argument.
          
            Myra Page (Dorothy Markey) is currently completing an
autobiographical novel about her early years in Newport News entitled
Soundings. Under the pen name Myra Page she hats
written three novels and published numerous articles, stories, and two
radio plays in The Nation, New Masses,
American Spectator, and New
Directions. Articles about the miners' strike in Pennsylvania
in 1985 and an interview with President Cardenas of Mexico, 1987-88
appeared in New Masses. Her work as a writer was
interrupted during the McCarthy era when Viking was to publish
With Sun in Our Blood, but cancelled the contract; the
book was subsequently published by New York's Citadel
Press.
          
        
        
          The 1982 Lillian Smith Book Awards
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 5, No. 1, 1983, pp. 7-10
          
          The Southern Regional Council's annual Lillian Smith Awards
Luncheon was held in Atlanta in November as a part of the SRC's annual
meeting. The awards recognize the year's best fiction and non-fiction
books about the South. The 1982 winners were John Ehle for The
Winter People (New York: Harper and Row) and Harry Ashmore for
Hearts and Minds: A History of Racism from Roosevelt to
Reagan (New York: McGraw-Hill). Following are excerpts from
remarks at the luncheon.
          
            Mary Frances Deriner
          
          Lillian Smith, Georgia thinker, activist, author and Southern
Regional Council Life Member, died September 28, 1966, concluding a
career of a Southerner who said that she never wanted to write about
race, just about people. The Southern Regional Council created the
Lillian Smith Awards shortly after Miss Smith's death to honor her
life, her work, and her commitment, and to recognize in her name those
who, like her, have contributed to our understanding of or given us
new insights into the Southern region, its people, its strengths, its
problems and its weaknesses.
          The Lillian Smith Awards are given annually. Five judges receive
from fifty to seventy-five entries and judge them seeking a certain
quality which is something like the Supreme Court's definition of
pornography--you can't define it, but you know it when you've seen
it. The committee receives many good, even fine, works each year. This
is a heartening sign to those of us interested in the Southern
arts. But only a few of them every year have that undefinable quality
which makes them Lillian Smith Award winners. Both of this year's
winners struck us immediately as having that quality, that relevance
and humanity in abundance. This is a quality which brings to mind and
keeps alive the life and work of Lillian Smith.
          Lillian Smith's fame came with her first novel, Strange
Fruit, a small town story of a tragic black-white love
affair. It sold three million copies and was translated into fifteen
languages. It made her a spokesperson to the world on Southern sins of
race. Her Killers of the Dream, a psychological
analysis of the Southern system of separation became a classic of
sectional understanding and a ringing demand for the liberation of
Southerners, black and white, male and female, rich and poor from the
bonds of segregation and sexism. Although Lillian Smith wrote many
more books, I think that Killers of the Dream is her
best, the one which spells out most specifically and clearly what I
call Lillian Smith's "whole ball of wax" theory: the theory that the
Southern system, dominated as it is, and was when she was writing, by
wealthy white males, invariably discriminates against those who are
black or female or poor or a combination of the above. And the system,
said Miss Smith, would work only so long as those wealthy white males
could keep women and blacks and poor folks from joining forces with
one another.
          
            Tony Dunbar
          
          John Ehle couldn't be with us today. Last year's Lillian Smith book
award winner for fiction was Pat Conroy, who was out of the
country. John Ehle, his publisher tells us, is in the country and it's
reassuring to know that there are still places in the South so far
back that even someone as persistent as Mary Francis Derfner can't dig
them out.
          Those of you from North Carolina may know the man. He has been a
writer of merit for twenty-five years and a champion of the arts in a
state best known for tobacco and its residue: the politics of Jesse
Helms.
          The book we're honoring today is called The Winter
People. It's unquestionably his finest work. In a better world
ruled less by literary fashions and megabucks, this book would be a
popular classic. Maybe today we can help it along in that
direction.
          The Winter People is set in the North Carolina mountains during the
Depression. It is a story of love and violence, two human capacities
frequently associated with mountain life. But the book is something
more than that. It shows us an Appalachia before there was coal,
before there were social programs, before the world outside meant very
much. The forces at work in Ehle's mountains are Scottish and Irish
clans who measure their power in the quantity of children and the
number of timbered acres they possess. The pageantry of warlords in
homespun clothes reminds us of tales from across the water like
Lancelot, but these people in John Ehle's work appear real to us, not
mythical. Their devotion to family is overriding and it takes no great
leap of imagination to see the body and soul of today's mountain
people in Ehle's wonderful prose. In giving us this first glimpse, I
think, in fiction, of the people who pioneered our Southern highlands,
Ehle has given us the year's most original work of Southern
fiction.
          
            Harry Ashmore
          
          A few weeks ago I encountered one of your former executive
directors, Leslie Dunbar, and was pleased to find that he had read
Hearts and Minds--or at least 

had checked the index to
see wherein he might be mentioned. Since no account of racism from
Roosevelt to Reagan would be complete without numerous references to
the Southern Regional Council and its battle-scarred principals, Les
had come upon a passage in which I referred to him as a "certified
idealist." He was somewhat taken aback, he said, since he thought
"certified" was applied only to lunatics and recidivist criminals. I
reminded him that it also designated public accountants, but this did
nothing to placate him since, like all budget-ridden foundation
executives, he regards those who draw up balance sheets as natural
enemies.
          The chapter in which I certified Les begins with an anecdote I hope
bears repeating here today. I tell of returning to Atlanta to address
the chief state school officers of the old Confederacy twenty-five
years after Harold Fleming, John Griffin and I had arranged a
gathering of their predecessors to consider the findings we were about
to publish in a book with the incendiary title, The Negro and
the Schools. The Brown decision was then
pending, and the learned gentlemen responded to the invitation of our
sponsor, the Ford Foundation, only on condition that we hide out in
the suburbs and not only keep the meeting secret but make it, as they
say in diplomatic circles, deniable--that is, that in the event of a
leak to the press we would claim that no such assemblage had ever
taken place, and even if it had the dread possibility of school
desegregation had never been mentioned. There were, as I recall,
several apparent cardiac arrests when a rumor spread that young
William Emerson of Newsweek had been seen skulking in
the shrubbery.
          Now, a quarter century later, I again faced the chief state school
officers, but this time each was accompanied by a black deputy and the
pepper-and-salt audience was assembled at the Atlanta Biltmore under
the glare of television lights. It was, I noted, a far cry from the
days when we were working with black colleagues on the school project
and the closest we could get to the Biltmore at mealtime was the
Southern Education Foundation a block away, where we pulled down the
shades and shared catered barbecue sandwiches--which, I must say, did
represent an improvement over the cuisine available in a hotel
ballroom, then or now.
          My citation of the transformation that had, in that brief span,
made Atlanta perhaps the most thoroughly desegregated major city in
the nation prompted a question from one of the black participants. He
agreed that on the surface there were a great many changes--but, deep
down, did I think anything was really different? Indeed I
did. Twenty-five years ago, I pointed out, the great majority of
Southerners, white and black, acted on the assumption that there was a
real difference between the two races: "Now we know this is not
so. And that's the root of the problem--blacks have turned out to be
just like us, and we're no damned good."
          This back-handed assertion of common humanity did, in its ironic
way, recognize the widespread disillusionment among those of both
races who had been sustained by soaring hopes in the glory days of the
civil rights movement. The idealists had believed--perhaps had had to
believe--that the inspired gallantry of liberated blacks and their
white supporters would usher in the beloved community of Martin Luther
King's dream. It was in this company that I placed Les Dunbar, quoting
from his recent appraisal of The South and the Near
Future in Clark College publication:
          
            We did not pass from a segregated to an integrated
society. Only in a relative sense have we come from an unjust to a
more just society; most certainly we have not passed from a wandering
in the desert by blacks and from moral squalor of whites into a
'beloved community.' We attained none of these. What was accomplished,
however, is a vast enlargement of choice.
          
          And that, of course, is so. As the cliche has it, those who measure
progress against the ideal of a fully integrated society see the
bottle as half-empty; the pragmatists who measure against the point of
departure see it as half full.
          The indomitable woman in whose name we are gathered today surely
qualified for the certification I bestowed upon Les Dunbar. By 1943,
when SRC was created out of the remains of the more timorous
Commission on Interracial Cooperation, Lillian Smith had already
rejected the prevailing arguments for gradual change; for her,
segregation posed a moral choice between good and evil, life and death
of the spirit. She publicly declared that SRC's temporizing policy
made t-he organization "potentially more harmful than beneficial." And
she was unimpressed when Guy Johnson, the first executive director,
replied that it was unrealistic to adopt a policy that would restrict
SRC's membership to those who were willing to denounce segregation but
were powerless to do anything about it.
          If Miss Lillian did not prevail, neither did those she scorned as
killers of the dream--the dream she shared with the dedicated young
preacher who became her friend. Her adamant rejection of the demeaning
social conventions of the day may have scared off some potential
allies, but it also made one of our most pragmatic presidents the
first to employ the full authority of his office in support of
Southern blacks who had taken to the streets to protest denial of
their civil rights.
          One evening early in 1960 Miss Lillian had dinner with Coretta and
Martin King, and afterward they drove her to Emory University hospital
where she was undergoing treatment for cancer. As they passed through
a corner of DeKalb County a patrolman noticed a white woman sitting
beside a black man and automatically halted the car. When he
discovered that the driver was the trouble-making preacher who had
just moved in from Montgomery he concluded that his driver's license
was bound to be invalid. Martin was fined twenty-five dollars, given a
six-months suspended sentence, and released on parole. Some months
later, when he refused bond and went to jail in Atlanta to dramatize a
student sit-in at Rich's, the DeKalb court charged him with violating
parole. On this second trip to the drumhead he was whisked off in the
dead of night to Reidsville state prison.
          In desperation Coretta King put in a call to the young Democratic
candidate for president who was then heading into the home
stretch. Jack Kennedy offered reassurance, Robert Kennedy got in touch
with the 

DeKalb County judge, and Martin was returned to his father's
Ebenezer Baptist Church in a blaze of televised glory. Daddy King, who
had been publicly supporting Richard Nixon on the ground that his
Baptist faith would not permit him to vote for a Catholic, recanted
and offered a ringing endorsement of the Democratic ticket. The
resulting sweep of the black precincts in all the major cities
provided Kennedy's narrow margin of victory, and left him beholden to
Martin Luther King, Jr. and the movement he led.
          From the beginning, the civil rights movement depended upon
political finagling as well as eloquent appeals to the conscience of
the white majority. There was a splendid irony in the maneuvering that
took place in the traditional gap between rhetoric and reality--which
became even wider after the Citizens Councils unfurled the banner of
massive resistance and accentuated the discrepancy between what
leaders of both races said in public and what they were privately
willing to do. When Jack Kennedy was told that Daddy King had to
suspend his anti-Catholic bias in order to convert to the Democratic
cause, he said, "Who would have thought that Martin Luther King's
father could be a bigot?" Then, reflecting upon the life and times of
old Joe Kennedy, he added, "But, then, we all have fathers."
          So we do, and progress on the race front can be measured by the
tempering of attitudes from one generation to the next. The fathers of
my generation of white Southerners took their stand on what their
preachers told them was biblically-sanctioned moral ground, reducing
the region to poverty as they sacrificed self-interest on the altar of
white supremacy. My contemporaries, with no more valid claim to
probity; concluded that they had rather abandon Jim Crow than pay the
price required to maintain segregation in the face of mounting black
protest.
          So it was that when Bull Connor unleashed police dogs and firehoses
against black children in Birmingham, Jack Kennedy employed his
cabinet's corporate heavyweights to convince the Big Mules of the
Alabama establishment that racial violence was bad for business. After
the White Only signs came down the President told Martin and his
aides: "I don't think you should be totally harsh on Bull Connor. He's
done as much for civil rights as anybody since Abraham Lincoln."
          Those of you who labor in the vineyard of race relations are
painfully aware of the circularity that has always characterized
public discussion of the basic issue. In the old days the demonstrably
inferior social condition of the black minority was cited to justify
the caste discrimination that perpetuated the inferior condition--and
so the dogma of white supremacy came to prevail everywhere in the
nation when blacks began to migrate from the South in substantial
numbers. That ghost, at least, has been laid by the enlargement of
choice that is the not inconsiderable legacy of the civil rights
movement.
          When the federal courts struck down the barriers of institutional
segregation a third of the black population promptly moved into the
mainstream, visibly giving the 

lie to the myth of inherent racial
inferiority. In terms of educational attainment, income level, and
type of employment these blacks are certifiably middle-class, and are
more or less being accepted as such by their white counterparts. The
larger society--burdened as it is by the third of the black population
still confined to a poverty-stricken underclass--is a long way from
being free of the residue from the racist past. But the tempering of
restrictive majority attitudes has been sufficient to change the
dimensions of the American dilemma.
          This shows up most significantly in politics. Those of us who were
on the front line in the early days of the movement may be appalled by
the resurrection of George Wallace in Alabama, but there is surely
encouragement in the fact that he could re-enter the lists only by
proclaiming himself a born-again integrationist, repentant of his
race-baiting past and wholly committed to advancing the welfare of the
blacks whose votes he sought and won. Then there is Ronald Reagan,
whose political strategy writes off the black vote but who hotly
denies that his reactionary policies are tinged with racism. "I want
everyone to understand that I am heart and soul in favor of the things
that have been done in the name of civil rights and desegregation," he
has proclaimed, and, if you accept his remarkably constricted view of
contemporary society, there is no reason to doubt his sincerity.
          But if the President has rejected the dogma of white supremacy he
has fervently embraced the doctrine it produced--the old states rights
federalism elaborated by our forefathers in defense of slavery and the
second-class citizenship that succeeded it. The President's so-called
"new" federalism ignores not only the lessons of the bloodshot past,
but the reality of contemporary demography, which reflects the
transfer of the enduring race problem from the rural South to the
center of the nation's great cities, where it has produced what is
rightly labeled an urban crisis. The black underclass is not trapped
in northern slums by institutionalized race prejudice, but by a
debilitating, self-perpetuating culture of poverty that cannot
possibly yield to the kind of social Darwinism in which the President
places his faith. We are long past the share-cropping days when blacks
were kept in their place so they could be exploited as a source of
cheap labor; along with the Hispanics and poor whites who share its
misery, the black underclass has become surplus population, a
non-productive burden increasingly seen as intolerable in a shrinking
economy.
          The secular theology called Reaganomics holds that this condition
is of no concern to the federal government and can readily be disposed
of by placing responsibility for its cure upon state and local
authorities assisted by the benign working of the private sector. That
delusion cannot endure, and when it is finally dispelled there will be
much work to do--particularly for organizations like SRC which have
always had to find their way in the void between rhetoric and
reality.
          I have never been blessed with a faith strong enough to take me to
the mountaintop from which Martin Luther King caught sight of the
promised land, and assured his people that, with or without him, they
would get there one day. But I have never doubted that his vision of a
beloved community represented the only goal that would, in the end,
prove acceptable to Southerners. Miss Lillian believed that, too, and
when, at the end of her life, she revised Killers of the
Dream, she closed with these lines:
          
            So we stand: tied to the past and clutching at the stars!
Only by the agonizing pull of our dream can we wrench ourselves from
such fixating stuff and climb into the unknown. But we have always
done it and we can do it again. We have the means, the techniques, we
have the knowledge and insight and courage. All have synchronized for
the first time in history. Do we have the desire? This is a question
that each of us must answer for himself.
          
          
            Mary Frances Derfner is Vice-President of the Southern
Regional Council and chairperson of the Smith Awards Committee. Other
committee members for 1982 included Tony Dunbar, John Popham, Wilma
Dykeman and Lottie Shackelford.
          
        
        
          Delta Politics and the Almost Possible
          By Barber, RimsRims Barber
          Vol. 5, No. 1, 1983, pp. 4-7
          
          During the recent redistricting process, black leaders felt that it
would be impossible for a black candidate to 

win Mississippi's Second
Congressional District as it ultimately came to be drawn. The narrow
black population majority makes victory a very long shot for even the
exceptional campaign conducted with careful consideration of racial
relationships. Yet when Delta Congressman David Bowen chose not to
seek re-election in the newly drawn district, black state
representative Robert Clark ran and almost won.
          Robert Clark was an ideal candidate for the campaign. In 1967 he
became the first black elected to the Mississippi legislature since
Reconstruction. He has served with distinction as Chairman of the
House Education Committee. Clark has name recognition. He brought to
the campaign political experience that had earned trust, solid
relations with education and labor organizations and a claim on the
white Democratic leadership that few could match. The closeness of the
race (twelve hundred votes out of 145,000) was in large part
attributable to the qualities of the candidate himself.
          The District is 53.4% black in overall population. Black voting age
population is forty-eight percent. Estimates of registered voters show
black strength at forty-four percent. This means that it will take a
solid black vote, at or near record proportions, and a high white
crossover vote for a black Democratic candidate to win. In
Mississippi, black candidates under most circumstances may expect to
garner only two to three percent of the white vote. Clark received
twelve to thirteen percent of the white vote.
          Considering the closeness of the race, almost any shift of counties
during reapportionment would have made a significant difference. Had
the district not been gerrymandered to preserve the incumbency of
First District Congressman Jamie Whitten, Tallahatchie County could
have been traded for the two whitest counties (Choctaw and Webster)
and Clark could have won. He lost these two small counties by more
than the difference between himself and the winner, Republican Webb
Franklin. In similar fashion, Franklin won Warren County by more than
the final difference 

between the candidates. A split of Warren,
similar to that made for state legislative districts would have
shifted enough votes, as would a trade that put a small portion of
northern Hinds into the Second District.
          Victory in the spring, 1982, Democratic primary was crucial. Clark
won without a runoff although he had little more than one thousand
white votes. A runoff would have been disastrous: there would have
been little time to mobilize additional black voters, white support
that appeared in the general election would not have materialized for
the runoff, and further racial polarization within the party would
have occurred. There is a high probability that Clark would have lost
a runoff and that blacks would have bolted the Democratic party.
          The November general election attracted the second best black voter
turnout ever; the highest occurred in the 1980 Presidential
election. This time the vote was approximately ninety percent of that
record turnout, with between 65,000 and 67,000 black voters. It was
thirty percent higher than the turnout for the last off-year election,
in which Charles Evers was the drawing card for the black
electorate. Approximately forty-two percent of the voting age
population of blacks turned out while in 1980 it was forty-five
percent. Anything over sixty thousand is exceptional in this
geographical area.
          The black vote went overwhelmingly for Robert Clark by a margin of
ninety-four percent, slightly less than the ninety-six percent bloc
vote that Jimmy Carter received in 1980.
          There were however, some areas of black weakness. Five counties,
historically low in turnout, had less than forty percent of their
black voting age population to vote: Coahoma, Sunflower, Tunica,
Warren and Washington. Sunflower had the lowest at twenty-eight
percent. These five counties contain about forty 'percept of the black
voting age population in the District. Clearly, there is need for
voter registration work.
          There was a strong white turnout, about ten thousand more voters
than had been predicted. As a percentage of the white voting age
population, the turnout was about forty-eight percent (compared with
fifty-seven percent in the 1980 Presidential race). Approximately
81,000 whites voted (compared to 95,000 in 1980 and seventy thousand
in 1978). Doubtless, racial overtones helped the white turnout.
          Robert Clark received about twelve to thirteen percent of the white
vote. This varied from over twenty percent in counties like Attala and
Webster to five and six percent in Coahoma, Leflore and Tunica. In the
Hill counties, it appears that Clark received a better white vote in
rural areas than in the towns. In the Delta, Clark did better in towns
than in rural areas. The work of education and labor groups and the
Democratic party paid off with significant numbers of whites voting
for the candidate regardless of race. This was a brave first step for
several thousand white voters.
          The white vote in the District, however, has become increasingly
Republican over the past few years. This has been most pronounced when
there has been a high white turnout; almost all of the added turnout
has been Republican. Historically, the ratio of Democrats to
Republicans among white voters has been one to two.
          Over the last half dozen years, this has shifted to one Democrat
for every three Republican whites. And in 1982, half of this
diminished number of Democrats voted Republican.
          A close contest is painful to lose and prompts a lot o. second
guessing. But the challenge in the Second District of Mississippi is
to build the coalition that can bring victory and adequate
representation for the District's people. Certainly, some factors
would have made the difference in November's outcome:
Had the District been constituted with a slightly higher
percentage of black voters.Had the black voter turnout matched the record of two years
ago (and it might in 1984 if Reagan runs for reelection).Had the black bloc vote been just two percentage points more
consistent.Had the white vote not been stirred by the opponent and voted
in such strong numbers.Had a greater number of whites been able to leap the racial
barrier and vote their usual Democratic pattern.
          Other factors, not so demonstrable, could also have made a
difference: had there been a stronger Democratic party structure
across the District; had the coalition across racial lines been built
more solidly; had there been less fragmentation in the campaign;
clearer lines of communication, less conflict over strategies; had
there been more clear Democratic programmatic alternatives
consistently put before the voter; had more effort been targeted at
the weak black turnout areas.
          The fact is that the election was so close that almost any
favorable change in reapportionment, registration turnout or
Democratic party loyalty could have altered. the results. Of
particular importance, however, is a strengthened and deepened
partnership with blacks and whites in the campaign. There are
questions to answer about campaign strategies: How can white and black
staff be better coordinated so that both races feel a participation
and ownership in the cause? Can campaign appeals be made to one racial
community without agitating the other--would a traditional black rally
to increase voter turnout scare off potential white voters? How should
time be budgeted to produce the best results--how much time ought to
be spent on the ten to fifteen percent of the white vote that a black
candidate might get?
          Across the lines of race there is, at present, a growing sense of
interdependence in Mississippi's Second District. Both blacks and
whites are understanding that the kind of education provided their
children makes a difference to everybody; that health care, from
Medicare to the building of hospitals, makes a difference to
everybody; that economic development and the survival of farming make
a difference to everybody.
          Out of Holmes County in the Second District in 1982 came both the
Eddie Garthan trial and congressional candidate Robert
Clark. Carthan's case stood for recent black attempts to gain local
political power in the face of the long history of white supremacy
(see "Black Political Participation and the Challenge of
Conservatism," in Southern Changes, August/September
1982). Clark's. candidacy gave hope for a new future of inter-racial

politics. For a while, past and future came together in Holmes
County. In a room of the county courthouse, the Carthan case was
suspended one day so the election could be conducted. As things turned
out, Carthan was acquitted and Robert Clark lost by one percent of the
total vote. Clark says he is "inclined to try again."
          
            Rims Barber is project director for the Childrens'
Defense Fund in Mississippi. He is a member of the Southern Regional
Council and has been active in civil rights issue in Mississippi for
eighteen years.
          
        
      
    
  