
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 5, Number 5,
	       1983
        
          Checking the Teeth of Change
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 5, No. 5, 1983, p. 6
          
          The obvious changes in Southern politics usually deserve our most
intense suspicions, and Mississippi's recent democratic primary
election for the state legislature is only the most recent reminder of
this truism.
          After fifteen years of litigation, the Mississippi legislature was
forced by federal court order to redistrict in 1979. The redistricting
plan created twenty-nine house districts and sixteen senate districts
of more than fifty percent black population. Compared to the four
blacks who were then sitting with a hundred and seventy white
colleagues in the state legislature, the redistricting change prompted
one black newspaper in the state to proclaim "a political revolution
not witnessed in over a century."
          In 1979 a total of seventeen blacks were elected to the Mississippi
legislature. Earlier this year twenty-one were nominated in democratic
primaries and will probably be elected in early November. But in 1984
there will still be twice as many majority black districts as there
will be black legislators in Mississippi. While these changes are
meaningful, Mississippi appears to have witnessed only half a
political revolution.
          "Not so," I was told, during my last trip to Mississippi, by a
young white lawyer who considers himself both politically
sophisticated and color blind. Commenting after three years spent away
from the state in an East coast law school, he said: "We have had a
revolution. Racial politics is almost dead in this state. Blacks don't
need to vote for a black face every time. They will vote for whites
who represent them and that's a real political change ...."
          Some, however, see it differently. Robert Jackson, a young black
with the Quitman County Development Organization, said, "we should
have the right to select our own leaders but are being hampered by not
having a fair chance at the ballot box. We are sick and tired of
whites choosing our leaders for us."
          While the interpretation of what has happened in Mississippi
elections is not at all obvious, the plain fact is that black
candidates ran and lost in more than forty-five majority black
legislative districts in the Democratic primary this summer. Some
black candidates lost because some blacks did vote for white
candidates such as Speaker of the House Buddie Newman. Yet Newman's
victory is not simon-pure evidence of the end of racial politics in
Mississippi (see Bill Minor's article in this issue). In addition,
several tainted factors continue to deny black people equal footing at
the ballot box.
          Some Mississippi counties have dual sites for registration. The
places of registration still remain distant to most voters and are
open at infrequent times. In the rural Delta of Mississippi, for
example, the average black citizen must lose part of a day's work and
travel an average of thirty-nine miles to register to vote. These
problems are faced by both blacks and whites, but blacks more often
than whites have difficulty in leaving their work to register and,
because substantially fewer have automobiles, blacks find it more
difficult to travel long distances to the polls and to registration
sites.
          The election-day turnout is also a factor in Mississippi election
results. Blacks continue to turn out for elections in smaller
percentages than whites. Lack of transportation is one reason. Another
important reason, often overlooked, is historical: the average black
Mississippian was permitted to vote so recently that he has had an
opportunity to vote in only three or four presidential
elections. Blacks in Mississippi thus have only a short tradition of
political participation to help them overcome real or remembered acts
of intimidation for voting.
          These explanations prompt an almost universal response from white
rural legislators from Virginia to Mississippi: "What more do they
want? The courts have given blacks majority of the population in the
districts."
          Here lies the common misunderstanding and misrepresentation about
redistricting in the South. In Mississippi, what appears to be a
majority black district often is not. Blacks have a majority of the
total population in the Mississippi senate district that includes
Quitman County. Yet in rural Mississippi, and in much of the rural
South, the black population is very old or very young. Hence, a
fifty-four percent black district is reduced by about seven percentage
points because of the difference between the percentage of the general
population of voting age and the percentage of blacks who are of
voting age. Hence a fifty-four percent black district is in fact a
forty-seven percent black district of voting age population.
          Black voting strength may be further reduced by another seven
percentage points because of the difference in registration between
blacks and whites. Here, the problem of dual registration, distance,
and a short history of political participation take their toll. Thus a
candidate in this Mississippi district of fifty-five percent black
population can expect that forty-one percent of those voting will be
black. When all the subtracting is done, the number of legislative
districts in Mississippi where black voters are in the actual majority
is probably no more than twenty. This difference of almost fifteen
percentage points is why civil rights lawyers active in voting cases
often assume that a legislative district that is less than sixty-five
percent black is not a district where the black population has a
majority of those voting.
          Misunderstanding the nature of change in the region's politics is
one of the ancient temptations. With peculiar legalisms and political
shorthand, the nature of political change is also easily manipulated
in the public understanding. The folk wisdom, "the more things change,
the more they stay the same," is worth remembering in these days of
changing Southern politics.
          
            Steve Suitts is the executive director of the Southern
Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Drawing the Lines: A Reapportionment Primer
          By Sherman, BrianBrian Sherman
          Vol. 5, No. 5, 1983, pp. 12-18
          
          Reapportionment occurs, or at least should occur, every ten
years--when the results of the population census are released. Three
years after the 1980 census, some jurisdictions (states, counties,
municipalities) have not yet completed their reapportionment
plans. Other plans have become the subject of lawsuits which will take
many months to resolve. Groups such as the Voting Rights Project of
the Southern Regional Council have continued to review reapportionment
plans of state and local governmental bodies in the South, to assist
community groups who are fighting discriminatory plans and to develop,
upon request, alternative plans.
          Many jurisdictions in the South persist in using reapportionment as
a means to prevent blacks and other minorities from full political
participation. Blacks tend to be severely underrepresented at every
level of government. There are still many counties and cities where
blacks constitute a majority of the voting-age population but whose
elected officials remain all white.
          Most visibly, there are no black governors and no black
U.S. senators. Only two blacks--one from Texas, the other from
Tennessee--sit in Southern delegations to the House of
Representatives. Only 5.9 percent of the members of state legislatures
in the Old Confederacy are black, whereas the black population of
these states is 19.7 percent. Only forty-six municipalities, of all
sizes, in these 

states have black mayors. Invariably, blacks win
election only in jurisdictions or districts which are clearly majority
black and only after they have overcome various impediments placed by
established white power structures.
          In recent years, the major obstacle to black representation has
been white bloc voting in combination with either at-large or unfairly
apportioned election districts.
          In developing standards for enforcement of the Voting Rights Act,
the U.S Department of Justice (DOJ) has come to recognize that, at
present, the only blacks will win representation is by election in
districts which are majority black. Consequently, DOJ has defined a
fair reapportionment plan as one in which the percentage of majority
black districts in a jurisdiction comes nearest to the percentage of
blacks in the population. If a county, for example, has a five-member
elected commission and a population which is 41.6 percent black, a
fair plan will provide for two of the five districts (forty percent)
to be majority black.
          The Department of Justice defines a "majority black district" as
one whose population is at least sixty-five percent black. This figure
takes into account the greater percentage of blacks than whites in a
jurisdiction's population who are under voting age and the fact that
blacks usually have lower registration and voting rates than
whites. These lower rates can be partially explained by the greater
number of blacks than whites who are poor. Poor people are less likely
to be able to leave work to register, less likely to have
transportation to distant registration and polling sites and less
likely to be members of special interest groups which have the money
to mobilize their members.
          In addition, the legacy of terror and oppression to which blacks
have been subjected is perpetuated by intimidation, threats and other
abuses. Many thwarting devices remain. Inaccessible registration sites
and polling places, uncooperative registrars, menacing poll-watchers,
discriminatory purges of the voting rolls and absentee ballot abuse
are some of the most frequent obstacles faced by blacks.
          Since 1965 all of six Southern states (Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana,
Mississippi, South Carolina, Virginia) and parts of three others
(Florida, North Carolina, and Texas) as well as all of the counties
and municipalities in them, have been required by Section Five of the
Voting Rights Act of 1965 to submit any proposed changes in any aspect
of the electoral process to the Department of Justice for preclearance. The jurisdiction must submit a
description of the planned change along with evidence to show that the
change will not discriminate against blacks or other minorities. If
Justice agrees, the change is precleared and can
go into effect; if it is considered discriminatory, the Assistant
Attorney General for Civil Rights will write an "objection letter"
informing the jurisdiction that the plan is not precleared.
          When a jurisdiction receives an objection letter, it should
withdraw the proposed change and offer a new, non-discriminatory, plan
to the Department of Justice. Ideally, blacks will be included in
discussions leading to the development of a new plan. They will
negotiate with white leaders to reach an agreement. Often a consensus
is arrived at because whites realize they will be vulnerable to a
lawsuit unless a fair plan is developed. Predictably, if a plan has
received the support of both blacks and whites in the jurisdiction,
Justice will preclear it.
          Often however, white leaders will refuse to negotiate with
blacks. Some jurisdictions make no changes even after receiving an
objection from Justice. Other jurisdictions don't even bother to
submit their plans for preclearance at all. In either case, the plan
goes into effect. Other than preclearing or objecting to plans, the
Department of Justice rarely takes an active role in the
reapportionment process. Local black leaders who have carefully
monitored the reapportionment process and find a proposed change to be
discriminatory often have to initiate litigation in order to stop a
discriminatory plan from going into effect.
          There are some three thousand jurisdictions in the South with
significantly large black populations. Even a Department of Justice
with officials at every level who are determined to enforce the Voting
Rights Act would have a difficult time assessing all of these plans
for discriminatory intent or effect. Their task is made more difficult
by the professionals (lawyers, demographers) often hired by
jurisdictions to prepare elaborate materials purporting to show that
the submitted plan is not discriminatory. Unless local black leaders
are aware of what the jurisdiction is doing and communicate with DOJ
directly or through civil rights groups, the Justice official assigned
to the case may see no reason to believe the plan may be
discriminatory. Having only sixty days to review the plan, the
official may find no justification for any other action besides
preclearance.
          The attitude of the President and the Justice Department is
critical. An obviously discriminatory plan may still be precleared if
the Justice Department has other things on its mind. This was the case
after the 1970 census when the Department, under the direction of
Attorney General John Mitchell, was more concerned with mobilizing
white support for Richard Nixon's reelection than with enforcing the
Voting Rights Act. Emblematic of the discriminatory plans which the
Nixon-Mitchell DOJ ignored was the Mississippi congressional
reapportionment plan which fragmented newly franchised black voting
strength in the Delta by dividing it among three districts. Equally
discriminatory plans were allowed to stand throughout the
South. Blacks continued to be underrepresented throughout the 1970s
and had to wait until after the 1980 census for their next opportunity
for electoral fairness.
          Supporters of fair reapportionment increased their 

political
sophistication and organization during the 1970s, hopeful of
implementing fair plans for the 1980 census. Unfortunately, in many
instances, Reagan and his appointees to the Department of Justice
displayed as little sympathy and understanding of fairness during
their first two years in office as had Nixon and his appointees.
          Early in 1983 however, the supporters of fair plans began to notice
a shift in the way Justice reacted to the submissions for
preclearance. The DOJ has written objections to a greater proportion
of the plans during the past year than in the previous two. Perhaps
the shift has come with Reagan's increasing awareness of claims that
he is sympathetic to the proponents of continued racism. Yet, some
fear that if Reagan is re-elected, he and his supporters will abandon
any attempt to appear sympathetic to the development of fair
reapportionment plans.
          
            A Gazetteer of Inequality
          
          A fair reapportionment plan is one which, following the "one
person, one vote" principle, gives every significant population group
the opportunity to elect representatives of its own choice. Each
district should contain more or less the same number of
people. Districts should be compact, with few twists and turns to
their boundaries. The perimeter of the ideal compact district might
resemble a square or a rectangle, or follow recognized boundaries such
as a major highway or river. It should be contiguous, not chopped into
more than one part (an example of a non-contiguous district is
Louisiana's St. Martin Parish in the south-central portion of the
state).
          The most common techniques used by incumbent white elites to
prevent the development of fair reapportionment plans are dilution, packing, gerrymandering, packaging and rationalization.
          Dilution fragments concentrations of black
residents into as many districts as possible so that no one district
has a sufficiently large black vote.
          Packing puts as many blacks as possible into
as few districts as possible. Packing often occurs when the white
power structure realizes that the proportion of blacks in a
jursidiction's population is so large that it will be impossible to
draw a plan without at least one majority black district.
          Gerrymandering distorts the shape of a
district, abandoning the ideal of compactness to create a district
whose voting majority supports the incumbent power-holders.
          Packaging is resorted to when a jurisdiction
that has developed an unfair plan tries to present it publicly and to
the Department of Justice in such a way as to fool potential
critics. Some jurisdictions hire specialists who put the plan in a
slick form--perhaps as a booklet with charts, tables, maps and other
details. Packaging may also include outright lying.
          Rationalization involves the submission of an
unfair plan while claiming that for some reason or other, it should be
accepted by the DOJ anyway. One form of rationalization argues that
the proposed plan uses districts which are already in place for
another purpose.
          The Department of Justice and the courts follow a number of
criteria in assessing whether or not a plan is fair. Included are retrogression, intent, effects and totality of
circumstances.
          Examining a plan for retrogression involves making a comparison to
see if the percentage of majority black districts in the proposed plan
is fewer than in the existing plan. If so, then the DOJ will
invariably object to it. In 1981 and '82, retrogressive plans were the
only form of discriminatory plans that the DOJ was likely to object
to. During the first two years of the Reagan Administration, the DOJ
precleared many proposed plans from jurisdictions which had no
majority black districts in their existing plans. As a result, blacks
in many jurisdictions with sizable black populations still do not have
the opportunity to elect any representatives of their choice. Barring
litigation, they will have to wait until after the 1990 census and for
a more sympathetic administration.

          The criterion of intent involves documentation of the intention to
develop a plan which discriminates against blacks. These days, only a
few politicians are as publicly bold as the chair of Georgia's
legislative reapportionment committee who vowed, during this past
year's congressional redistricting process, not to support the
creation of even one "nigger district" in the state.
          To demonstrate intent in the absence of blatant public
pronouncements requires documentation of a history of repeated
attempts to thwart minority groups' efforts for a fair plan. A case
for intent can be built out of such evidence as failure to hold public
meetings, failure to give serious attention to plans presented by
black community groups, failure to submit plans for preclearance and
the continued use of such devices as dilution and packing.
          It is much easier to establish that a proposed reapportionment plan
will have the effect of discriminating against
blacks than it is to prove intent. Until
recently, however, the DOJ did not consider this a sufficient basis
for requesting an objection. A narrow interpretation of the Voting
Rights Act of 1965 by the DOJ and many courts allowed the
implementation of many discriminatory plans after the 1970 census and
again, immediately after the 1980 census. When it was renewed in 1982,
the Voting Rights Act was strengthened to make it easier for Justice
to object to plans having discriminatory effects. And, throughout 1983
there has been a perceptible movement in the DOJ towards more frequent
objections on these grounds.
          The criteria of retrogression, intent and effect are all relatively specific in the data and
analysis they require: Are blacks worse off under the proposed plan
than they were under the existing plan? If so, then the plan is
retrogressive. Did designers intend a discriminatory plan? Will the
consequences of the plan be such that the black electorate will not
have fair representation? If yes, then the plan's effect may be
assessed as discriminatory.
          There is yet another criterion, not as specific as the preceding
three, but one that can be used to argue against unfair
plans. Designated by the legalistic term totality of
circumstances, this criterion involves a much more extensive
analysis of the lives and positions of blacks in the jurisdiction with
special attention to the nature of black participation in political
life. With regard to the plan itself, one can ask: Was there black
involvement in its preparation? Were discussions of the plan public?
Were blacks intentionally or unintentionally excluded from the
discussions? If blacks made public their criticisms of the plan, were
they taken seriously? More generally, one can ask: How have whites
responded to black efforts at increased political participation? How
have white leaders responded to black attempts to mitigate the effects
of the legacy of segregation and racism?
          Answers to many of these questions often come from the personal
archives kept by many blacks involved in struggles for fair
treatment. Their letters, leaflets, clippings, old maps, lists tables,
charts, etc., provide a wealth of details not only about their
particular situations "but about the operation of power in their
jurisdictions. Information from these archives along with interviews
and quantitative data from a variety of sources can be combined into a
powerful analysis of the level of local discrimination.
          
            Four Recent Cases
          
          Each of the following cases. all from 1983, involve a
reapportionment map submitted by a jurisdiction to the Department of
Justice for preclearance. In each, the Voting Rights Project of the
Southern Regional Counci1 consulted with a group of black citizens in
the jurisdiction who felt that the plan was discriminatory. We
gathered as much data as we could in preparation for a "comment
letter" in which we asked the DOJ to object to the plan. To show what
a fair reapportionment plan would look like, we also drew alternative
maps. In each of these cases, the DOJ did object to the jurisdiction's
changes.
          The four jurisdictions include Caddo and St. Helena parishes in
Louisiana, Williamsburg County in South Carolina, and Winston County
in Mississippi.
          
            Caddo Parish
          
          Caddo Parish is located in northwestern Louisiana. Over eighty
percent of its population lives in its largest city--Shreveport. The
parish submitted a plan for the reapportionment of its police jury
(analogous in structure and function to other states' county
commission) which was a textbook case of retrogression.
          Under the existing plan there are twenty members of the police
jury. Six, or thirty percent of them, are black. Under the proposed
plan, in which the police jury was to have shrunk to twelve members,
only two of the twelve districts or 16.7 percent were majority
black. A third district was almost, but not quite, majority
black. Even if this district were counted as majority black, the plan
would remain retrogressive (black representation declining from thirty
percent to twenty-five percent).
          White parish officials rationalized that their plan was identical
to a school board plan already precleared by Justice. Upon a closer
look, however, the school board plan appears to be retrogressive, too,
insofar as it doesn't provide for three well-defined majority black
districts. Also, the school board plan had been precleared early in
the Reagan Administration when the DOJ was not objecting as frequently
to discriminatory plans.
          There were other grounds for suspecting Caddo Parish's proposed
change in the police jury. The demographer hired by the parish to draw
and present the plan was president of a company which, according to
its own advertisement, had prepared reapportionment plans for many
other jurisdictions, including over half the parishes in Louisiana. He
was surely aware of the retrogression criterion and of the likelihood
of objection by the DOJ once it realized the plan was
retrogressive.
          The Voting Rights Project sent a letter to Justice with a
statistical analysis indicating the retrogressive effect of the
proposed plan. We also drew and sent an alternative, fair plan. Caddo
Parish is thirty-eight percent black. We argued that the fairest plan
would provide five majority black districts in a twelve district
plan. We showed that because Shreveport is so segregated, it is
possible to create six majority black districts, so there is no excuse

for Caddo Parish not to provide five.
          
            St. Helena Parish
          
          St. Helena is a rural parish northeast of Baton Rouge. It has a
six-member police jury and is slightly more than fifty percent
black. A fair plan should provide for three majority black
districts. Instead, the parish submitted a plan which provided for
only one majority black district. St. Helena did not hire a
demographer, but drew the plan on its own. Without a professional's
tricks, their proposed plan was transparently discriminatory. The
parish's white power structure packed the one majority black district
that they couldn't avoid drawing, adding to it a gerrymandered slice
from an adjacent district and hanging this slice, like a tail, down
from one corner (see accompanying map).
          In the comment letter which the Voting Rights Project wrote to
Justice, we analyzed this plan and some of the factors which helped
account for it. We found that the parish was run in a manorial style
by whites who held essentially feudal attitudes and committed rather
unsophisticated sins. A television reporter from nearby Baton Rouge
showed that some of the names on the voting rolls were the same as
those on parish gravestones. Votes were bought seasonally at a local
sporting goods store. There is a pattern of harassing black leaders
which has forced several to leave the parish because of firings or
threats.
          St. Helena Parish presented an additional difficulty. We were
unable to send a fair alternate plan along with our comment letter
because of the unavailability of detailed census data. The white
incumbents didn't have the data either. They simply made their own
head counts, but provided no information about how they did it. When
census data are not available, Justice says it is reasonable for
jurisdictions to make their own counts, but only if all groups in the
jurisdiction agree on how the counting will be done. Blacks in
St. Helena are attempting to get the white leaders to agree to this
process. Otherwise, they will have to go to court in pursuit of a fair
plan.
          
            Williamsburg County, South Carolina
          
          Williamsburg County is sixty-one percent black. Its county council
has seven members. Before reapportionment there were three majority
black districts. This enabled whites to hold a four to three majority
on the council. The reapportionment plan proposed by the council was
designed to preserve the white majority. A fair plan, however, would
provide four majority black districts out of seven, a proportion which
comes closest to the percentage of blacks in the county.
          Blacks had no opportunity for discussion of the proposed plan at
public meetings because no meetings were held. Under South Carolina
state law, a county's representatives to the state legislature have
authority over the development of new reapportionment plans. In
Williamsburg, one state senator had the main voice in development of
the new plan. He and other state legislators met with the county
council at a closed meeting to present the already developed plan to
the council members. Neither the press nor the public was notified. A
local reporter, tipped off about the meeting. was allowed to stay only
through the insistence of a black count councillor--a councillor who,
under the proposed plan, was to lose his well-defined black majority
district and be thrown into a non-majority black district with a white
incumbent whose father happened to be the state senator who supervised
the development of the proposed plan. When the reporter asked for a
copy of the plan, the senator refused, saying it might "confuse the
public."
          In a front page editorial, the newspaper pointed out that the
secrecy of the meeting violated South Carolina's Freedom of
Information Act and was also solid evidence that the county did not
intend to allow black community participation in the development of
the plan. Despite newspaper stories and protests from the black
community, the county approved the plan, sent it to Justice, and
without waiting for preclearance, prepared to put the plan into effect
for upcoming county elections.
          In order to dilute three adjacent districts, the proposed plan
packed a large proportion of the county's blacks into a single
district which one observer said was shaped like a "crawling snake."
It also fragmented a large concentration of blacks in one of the
poorest regions of the 

county into three separate districts.
          Black leaders in Williamsburg County contacted the Voting Rights
Project and asked that we write a comment letter requesting the
Justice Department to object to the proposed plan and that we draw an
alternate.
          It was relatively easy to draw a fair seven-member plan- with four
compact majority black districts. The Justice Department objected to
the proposed plan and subsequently, the county adopted a fair plan
resembling the one we had drawn. It will be used in the next
election.
          
            Winston County, Mississippi
          
          Winston County is thirty-eight percent black but no black has ever
served on its five member county commission. Using an extraordinary
bit of gerrymandering, the county submitted a 1983 plan which
fragmented the black community in the county's largest town
(Louisville) among four of the five districts so that no district
would be majority black. One proposed district (see accompanying map)
extends for some twenty-six miles as it contorts its way from the
northern boundary of the county through Louisville, finally extending
in a strip to the eastern boundary of the county. This district
narrows at one point to the 190 foot width of a cemetery.
          The other proposed Winston County districts also had a lot of
twists and turns in them as they moved through Louisville, especially
in the black residential areas. Besides gerrymandering the black
community out of a district, the odd shapes make it difficult for
people to know what district they actually live in. Such confusion is
a further inhibitor of political participation.
          Winston County hired a private firm which sent the proposed plan to
Justice in a slickly packaged booklet. On the booklet's first page a
demographer flatly stated that the plan conformed to all the standards
of a fair plan according to interpretations of the Voting Rights
Act. He claimed that there was no dilution of the black vote despite,
as we showed in our comment letter to DOJ, his managing to achieve an
almost ideal example of dilution this drawing of districts.
          Along with our comment letter, we sent in an alternate plan. A fair
plan in this thirty-eight percent black county would provide for two
majority black districts out of five. In this case however, the
segregated residential patterns of the county are checkerboard rather
than ghetto style in their segregation, and thus do not al low for the
drawing of two black districts. Our plan provides for only one,
suggestive of a need to consider other measures to give blacks an
opportunity to elect representatives of their choice.
          
            Drawing the Lines
          
          Only one of the four cases just described has yet been resolved. In
the other three jurisdictions, blacks are attempting to negotiate with
white political leaders in order to reach a consensus which includes a
fair reapportionment plan. Illustrative of both the strength and the
limits of the Voting Rights Act, if the negotiations are unsuccessful,
blacks may have to go to court.
          The Voting Rights Act has not been interpreted to mean that the
Justice Department take an active role in 

securing fair
reapportionment plans. Usually, a jurisdiction's black citizenry,
relying upon limited resources, must initiate litigation. A Justice
Department objection letter or the documentation of failure to submit
a new plan for preclearance may provide strong supportive evidence but
don't necessarily mean that the courts will rule favorably or that a
fair plan will be adopted. Without the Voting Rights Act, blacks might
still be excluded completely from the reapportionment process in the
South and be absent from elected positions altogether. Yet, much more
white resistance must be overcome before blacks will gain fair
treatment.
          
            Brian Sherman is a clinical sociologist who works as a
research analyst for the Voting Rights Project of the Southern
Regional Council. He has drawn alternate reapportionment plans for
over twenty jurisdictions and is author of an empirical study of voter
discrimination in Georgia: Half a Foot in the
Door.
          
        
        
          Bertram Wyatt-Brown. Southern Honor: Ethics and Behavior
in the Old South. Oxford University Press, 1982.
          By Morgan, LyndaLynda Morgan
          Vol. 5, No. 5, 1983, pp. 22-24
          
          In his History of the Southern Confederacy,
published in 1954, Clement Eaton noted that students of the American
South needed to pay more attention to "Southern honor" and its role in
the secession movement, although he was careful to add that the real
issue concerned the safety of slavery. Twenty-eight years later,
Bertram Wyatt-Brown has provided the first important assessment of the
problem Eaton recognized. Southern Honor: Ethics and Behavior
in the Old South, the first volume of a projected trilogy, is
an elaborate and expansively documented study which explores the
functional aspects of honor, here described as the sine qua non of the wealthiest and most powerful
slave society in the New World. This culture of honor was a lily-white
and largely classless ethic that fueled secession and had little or
nothing to do with the institution of slavery. "I have not placed
slavery at the center of Southern concern," Wyatt-Brown
explains. "White Southerners seldom forgot the presence of blacks;
nevertheless, what mattered most to them was the interchanges of
whites among themselves." As an idea virtually imbued with a life of
its own, honor "existed before, during and after slavery . . . The
South was not founded to create slavery: slavery was recruited to
perpetuate the South. Honor came first" and existed distinctly "apart
from a particular system of labor, a special region of the country,
and a specific time in history."
          It is difficult to understand how a notion like honor, foreign to
or at least defined differently by those of us living in the late
twentieth century, could hold so much power over 7i~eil and
events. What exactly was honor? For nineteenth-century white
Southerners it defined a system of ethical principles virtually
synonymous with reputation; it was the culprit behind the South's high
incidence of violence; and it generally excluded women, children, and
slaves from its exactions. Honor, which is also to say personal worth,
was conferred or besmirched by other members of the community; it was
entirely external in origin and application. If a man were held
dishonorable, he remained so until he had proven otherwise, usually
through some form of physical violence. Personal worth came not from
within, as increasingly it did among nineteenth-century Northerners
(and as it later would for Southerners), but from without: you had
only as much honor as others said you had. These tenets applied to
individuals, families, communities, and eventually, the entire region,
insofar as these terms describe white male society. It was an "ancient
ethic," "the cement that held regional culture together," a precept
that arrived in the South partly via the cultural baggage of the
unruly Scots and Scots-Irish, who enjoyed a preponderance among
immigrants to the Old South. And it caused civil war. "The inhabitant
of the Old South was not inspired to she 

his own or another's blood
for the right to own slaves," says Wyatt-Brown. "Ever since man first
picked up a stone to fling at an enemy, he has justified his thirst
for revenge and for public approval on the grounds of honor."
          These are sweeping claims. While we are indebted to Wyatt-Brown for
a provocative new approach to the Southern past and to a topic long
neglected, Southern Honor contains errors of
conceptualization and credits the cultural and ideological precept of
honor with vastly more importance than it merits. The relegation of
slavery to obscurity is the worst fault and the one which will be most
fully discussed here. But the inability to integrate cultural concepts
into the wider social, political, and economic context, the
unfortunate tendency towards ethnocultural determinism, and the
inattention paid to how societies change over time--inattention, that
is, to the very stuff of history--are other problems that mar the book
throughout.
          Disregard for some of the most important historiographical insights
of the last three decades bespeaks a certain indiscretion. Remarkable
for their absence in Southern Honor are the findings of two of the
most eminent Southern historians of our time, C. Vann Woodward, of
whom Wyatt-Brown was once a student, and Eugene D. Genovese. Two major
and widely accepted themes emerged from their most influential works,
Origins of the New South 1877-1918 (1951), and
Roll Jordan Roll: The World the Slaves Made (1972),
respectively. Origins emphasized the discontinuities
rather than the continuities of Southern history; stressed
socioeconomic and political as well as ideological conflicts; and
rejected the then prevalent consensus approach which envisioned a
homogenous white South, an approach perhaps best illustrated in the
writings of U.B. Phillips. Genovese's classic Roll, Jordan,
Roll carefully detailed antebellum slavery from the slaves'
perspective and painstakingly delineated what is now a commonplace in
Southern history that is ignored at considerable peril: "Masters and
slaves shaped each other and cannot be discussed or analyzed in
isolation." Woodward too had underscored this point in 1964 in the
preface to a book of essays entitled American Counterpoint:
Slavery and Racism in the North-South Dialogue,  when he
said:
          
            The ironic thing about these two great hyphenate minorities,
Southern-Americans and Afro-Americans, confronting each other on their
native soil for three and a half centuries, is the degree to which
they have shaped each other's destiny, determined each other's
isolation, shared and molded a common culture. It is, in fact,
impossible to imagine the one without the other and quite futile to
try.
          
          This is precisely the error that Southern Honor
makes--it describes white Southerners without regard for the impact of
Afro-Americans on their lives and their culture, if whites can be said
to have had a "separate" culture. For even if it were true that
intraracial exchanges assumed priority with antebellum white
Southerners, the fact is that slaves fundamentally influenced every
aspect of white society, especially honor. Indeed, the very fact that
honor in its American incarnation lasted longest in the slaveholding
South 

indicates that slavery played no small part in the development
and character of that ethic.
          The dynamics of this master-slave dialectic as they applied to
honor need to be more fully explained. Even on the rare occasion when
Southern Honor discusses master-slave relationships, the interaction
tends to proceed from master to slave, rather than between master and
slave. Wyatt-Brown claims. for example, that honor required "the
unfeigned will ingress of slaves to bestow honor on all whites
. . . if slaves merely pretended to offer respect, the essence of
honor would be dissolved; only the appearance, shabby and suspect,
would remain." But a slave's willingness to bestow respect was typically an insincere appearance, though a
sophisticated rather than a shabby one. As a survival technique, the
facade of obedience ironically provided slaves with the very sense of
inner personal worth that was so illusory to slaveholders themselves,
and which they could do nothing to destroy in their slaves--if indeed
masters were even aware of it. These attitudes, far from dissolving
honor, affected it profoundly and, as W.E.B. Du Bois wrote, made honor
"a vast and awful thing." No matter how much whites would have liked
to believe it, slaves were hardly social ciphers. As Genovese so aptly
noted, slaveholders "wallowed in those deformities which their slaves
had thrust upon them in the revenge of historical silence--deformities
which would eventually lead to their destruction as a class."
          Although Wyatt-Brown insists that honor existed strictly apart from
socioeconomic factors and untouched by time and place, Southern
Honor is hardly persuasive on this point. Honor may have been
an ancient ethic, but in different societies and at different times it
expressed itself in different ways. Neither honor in the Mediterranean
nor "primal" honor were the same as Southern honor. In the American
case it would seem that the nineteenth-century move to industrial
capitalism, a change which was accompanied by the end of slavery and
the advent of new forms of social and productive relationships, would
have had an immense impact on cultures North and South. Wyatt-Brown
does hint that change occurred: honor is clearly in decline in the
North by the early nineteenth century, though why and what replaces it
are unclear. Honor also eventually departs the South, and its decline
dated from the Jeffersonian era and was linked to the rise of Southern
evangelicalism. Since Wyatt-Brown promises to address honor's demise
in a subsequent volume, it is unfair to fault him for his brief
treatment of it here. Hopefully his later works will take these
questions into fuller consideration.
          In writing Southern Honor, Wyatt-Brown has performed
yeoman service. This initial foray into an important and hitherto
unstudied realm of Southern history has brought us to a fuller
understanding of what life in the Old South was like. His description
of honor, more anthropological than historical, sheds light on another
antebellum Southern culture, perhaps better described as a
sub-culture. Yet the book has left many questions unanswered:
questions of time and place, of class and race and of the changing
socioeconomic environment and its impact on culture. In short, there
is more to Southern honor than Wyatt-Brown is telling us.
        
        
          White Politics in a Black Land
          By Minor, BillBill Minor
          Vol. 5, No. 5, 1983, pp. 1-5, 7-9
          
          It was the sort of affair which a few years ago would have been
unthinkable in Mississippi: an NAACP fundraising luncheon in
Vicksburg, the Civil War "Gibraltar of the Confederacy," and almost
half the crowd consisted of white politicians, eager to make points
with local black leaders and pay their respects to Dr. Benjamin Hooks,
the NAACP national director.
          Among the white politicians on hand was State Representative
Clarence Benton "Buddie" Newman, the Speaker of the Mississippi House
of Representatives, the man whom many regard as the most powerful
figure in Mississippi government. Newman's legislative district has
been altered as a result of recent reapportionment to include a
section of the suburbs of Vicksburg (embracing several north Warren
(County white residential areas), as well as his longtime political
base--the two tiny cotton and soybean plantation counties of Sharkey
and Issaquena--tucked in a bend of the Mississippi River.
          For most of the thirty-six years that the stubby, bespectacled
Newman has served in the legislature he has been one of the most
influential lawmakers in suppressing civil rights for blacks. His role
as a close advisor to Governor Ross Barnett during the 1962 James
Meredith crisis at the University of Mississippi has never been widely
known, but insiders to that sad episode of state history say that
Newman advocated the most extreme of the measures taken by Barnett to
defy federal authority.
          By trading some of their influence for black support, old time
segregationist politicians in Mississippi such as Newman have
displayed an amazing agility in adapting to an integrated political
milieu without losing any of the power they had back in the days of
segregation. Even in a number of legislative districts with decided
black majorities, black candidates have found that it is often

impossible to win against seasoned white politicians who can shrewdly
maneuver the black vote.
          Now, at age sixty-two, the raspy-voiced erstwhile soybean farmer
from Valley Park is at the top of a political system in Mississippi in
which the legislative branch dominates state government, virtually
holding governors hostage in their ceremonial office in the
magnificent eighty-year-old capitol building in Jackson.
          At the Vicksburg NAACP luncheon, Newman was seated at the head
table close to Dr. Hooks. The affair came just a few days before the
August 2 Democratic primary in Mississippi, wherein Newman had drawn
surprisingly stiff opposition from a thirty-six year old white woman
accountant named Phyllis Farragut.
          Ms. Farragut, known for her activity in the League of Women Voters
and the Federation of Business and Professional Women's Clubs, is
highly regarded in the Vicksburg black community for her demonstrated
social concerns. She had come to the luncheon at the invitation of
several local NAACP leaders who privately had given her assurances of
support in her race with Newman.
          Longtime Mississippi civil rights leader Aaron Henry of Clarksdale,
state president of the NAACP, and for the past three years a member of
the Mississippi House of Representatives, was asked to say a few words
at the Vicksburg luncheon. To the amazement of the local NAACP
leaders, Henry turned his remarks into a virtual endorsement of Buddie
Newman for reelection.
          "This is MY speaker," said the sixty-year-old Henry, "through the
years we've developed a wonderful working relationship." The bitter
irony is that in years past, Henry had picketed outside the State
Capitol against many of the repressive laws which Newman helped to
pass to keep blacks out of the political process.
          Capping off the event, the evangelistic Hooks stirred the two
hundred blacks present to shore up the NAACP as a civil rights force
in Mississippi and challenged everybody, including the white
politicians, to match his twenty dollar contribution to the Vicksburg
chapter. Among the first to come forward and plank down his twenty
dollar bill was Buddie Newman.
          Perhaps the episode at the Vicksburg luncheon was a precursor of
what would happen in Farragut's campaign to unseat Newman with the
help of the black vote in Sharkey and Issaquena Counties. The 1980
population census showed Sharkey with 65.7 percent black population
and Issaquena with 55.7 percent.
          "We really worked hard trying to get black votes in Sharkey and
Issaquena counties. A lot of black persons there were very nice to me
and seemed to be sympathetic to my campaign," Ms. Farragut said later,
"But a week before the election, I realized we hadn't gotten to first
base."
          Every time she spoke with some influential black in the two
counties, Newman would come along behind her and find out what
problems the black person might be having. . . with the PIK program or
Social Security, and the like. "Then Newman would pull his strings and
get the person's problem taken care of," said Farragut. "I couldn't do
anything like that."
          When the votes were counted on the night of August 2, Farragut and
Newman had run almost a deadheat in Warren County, only twelve votes
separating them. But in the two black-majority counties of Sharkey and
Issaquena, Newman piled up his winning margin of nineteen hundred
votes, getting almost ninety percent of,` the black vote.
          "What was so discouraging is that my candidacy offered a choice for
the first time between the old ways and a new way," she related. "It
was the old way that had given them a thirty-two percent illiteracy
rate in those two counties and held back the state. We offered them a
change."
          Farragut also came out of the election experience disenchanted with
black leader Aaron Henry, whom she said had given her strong
indications at the beginning of her candidacy that he would use his
influence to help her. "He is one person I will always be wary of,"
she declared.
          Newman considers himself a "farmer" because of the several hundred
acre soybean and cotton farm he has lived on and operated for a number
of years in the tiny village of Valley Park. But for at least
twenty-five years he has been on the payroll of Southern Natural Gas
Company, a gas transmission line based in Birmingham, which maintains
a pumping station in Valley Park. Variously, Newman has described his
connection with Southern Natural as that ,of "public relations" or
"industrial development" representative.
          Because Newman has only rarely performed any visible function for
Southern Natural (once or twice he has gone before the state tax
commission seeking to hold down the company's tax assessment in
Mississippi), it is widely assumed that he must be one of the
"friends" that Southern Natural's president, Peter G. Smith, referred
to 

in remarks before the Alaska Public Service Commission several
years ago. At the time, Southern Natural Gas was seeking rights to the
trans-Alaskan pipeline. and Smith bragged about the influential
buddies the company had in Southern legislatures, specifically
referring to Mississippi.
          When Ms. Farragut raised the issue of Newman's questionable
relationship with the natural gas utility company during the election
campaign, Newman explained it away by saying "everyone knows I give my
salary (from Southern Natural) to charity during the months the
legislature is in session." The Mississippi legislature raised the
salary of the Speaker of the House to $34,500 in 1980, on the premise
that the job was fulltime.
          Newman's formal education consists of high school and a year and a
half at a junior college before he went into the Army in World War
II. After the war, he was elected to the Mississippi State Senate from
Issaquena County, becoming part of the. "Class of 1948" which is
looked upon as one of the brightest group of freshman legislators ever
to sit in Jackson. Newman, however, was not one of those who showed
signs of providing a more moderate, intellectual leadership for the
future.
          He began his climb to political power when he moved over to the
Mississippi House in 1952 and became one of the young lieutenants in
the Old Guard of then Speaker Walter Sillers, a courtly Delta
plantation statesman-lawyer. With Sillers in mind, William Winter, the
current governor and another member of the Class of '48, had written
in A History of Mississippi, compiled in 1973:
"Although the office of speaker is less glamorous than that of
governor, the real power in Mississippi lies with the legislature."
Sillers is still regarded as the most powerful single legislative
figure of this century, in a career that spanned fifty years in the
Mississippi House.
          In the Dixiecrat rebellion of 1948, when Mississippi Democrats,
along with those of three other Southern states, bolted the ranks of
the National Democratic Party and voted for the States' Rights ticket
of Strom Thurmond and Fielding Wright, one of the chief architects of
the movement was the grey-maned Sillers. The 1948 bolt put Mississippi
on a course of alienation from the national party that would last for
the next quarter century, finally ending in a unified bi-racial party
in 1976.
          During the latter half of the 1950s, following the Brown vs. Board of Education decision, Sillers and
his loyal followers in the Mississippi House ran roughshod over the
then moderate governor, J. P. Coleman, who, though a supporter of
segregation, opposed putting the state on a collision course with the
federal government.
          When Coleman sought a new state constitution in late 1957 to
replace the state's 1890 document, the Sillers forces, with Newman a
leading spear-carrier, soundly repelled the Coleman effort, implying
that he was seeking to undermine the foundation of the state's
segregated society. Instead of a new constitution, the Delta
conservatives pushed through a constitutional amendment providing that
the legislature by a majority vote could abolish public schools if
they were ever integrated.
          A quarter of a century later, Mississippi still has its same
antiquated constitution. Newman. who became Speaker of the House in
1974, has been one of those largely responsible for perpetuating the
old document with its school abolition provision and a one-term
limitation on governors, putting chief executives at a distinct
disadvantage in dealing with the legislature.
          For years, the legislature has been encroaching upon the executive
branch of government in Mississippi, putting lawmakers by statute on
the most powerful state boards and commissions. When the state's
attorney general, Bill Allain, precipitated a showdown with the
lawmakers last year, Newman rallied the legislative forces to resist
by going to court with their own attorney, a Newman crony.
          A lower court judge ruled last January that the lawmakers were
violating the state constitutional provision on separation of powers,
and the case is now pending before the Mississippi Supreme Court. In
the meantime, Allain has become the Democratic nominee for governor
and is heavily favored to win the November 8 general election.
          In the Mississippi House, the Speaker apoints all committees, even
designating the chairs and vice-chairs. On key committees, almost
invariable, Newman's most loyal lieutenants sit in charge:
Representative H. I,. "Sonny" Merideth of Greenville, his closest
confidante, on Ways and Means; Representative Ed "Stump" Perry of
Oxford, on Appropriations, and Representative Jim Simpson of Long
Beach on Rules. With a brief word or even a nod from Newman, these
chairmen know which bills "Mr. Speaker" wants brought out or left to
die in their committees. Since the committee chairs control which
bills will be considered and which will not, they hold the power of
life and death over legislation.
          Under the "deadline" system for considering legislation, which the
Old Guard pushed through in the early '70s (and which is now
untouchable), a convenient graveyard is provided for three-fourths of
the bills introduced at each session before they get any real
consideration.
          And, when a committee fails to stop some measure Mr. Speaker
doesn't want, he has other devices--his Rules Committee which can put
bills up or down on the calendar, or his own gavel.
          With the fall of his gavel, Newman, in the 1982 session, 

choked off
a drive launched by Governor William Winter to create the state's
first system of free public kindergartens. Winter hoped to fund the
kindergartens with an increase in the state's severance tax on oil and
gas production, a tax which had remained unchanged since 1944. Not
surprisingly, Newman has been a longtime foe of increased oil and gas
tax.
          Newman had taken refuge on the kindergarten issue for several years
by saying that the only way he could support kindergartens was if they
were funded largely by local school districts. Yet, because of a
taxation straitjacket placed upon school districts by the legislature,
such a system of funding was virtually impossible.
          Kindergartens had also become a last line of defense among oldtime
segregationists in the Mississippi Legislature who privately regarded
the proposed system as "nothing but a babysitting service for black
kids."
          With the kindergarten bill awaiting action on the House calendar,
Newman called for a voice vote on adjournment which would have the
effect of killing the measure. Despite a heavy chorus of "no's,"
Newman rapped the gavel and ruled the House adjourned. He then stalked
off the podium, amid shouts by kindergarten backers for a roll call
vote.
          Newman's action brought down upon him the wrath of public school
forces as never before and became a focal point four months later for
an ABC-TV 20/20 feature making him the culprit for depriving children
in the nation's most educationally deprived state of the opportunity
to attend kindergartens. The 20/20 segment tied Newman's outside
interest as a gas company representative to his willingness to kill
kindergarten.
          The ABC show forced a turn-around in Newman's attitude and
triggered a succession of events which, in a winter special session,
culminated in the passage of the Educational Reform Act of 1982.
          Newman, stung by national exposure, created a special House
committee to draft the school reform act containing the features
wanted by Governor Winter, together with a financing plan. To the
surprise of critics, the House committee brought forth a package which
included an increase in the oil-gas tax, plus a laundry list of other
tax hikes providing $140 million for the education measure.
          What some have termed the "Christmas miracle" in Mississippi
happened in mid-December, 1982 when the Educational Reform Act won
enactment after unprecedented editorial pressure from the Jackson
Clarion-Ledger, which later won a Pulitzer Prize for
its efforts. The final version of the financing plan, however,
eliminated any oil-gas tax increase, and shifted most of the burden to
consumers through a one-half cent increase in the state sales
tax. (Mississippi does not exempt groceries from the sales tax, thus
placing a large portion of the tax increase on the poor.) Nonetheless,
the way opened for Mississippi public kindergartens by 1986 and for
other education improvements. (See "Mississippi Makes Up Its Mind,"
Southern Changes, March/April 1983.)
          The arrogance of Newman in killing the kindergarten bill in 1982
precipitated formation of a statewide bi-racial organization called
"Mississippi First" to elect a more progressive legislature. Out of
this came Ms. Farragut's candidacy and a dozen or more foes for Old
Guardsmen. While Mississippi First failed to unseat Newman, it did
manage to topple seven of his committee chairmen and remove some other
deadwood members.
          How Newman, despite his old identity as a strong racist in the
heyday of the white Citizens Councils and afterwards, has been able to
establish rapport with the black power structure is one of the
Mississippi political anomalies which Ms. Farragut discovered at first
hand.
          It was not until the early 1970s, after black voting strength began
to show in Mississippi politics, that Newman discovered any need to
communicate with blacks, even though he had always represented a black
majority population area.
          His first perceptible move came in 1974 when he shrewdly
outmaneuvered several other able legislators to gain the House
speakership. As one of those to nominate him for the post, Newman
picked Representative Robert Clark of Ebenezer, who, in 1967, had
become the first black member of the Mississippi Legislature since
1888. Three years later when the chairmanship of the House Education
Committee became vacant, Newman rewarded Clark with the post.
          Perhaps the true indication of how much Newman trusted Clark to
pass on major education matters came afterwards when Newman began
referring such measures to both the Education Committee and the
Appropriations Committee--headed by a faithful lieutenant of the
Speaker.
          The most powerful black figure in Newman's home county of Issaquena
is Mayor Unita Blackwell of Mayersville. Many have wondered why
Ms. Blackwell had not challenged Newman for his legislative seat,
since she would have swept the black vote in the district.
          Newman evidently began courting Ms. Blackwell several years back so
as to dissuade her from launching an opposition movement. Observers
remember the occasion of the Third Congressional District Democratic
caucus in April 1980 when Newman sat at Blackwell's elbow for eight
solid hours, voting down the line with her to make certain she would
be a delegate from the district 

to the Democratic National Convention.
          For weeks before the August primary contest with Newman,
Ms. Farragut had tried to contact Blackwell and enlist her support. "I
was never able to see her," Farragut said, "but she sent word she was
going to be out of the state working on an advanced college degree
most of the summer and would not take part in the campaign." This,
Farragut later discovered, would not exactly be the case.
          "I found I had been led down the primrose path, and that Unita
Blackwell had organized her forces for Newman before she left," she
declared. "A lot of people say you can't get the black vote by getting
to the leaders anymore. I don't think that is so in Sharkey and
Issaquena Counties."
          In a number of instances where old hands in the Mississippi
legislature were turned out of office this past summer, it was said to
be a case of their having lost touch with their constituents. A
notable exception came in State Senatorial District Thirteen, a
decidedly black-majority district in the heart of the Delta where
Senator Robert L. Crook, fifty-four, won his sixth successive term in
the Legislature even though he doesn't really reside among his
constituents.
          Crook, a white attorney, lists Ruleville as his hometown, but it is
common knowledge in the legislature and among many in his alleged home
county of Sunflower that he and his family have resided in Jackson,
120 miles to the south, for the past twenty-three years. Once a dry
cleaning establishment operator in Ruleville, Crook had gone to
Jackson in 1960 to take a job as state civil defense director in the
Ross Barnett Administration. With no formal education beyond high
school, Crook had gotten a law diploma from a night school in Jackson
and became a member of the state bar, getting elected to the
Mississippi state senate from Sunflower County in 1963 when only
whites voted in the black-majority county.
          In most of the election years since, Crook has encountered only
token opposition, usually a little-known black candidate. This time,
he was put to his sternest test when the district was reshaped to
include a substantial chunk of neighboring Coahoma County and the city
of Clarksdale, giving the district a fi3.6 percent black voting age
population.
          Not only did he have a rather prominent black opponent,
fifty-year-old Elijah Wilson of Clarksdale, the president of the
Coahoma County NAACP, but also fifty-two-year old Turner Arant, member
of a prominent Delta cotton farming family.
          Crook was fresh from having led Senate forces in blocking Governor
Winter's proposed reforms in the prison system. Winter sought to
provide alternative sentencing and decentralization of prison
facilities as a solution to overcrowding at Parchman Penitentiary and
county jails around the state.
          Labelling the Winter proposals "soft on crime," Crook had mounted a
campaign which almost destroyed the model state corrections board
created in 1976 in response to a federal court order directing
modernization of the penal system. For years. Crook has considered
Parchman Penitentiary, located in Sunflower County, his personal
fiefdom, involving himself in who is hired and fired, and serving as
the "outside world" lawyer for inmates.
          Significantly, when prison guards living on the premises at
Parchman didn't want to send their kids to integrated public schools
in Sunflower County, Crook got through a bill providing tuition grants
to send them to private, segregated academies.
          In the old days of the Citizens' Councils. Crook had been a loyal
supporter of the segregationist organization. In 1966 he sponsored the
CC's bill for a "Mississippi Relocation Commission," to provide
one-way bus tickets for blacks to go North. It would offer assistance
to any families who believed "they can improve their economic and
social status by relinquishing residence and citizenship in this state
and by going to and residing in another state."
          Prospective clients for relocation would be taken from the county
welfare rolls. Funds would be provided to any family to move their
belongings and transport themselves to another state, but acceptance
of the funds would constitute a lien against any property the
expatriated family may have in Mississippi. The debt would be
cancelled after a certain number of years.
          The "one-way ticket" measure never passed the legislature, and
veteran lawmakers now concerned about their image with black voters
don't like to talk about the bill. When the Relocation Commission
proposal was brought up by Crook's opponents in the past summer's
campaign, he shrugged it off as "just newspaper talk."
          Wilson, the black opponent of Crook in the August 2 Democratic
primary, had the backing of Mississippi First, which considered Crook
to be one of the negative forces in the legislature. The organization
put its 

maximum help to the tune of $2500 in cash, printing and
consultant services behind Wilson, but he was unable to raise more
than one thousand dollars beyond that from black political activists,
even though a majority of the residents of the district were in
Coahoma County, and that part of the district was seventy percent
black.
          Coahoma County and Clarksdale happen to be the home of Aaron Henry,
the state NAACP president. However, as Wilson's campaign developed, it
became evident that he was not getting the support from Henry which he
would expect from a fellow black leader.
          Six months earlier, Wilson had been elected president of the
Coahoma County NAACP chapter, replacing Henry, who had held that title
for nearly thirty years. "I didn't campaign for it. The nominating
committee came back with the recommendation that I be elected
president, and that is what happened," says Wilson.
          Sources of campaign funds Wilson expected to tap in the black
community "just didn't come through . . . I don't know if Aaron had
anything to do with that or not." The lack of money didn't give him
the kind of exposure he needed, especially in Sunflower County, which
has seven small municipalities, the largest being Indianola with a
population of around nine thousand.
          Although Sunflower County has a fifty-five percent black majority,
Crook got four to one the number of votes Wilson received, and almost
double the number Arant received. Even with a clear majority over his
two opponents in the 2900 votes Coahoma cast in the election, Wilson
finished out of the money in third place, setting up a runoff between
Crook and Arant.
          Crook contends the utility companies went after him "with all the
money and influence" they could throw into the second primary on the
side of his opponent because of Crook's stand for strong utility
regulatory laws and his opposition to rate increases in recent
years. "It's unbelievable what they tried to do," he says, "they spent
$160,000, I believe, trying to defeat me."
          If the figure of $150,000 were accurate, it would be the largest
amount ever expended in a single legislative race in Mississippi. In
any case, Arant put on a major campaign for a largely rural area,
utilizing phone banks, billboards and special spots on regional
television stations during the three-week runoff campaign.
          Crook, despite his heavy black constituency, has never learned how
to pronounce the word "Negro," or use the word "black."
          "This nigra woman called me," Crook said
later, "and said she had been in a meeting with the Arant folks that
morning and she was offered $350 to work at the polls on election
day." The black lady had been told that she and some twenty-five
others at the meeting would get the $350 plus $150 if Arant carried
the voting precinct.
          "She told me," says Crook, "'Mr. Crook, I don't have 

anything
against you . . . you tried to help me one time, and I don't know what
to do.'" His advice, she told this reporter, was to accept the money
"and let your conscience tell you how to vote."
          In the runoff Wilson decided to do a radio spot endorsing Arant
because of some underhanded tactics he had learned that Crook used
against him in the first primary. "He's [Crook] a good manipulator. I
thought I had all of the black mayors and aldermen in Sunflower
County, but he went around after me and said Aaron Henry was
supporting him. I never had a chance to counteract that," Wilson
said.
          Wilson came out of the political race critical of his longtime
black colleague, Aaron Henry. "He doesn't speak for black folks in
this state, but a lot of white folks think that he does," Wilson
declared. "Aaron is looking out for himself, not for the rest of
us."
          Nobody underestimates the fact that Crook is a tiger when it comes
to waging a campaign to hold on to his political base. "He has the
qualifications," said James Robinson, an alderman and black
businessman in Indianola, who voted for him, "even though he might not
have been the best man."
          Sylvester Ingram, a black grocery store operator at Moorhead,
admitted he had voted for Crook. "I've known Senator Crook a long
while, and I think he has made us a good senator. I don't think he has
said too much against the blacks. He's for poor people, and that's
okay with me."
          
          Four years ago, state senate district thirty-seven in southwest
Mississippi had more or less been tailor-made for Fayette Mayor
Charles Evers. Many whites felt it better to give him a forum in the
legislature rather than have him as a constant critic from the
outside. The district had a 61.5 percent black voting age majority and
included Jefferson and Claiborne Counties, considered "Evers
Country."
          But the charismatic black political figure did not campaign very
hard, assuming that his name recognition was all he needed to win
handily. A year before, Evers had run as an independent for the
U.S. Senate in the race won by Republican Thad Cochran and polled over
8600 votes in the four counties (Jefferson, Claiborne, Franklin and
Copiah) in the senatorial district. That was believed more than
adequate to win the seat in the state senate.
          Meanwhile, however, some other factors entered the political
picture. Significant opposition developed around Fayette because of
Evers' high-handed style of governing. In addition, he lost the
backing of Mississippi AFL-CIO President Claude Ramsay for
discouraging unionization of a new industry in Fayette.
          Organized labor, which is not strong in southwest Mississippi,
nevertheless proved to be a critical factor in defeating Evers and
electing white Hazlehurst attorney Jay Disharoon, who had made an
all-out bid for labor support. Disharoon, thirty-four, also had
developed good relations with area blacks in a previous race for a
U.S. congressional seat.
          Evers fell some thirteen hundred votes below what he had received
the year before in the U.S. Senate race in the four counties, and
Disharoon wound up the winner by nine hundred votes in the November,
1979 general election.
          This was the first of two political setbacks for the veteran
Mississippi civil rights leader in his supposed stronghold. A year and
a half later, Kennie Middleton, a thirty-year-old black attorney, came
along and upset Evers for the mayor's job in Fayette.
          Disharoon kept his fences mended with his black constituents and
when this year's elections rolled around, he drew no opponents.
          
          Newly created house district twenty-nine, a 67.1 percent majority
black voting district in Bolivar County was considered almost a
certainty to elect a black this year. The race pitted two white
incumbent representatives, Ed Jackson of Cleveland and Hilliard Lawler
of Rosedale, both of whom had rather good "moderate" credentials,
along with a black candidate, Reverend Henry Ward, Jr.
          Ward led the field in the August 2 first Democratic primary, going
into a runoff with Jackson, forty-one year old printing company owner,
on August 23. Jackson had done a lot of personal favors for his black
constituents and was able to pull enough votes out of the black
community to edge Ward by three hundred votes in the second
primary. Ward's defeat was blamed largely on a poor turnout of black
voters in the runoff.
          
          Jealousies and divisiveness among black leadership in Mississippi
continue to plague efforts of blacks to win political offices that are
within their grasp.
          The classic example was the failure of State Rep. Robert Clark of
Ebeneezer to win the Second Congressional District seat last year
after impressively capturing the Democratic nomination in the first
Democratic primary of June, 1982. The fifty-three year old Clark, a
popular black legislative figure, was given strong endorsements by
Governor William Winter and all leading white Democrats in the state
in his general election face-off with Republican Webb Franklin last
November.

          Clark's own campaign organization estimated he needed only about
twelve percent of the white vote in the twenty-one county district to
win comfortably. The district, embracing eleven Delta counties, had a
53.6 percent black population majority, and unofficial voter
registration figures indicated blacks made up a fifty-five percent
majority of registered voters district-wide.
          The white vote that Clark needed materialized, but he fell two
thousand votes short of winning when the black vote failed to reach
expectations in a half dozen counties where he ran significantly below
the black vote Jimmy Carter received in 1980.
          Many of Clark's campaign supporters blame the defeat of the Holmes
County legislator on a few black political leaders and office-holders
in the Delta who feared that the election of a moderate like Clark
would diminish their local power and make him the consummate spokesman
for the black community.
          Instances were found where close supporters of former Tchula Mayor
Eddie Carthan, now serving a federal prison sentence for falsifying
statements to receive federal funds, discouraged blacks from voting
for Clark because the Ebeneezer lawmaker had not defended
Carthan. Several black mayors were also believed cool toward Clark
because he was chosen by an informal caucus of blacks to be the
candidate, rather than they.
          Since the not-too-distant past when Robert Clark was the one black
to sit in the Mississippi Legislature, there has been a dramatic
increase in the number of black lawmakers. Four years ago, following
creation of single-member legislative districts under federal court
guidelines, the black legislative contingent rose from four to
seventeen--two in the Senate and fifteen in the House. As a result of
this year's elections, to be completed on, November 8, blacks are
assured of two additional seats in the House, and possibly a third,
with a good chance of increasing the number of senators to three.
          However, this total of twenty or twenty-one black lawmakers in
Mississippi still falls considerably below the potential of black
representation based on the number of legislative districts with
majority black voting age populations. Ten Senate districts have a
black VAP of fifty percent or more, four of them over sixty
percent. Among House districts, a total of twenty-six districts have
fifty percent or more black VAP, sixteen of them more than sixty
percent.
          Although they represent only fifteen percent of the total
membership of the Mississippi House, the bloc of black lawmakers has
been effective by standing together on several mayor issues, primarily
against increases in taxes which hit the poor and blacks
hardest. Reluctantly, some of the younger, more aggressive black
lawmakers have come around to the philosophy of Robert Clark that they
must first work within the system before they can change it.
          Because Buddie Newman and his "Delta barons" have once more
consolidated power, the prospect looms for at least four more years of
waiting for change. What impact the black legislators can have in the
meantime depends upon a dole system, in whose features lie a glimpse
of plantation days.
          
            Bill Minor, a longtime observer of Mississippi polities,
lives in Jackson. 
          
        
        
          Testing for Competency
          By Dixon, HortenseHortense Dixon
          Vol. 5, No. 5, 1983, pp. 20-22
          
          Twenty-one states now base teacher certification on the results of
competency tests. These tests measure what is considered to be "basic
knowledge" appropriate for the eighth grade level. At the same time,
an increasing number of states and metropolitan school districts are
requiring the passing of a standardized test as a requirement for
receiving a high school diploma. Those who fail the test will receive
either a certificate of attendance or a diploma noting recipients'
deficiencies in basic skills.
          In the city where I live, the Houston Independent School District
recently adopted competency testing for all currently certified
teachers and standardized testing in all subjects in grades nine
through twelve with the passing grade for the subject determined by
the standardized test results. The Texas State Board of Education has
conducted hearings on major curriculum changes that would require more
time on the study of science, math and English. The President of the
United States has placed his stamp of approval on a "return to the
basics."
          The national search to discover what has gone wrong with our
schools has drawn a tiny circle around teachers, students and
standardized test results. This search seeks the comfort zone of an
earlier time in a simplistic return to the tree it's. Such a tightly
drawn circle zeros in on minimal considerations of what knowledge
teachers and students must have today and on the least powerful tools
for learning.
          Of course teachers and graduates must be capable of reading,
writing and computing. But they must also be excellent in
comprehending what they read, of analyzing what they hear, of
synthesizing new and old information and of judging what is of
immediate and what is of long-term value. It is only within a large
circle of interpretation that we can make sense of ourselves and of
the people and events that are moving us into the twenty-first
century.
          We are in the midst of a transformation from an industrially
oriented society to a society of high-tech, information and
education. An historical shift as significant as that from an
agricultural to an industrial society is underway. As individuals and
groups within American society grapple with the shape, direction and
speed of this transformation, the educational system reflects the
current fuzzy state of misunderstanding.
          Teachers and school administrators, trained for what used to be,
are caught between the demands of an educational program designed for
the industrial society that is passing and the fuzzy and contentious
terrain of emerging patterns of leisure and work.
          Sources of information are stratified by special 

interest,
fragmented and frequently without conceptual frameworks and
disseminated in a variety of media and modes. Learning occurs in many
settings outside the classroom and in a highly informal fashion. Our
children know about things that their parents and teachers know and
understand least. They know more about outer space, ecology, drugs,
electronics, computers and the criminal justice system than most
adults. They question and challenge the contradictions and paradoxes
that their parents and teachers have been taught to accept or
dismiss. Teaching them is much more complex than ever before.
          Our children have knowledge in areas with which the school has not
been historically concerned. Much of their knowledge is attuned to the
emerging society. While the educational system enforces the old
curriculum, young people are already looking beyond the schools trying
to figure out a way to satisfy their interests and needs. Educators
continue to teach and test for the simpler skills of an older
day. Alarmed, they think competence can be attained by getting tougher
and by adding on more years of the same old thing.
          Parents, both literate and illiterate, find their education,
knowledge and skills useless and obsolete as they are "laid-off,"
never to be recalled to what they believed to be their life's work in
industrial society. They, too, know that their education no longer
serves them well. No wonder that they wonder about their children's
education, still very similar to their own.
          Why don't our children learn to read? Is it because they receive
most of their information from sources other than books and printed
material? Is it because what we teach them to read is out of touch
with the world as they know it? Is is because they learn twice as much
from what they see and hear than from what they read? The answers to
these questions will not come through competency testing or stratified
diplomas.
          We did not discover in 1970 or 1980 that "Johnny could not read."
It was posed as a question in the 1950s. The most significant answer
then, as it is today, concerned the relationship between poverty and
learning. We know today, just as we knew then, of the destructive
effects of socioeconomic deprivation into which many children are born
and continue to live. These findings. which require drawing the larger
circle, have yet to be integrated into discussions of educational
policy.
          Other answers, learned in the 1950s and still outside the circle,
showed the importance of caring teachers and of the attention given to
developing self-concepts and creative adaptations of the curriculum
linked to the child's experiences and exposures. Another fifties"
lesson taught us that the expectations of teachers have more to do
with students" performance than do IQ scores.
          How do we measure a teacher's skills in helping students from
impoverished backgrounds overcome their circumstances? Can such
learning be measured by a standardized test? Or such teachers by a
competency test?
          How do we measure the important role that many black colleges and
universities have played in educating black youngsters even while
these institutions themselves suffered under discriminatory
circumstances? Given this history, what are we to make of the fact
that five black colleges in Alabama had the lowest pass rates on the
Alabama teacher competency test--with percentages ranging from zero to
sixty-five--while the white schools' pass rate clustered in the
eighties and nineties with only four falling below seventy-five
percent. Such figures raise serious questions about the competency
test used, its design and standardized process, the selection criteria
and cultural bias.
          Such test results also demonstrate how blacks may be more adversely
affected by the competency testing movement. The number of black
teachers in the South may be reduced at a time when more and more
education is required if students are to have hopes for a satisfying
future. If there are fewer black teachers, we can expect fewer black
students to persist. For we have also recently learned that a major
factor associated with the completion rate of students is whether or
not there are teachers who are like them, teachers with whom they can
identify. Still another generation of under-educated and uneducated
blacks stand on the edge of perpetuating a black underclass.
          But there is a further failing with regard to competency
testing. What the testers are satisfied with--a narrowly conceived
"body of knowledge" known as eighth grade competence--gives a false
impression to teachers, parents and students that such minimal skills,
and these precise ones, are sufficient for "success" in
society. Actually, these skills will prepare students to fill some
600,000 new janitor and sexton jobs or 800,000 new fast food and
kitchen helper jobs whose low pay and un-unioned status represent the
foundation of exploitation upon which the economic inequalities of the
South will be perpetuated. Another generation of cheap and contented
labor?
          As the movement toward standardized testing and "basics" teaching
sweeps the South we must see it in relation to this section's old
habits and tendencies. We must raise, even if we cannot yet answer,
some familiar sounding questions. Is the racial dilemma that has
dominated educational decision-making in the South since the Brown
decision intertwined in the standardized competency testing movement?
Is the historical use of education as a political power chess board
and a tool of disenfranchisement flying under a new banner? Is the
love affair of Southern elites with economic structures that preserve
inequalities undergirding this movement? Are we, in the rush to
simple-minded basics, about to position the South for the back-end
rather than the front-end of the economic, social and cultural
revolution that is already underway?
          A new society is unfolding in America and in the South. Its key
lies in learning how to learn. In requires 

greater attention to an
expenditures for education than we have ever committed. It requires,
if we are to honor our pledge toward the promotion of equality, the
pursuit of public policy not private advantage.
          As we work toward the creation of a just society in the South, we
must be sure that what we teach is of value and that how we teach
fosters an unquenchable desire to learn. Competency testing does
neither.
          
            Hortense Dixon is profesor of home economics at Texas
Southern University and serves on the executive committee of the
Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Aaron Henry from Clarksdale
          By Long, WorthWorth Long
          Vol. 5, No. 5, 1983, pp. 9-12
          
          This is Aaron Henry and I'm from Clarksdale, have always lived
here. Born outside of the city limits on a plantation called Flowers'
Brothers. It's still out there. I grew up chopping cotton, picking
cotton, slopping hogs, milking cows, doing all the things that a
country boy does. No nostalgia, that's simply the area of my
beginning.
          When I was a youngster, going to school out in the country, white
kids were able to go to school seven months and black kids went
five. Now the rationale for that was the black kids had to help
cultivate and harvest the crops and do the work. Many of the white
kids were sons and daughters of the plantation owners.
          It was not right, from my earliest perception, that white kids
would go to school seven months, we couldn't go but five. That was one
of the things I worried my mother about. I also worried her about why
did I have to step back when a white person walked into a store
although I was there first and why couldn't I drink water out of
certain barrels which were marked for whites. But most of all I kept
on her case about the school months.
          One day my momma called me. She say, "Aaron, come here." She say,
"About this five months and seven months school deal. I want you to
know you my boy--and you don't need but five. The rest of them jokers
they go to have seven, but you my boy, you don't need but five." Hell,
I been cocky ever since.
          My mother was involved with the Methodist church as long as I can
remember. And the white and black women of the Woman's Society of
Christian Service--they were trying to Christianize Japan--often were
in our home. My parents were in their homes. When they came they
brought their children. I got to learn and to know their kids just
like their kids got to learn and to know me. In that way I developed
very early an understanding that white folks put on their pants one
leg at a time. I always had the feeling that there was no such thing
as white supremacy and black inferiority.
          Neighbors used to tell my momma, "This boy going to get his fool
self killed. I heard him talking to Mr. So-and-so and he wasn't being
mannerable. He says 'yes' and 'new' to white folks and he don't call
them Mr. and Mrs. He don't say 'yazzum' end 'nome.' You oughta teach
him better cause he's going to get hurt if you don't."
          I heard it often. Neighbors come into the house--and in those days,
grown people talked and they asked the 

children to leave. A lady'd
say, "Mattie, I got something I want to talk to you about." Momma'd
say, "Aaron, you; need to go outside for awhile." I'd listen and I'd
hear what they were saying.
          In my time when a child was growing up, every adult in the
neighborhood was his momma and his poppa. You messed up and they got a
hold of you. When your momma come home, they told her and you got
another whipping. So I was always anxious to know what they were
telling momma, cause I was kinda tough. I was doing what I felt came
natural being a boy: climbing trees, shooting birds, stealing
watermelons and plums, all those kinds of things.
          The major kind of resistance that blacks were engaged in as I grew
up had to do with the farm economy and the determination of blacks to
earn or to obtain what they'd earned. In many instances, the white
landlord at the end of the year had the habit of not dealing
fairly. Those blacks who stood up were often asked to move off the
plantation. They were singled out as troublemakers. And this is where
you heard the horror stories as I was a child, about how blacks were
misused by whites largely because of either their unwillingness to do
work that they felt was more and above the reward they would receive
for it, or their demands for pay for the work that they done.
          You remember the old black folksong, "When Do We Get Paid for the
Work That We've Done?" That's pretty much the basic reaction of blacks
toward white supremacy as I grew up.
          As an eleventh grade student at Coahoma County Agricultural High
School, we had a teacher, a young lady who had finished school at
Dillard and had done some work at Fisk. Her name was T.K. Shelby. She
was very much aware of the NAACP and black life. As extra reading
material she had our class engaged in stuff like The Soul of Black
Folk by W.E.B. Dubois, Black Boy by Richard Wright, and Strange Fruit
by Lillian Smith.
          Well, at the conclusion of our junior year, she encouraged us to
take out a membership in the NAACP Youth Convention--which at that
time was a quarter. And most of us did.
          Now that sort of ties into my further activity upon graduation from
high school and the next year going directly into the armed
service. The armed services in World War II, when I went in, was as
segregated and discriminated as any facet of American life. Black and
whites didn't live in the same areas, didn't eat in the same dining
room, didn't play on the same playground. We even went to the movies
on separate days. It was a completely apartheid situation.
          Those of us who had come into the armed services with at least a
smattering of a feeling that this was legally wrong often found
ourselves allying with the NAACP unit in the nearest big town. We did
basic training in Fort McClellan, Alabama. There was an NAACP chapter
in Anniston and one in Birmingham. That's where we participated in
trying to overcome segregation and discrimination in the armed
forces. We later were billeted in California. So I just can't remember
any time in my adult life when I was not involved in trying to
overcome the evils of segregation.
          Now ever since I can remember anything about black life, blacks
have always resented mistreatment at the hands of whites. Even during
slave ship days there were blacks who jumped overboard rather than be
slaves. And women who threw their children in the mouths of sharks in
the water rather than have them grow up as slaves. Any of us who think
that the phrases we are coining now, and the leaders that are on the
scene now, and the issues that we are dealing with now, that we are
the first persons of the black community to have the enlightenment to
do that, we are as stupid as the fourteen year old boy who thought he
discovered sex. It has been around a long time. Don't remember when
there was not a movement by the black community that said, this is
wrong and we are going to overcome it.
          But certainly the efforts of blacks in this state to have an equal
voice and a fair share of what it was, really goes back to an
organization known as the Black and Tan Republicans which was the
early voice for black freedom in this state. Before Roosevelt in '32,
I'm sure most of the blacks in this state considered themselves
Republican allies, because of the fact that the slave question had
ended during the time we had a Republican president in the White
House, Abraham Lincoln. The Republican party in the South continued to
permit blacks to participate, wherein the Democratic party became a
white exclusive club.
          On the event of the presidential election of 1876, which brought
together Samuel J. Tilden and Rutherford B. Hayes, when Hayes became
President of the United States, the end of the first effort at
participation began to erode because of the positions and the edicts
from the White House that he began to express. And all America became
energized about this segregation thing to the point where in 1896 you
remember that in Plessy vs. Ferguson, although
Plessy had ridden the Illinois Central Railroad train, every day when
he got ready to St. Louis and sat where he wanted to, in 1896 the
conductor came to Plessy and told him, "I'm sorry, but in this dining
room you've got to sit behind the curtain." Of course Plessy refused
to sit behind the curtain and was thrown in jail. And the Supreme
Court ruled in 1896 that segregation was the law of the land, when it
decided that as long as things are equal, they may be separate.
          Restaurants had an aisle generally down the center and whites went
on one side and blacks went on the other. Stores had a custom--if not
a law, to always serve all the white folks present before any of the
blacks were server! regardless to when who came into the store. There
were 

curtains on the buses which blacks sat behind and whites in front
as long as there were no whites standing. If there were whites
standing, the curtains were moved and the blacks who had been sitting
had to stand. Blacks rode in the front car on trains, right behind the
coal car with all its soot and debris. The whole system was geared
toward making things as comfortable as possible for whites, and as
difficult as possible for blacks.
          We lived with this damnable separate but equalness from 1896 until
1954 when another Supreme Court overturned Plessy
vs. Ferguson in Brown vs. Kansas. In the
school desegregation case which says when you educate children and you
separate them by race to do it, you commit an act that is "calculated
to warp their minds in a manner never likely to be undone." So then
America turned around to some degree in 1954, but it was around 1965,
'66 and some areas as late as 1970, before the integration orders from
courts and from the people themselves in the areas actually began to
take effect.
          White Citizens Councils were formed in response to the 1954
decision. The catalyst that ignited the White Citizen's Council was
the fact that in fourteen towns in Mississippi, immediately after the
Supreme Court decision, petitions were presented signed by more than a
hundred families in each area, calling upon the school boards to obey
the law and integrate the public school system. Well, the response to
that was that the names of the people who had signed the petitions
were made public. They were published in newspapers, put upon the
cages of banks and lending institutions. Most of these people became
victims of economic pressure, to the extent in some places like Yazoo
City, those who signed petitions Y were not able to even purchase food
although they had the money.
          Medgar Evers signed the petition for Jackson. Medgar was able to
maneuver in the Jackson area as he did because of the allies that were
there to give him encouragement and assist him in every way. Now you
might recall Medgar and I became involved in the Mississippi NAACP at
the same time. I was a part of a team that went to Alcorn College in
1952 to help encourage Medgar to come to work for an organization
known as the Magnolia Mutual Life Insurance Company, whose president
was Dr. T.R.M. Howard of Mound Bayou. I served as secretary of that
institution. Dr. Howard was also the- president of an organization
known as the Regional Council of Negro Leadership which was touted by
many newspapers as the home grown NAACP. And that was a pretty good
characterization of it.
          Upon graduation, Medgar agreed to come to Magnolia Mutual. He
worked for a year with us and the abilities of the young fellow were
so evident that anybody who came in contact with him immediately
recognized that there was something great in this particular
individual.
          The first NAACP unit in Mississippi was organized in Vicksburg in
1918, about nine years after the organization was founded in
Springfield, Missouri. In the early 1950's there was strong talk that
Mississippi needed someone to coordinate the efforts of fourteen or
fifteen NAACP branches in the state. Ruby Hurley, who had been invited
into Clarksdale in 1953 to help organize an NAACP here, had met
Medgar. Dr. Howard was very willing that Medgar go to the NAACP as
field secretary because this was a sort of
rising-tide-that-lifts-all-boats type of philosophy. Medgar understood
that every branch president must understand that you are to be enraged
and involved in those issues that make it possible for the progress of
the black community to come up to the standards that you yourself feel
that it ought.
          Medgar and I travelled over this state together a tremendous
amount. We had three real intimate years of working together, working
with each other, from the time I became president of the Mississippi
state conference in 1960 until Medgar was killed in June of 1963.
          We had gotten word that the Klan was determined to get both of
us. They were going to take us off one at a time. They were going to
flip a coin and see who went first. About fifteen, sixteen persons
were marked for extinction--Dr. Edward Stringer from Columbus,
Dr. Howard, Amzie Moore from Cleveland, Gilbert Mason from Gulfport,
Vernon Dahmer from Hattiesburg, Gus Courts who was shot in his grocery
store at Belzoni and after that he went to Chicago, and several
others. I guess that's the mark of effectiveness.
          You know I've made my peace with God a long time ago. By the time I
got involved in the NAACP, it had been my blessing to have finished
one of the major universities in this country and to have gone into
the pharmaceutical business in a way that I could give some comfort
and some relief to thousands of people who either had not had the
chance, that I had, or had not taken advantage of the chances that I
had. I have taken a position that I'm God's child, and I've never
really feared the difficulties of the movement. You know we've had
several things here. We've had the house bombed. The piece of tin you
see up there in the store now a result of the last bombing of the
drugstore. We do that to keep reminding ourselves as to what the
situation has been, and what it can be.
          To show you what justice can come to, I'll tell you a story that
begins in 1963. SNCC, CORE, NAACP and SCLC were determined to offset
the vituperation that was being expressed by Senator Stennis, Senator
Eastland, Jamie Whitten and other members of the Mississippi
congressional delegation on Capitol Hill. They said that if you give
blacks the right to vote, they won't use it. We decided that we would
put that lie to rest. We would run for governor.
          We organized the Freedom Vote Campaign which had as its main
instrument a little newspaper, The Free Press. Medgar
Evers, R.L.T. Smith, Bill Minor and several other people were involved
in the Free Press. It was the instrument that we used
to alert people throughout the state that the Freedom Vote was going
to take place.
          I also went down to WLBT television in Jackson and asked the
manager for the opportunity to buy time to run my campaign. He looked
at me and said, "Niggah, you know we ain't go'n sell you no time on TV
for no political campaign. We don't sell black folks no time."
          I said, "Well, I'm running and I came by to ask you."
          That night I went back to a mass meeting and reported the fact that
the man at the television station wouldn't sell me no time, and what
he had said to me. The National Council of Churches had a cadre of
folks in the state at 

that time from all branches and religions. Their
communications director told me, "I know you don't like to be called a
niggah, but I would like for you to go back down there with me
tomorrow. If this is the answer we get again, the United Church of
Christ will move to divest the station of its license. This is blatant
racism and is against the rules and regulations of the FCC."
          So we walked in the next morning. The cat looked over the room and
saw me and said, "Look niggah, I told you yesterday," he said yestiddy, "we wadn't gotn sell you any damn time, and
here you are back today with a damn yankee."
          I said, "Well, all right. I just come back to try."
          We walked out. The suit was filed. We fought it from 1963, won the
revoking of the license and finally the privilege to operate the
station in 1979that's fifteen, sixteen, seventeen years of
fighting. The niggah that they wouldn't sell time to in 1963 today
sits as the chairman of the board of directors of that damn television
station.
          But anyway, when we decided to do the Freedom Vote Campaign in
1963, we set a date and put ballot boxes in churches and stores. There
was one here in this drug store. In all the places where black folks
congregated. And out of that effort we garnered the participation of
better than ninety-thousand blacks, who registered before God and
everybody, that if they had the right to vote then they would. And
this was one of the very strong pieces of evidence that we used in
arguing for the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Ninety-thousand blacks in
Mississippi who knew that their votes couldn't count but who were
willing to cast them to demonstrate their concern for the right to
vote.
          
            The following autobiographical recollections of Aaron
Henry (born 1922 in Coahoma County, Mississippi) sketch his
involvement in the movement for black civil rights up to the formation
of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party and the Democratic
National Convention of 1964. Presented here in an excerpted and edited
form, this interview, conducted earlier this year by Worth Long, is
one in a series documenting the modern civil rights movement in the
Deep South. Worth Long is director of the SRC's Civil Rights Radio
Project.
          
        
        
          Black Women's Health Conference
          By Chaney, Betty NorwoodBetty Norwood Chaney
          Vol. 5, No. 5, 1983, pp. 18-20
          
          In 1970 Byllye Avery had it made. She was married to a wonderful
man. He was college educated and had a good job. They owned their
home, had a station wagon and two children. They were a black family
achieving the American dream.
          Suddenly, Byllye Avery's husband died of a heart attack at age
thirty-three, a casualty of hypertension (killer of one out of every
four blacks). Only after years of cardiovascular stress, usually
producing no symptoms which require medical attention, does high blood
pressure result in major complications: stroke, heart attack, heart or
kidney failure and the premature death and disability of hundreds of
thousands of people each year.
          High blood pressure occurs more frequently among blacks than
whites; it develops earlier in life, is more severe and causes higher
mortality at younger ages. Deaths from hypertension before age forty
are six to seven times more common in blacks than whites.
          The loss of her husband changed Byllye Avery's life. Realizing that
degrees, jobs, money or middle class trappings matter little without
good health, she began a crusade to improve health care education and
conditions for blacks.
          Avery co-founded the Gainesville (Florida) Women's Health Center
and Birthplace, Alternative Birthing Center. Her discoveries about the
conditions of black women's health appalled her. Not only was the
incidence of hypertension in black women double that of the rest of
the population, but so were the rates of diabetes, cancer and
lupus. And because black women-headed households make up fifty-three
percent of all U.S. households in poverty, the demands of living for
black mothers lead to psychological distress for more than half of the
black female population. Additionally, the problem of teenage
pregnancy is a major health and social concern and black infant
mortality rates are twice those of whites.
          "If sickness and suffering among blacks is to be reduced," Avery
said, "it will be through the development of a new consciousness about
health and well being among black women."
          Over two years ago, Byllye Avery conceived the idea of a national
conference on black women and health. Sponsored by the Black Women's
Health Project and the National Women's Health Network, the conference
convened this summer on the campus of Spelman College in Atlanta. Over
sixteen hundred health care providers, health educators and interested
women attended from across the country, overwhelming and almost
tripling planners' expectations. The three-day gathering featured
workshops, speeches, films, self-help demonstrations, exhibits and
cultural and physical fitness activities. Discussion topics included
hypertension, diabetes, cancer, lupus, domestic violence, stress,
maternal and infant health, teenage pregnancy, elderly abuse and
occupational and environmental health.
          Dedicated to Fannie Lou Hamer (1917-1977), activist and freedom
fighter, the conference theme was "I'm sick and Tired of Being Sick
and Tired," words which Ms. Hamer said often as she struggled to
effect change in rural Mississippi. According to conference
coordinator Eleanor Hinton-Hoytt, the theme symbolized not only "the
struggles and suffering of black women, but also our commitment to
seize control of these conditions which affect our lifestyles and
health."
          Keynoting the conference, Dr. June Jackson Christmas of the School
of Bio-Medical Education, City College of New York, insisted that "we
must do more to learn and understand the causes of our being sick; the
reasons for our being tired. Black women face the triple jeopardy of
being black, female and poor in a racist, sexist and class 

structured society."
          The goal was to help black women learn to take care of their bodies
and take charge of their lives. "At the conference," says Byllye
Avery, "we tried to take care of black women in the way that we think
we need to be taken care of--in a way that nobody has taken care of us
before." Sixty workshops ran concurrently with films, exhibits and
self-help demonstrations. You could be tested for sickle cell anemia,
see a film on natural childbirth or a photo exhibit on black women's
life cycles. The second and third days began with yoga and physical
fitness sessions.
          All the workshops were well attended but the most popular ones
dealt with the psychological conditions of black women. Many illnesses
that black women suffer develop amid living conditions of continuous
emotional stress. "If we are going to improve our health," argues
Avery, "we first have got to deal with our minds."
          The most popular workshop was, "Black and Female: What is the
Reality?" This session, designed and conducted by Lillie Allen, a
family medicine educator at the Morehouse School of Medicines' Family
Practice Center. was held three times to overflow crowds. Allen sought
to dispel the myth that black women have to be eternal pillars of
strength. The women who attended (whites were excluded) shared deeply
personal, often painful experiences. The conclusion of this workshop
found hundreds of women in tears, embracing one another. "We felt,"
said one woman, "tremendous relief."
          "It was amazing," Allen says, "how one person in talking about an
area that was difficult for her helped the other women present. They
were able to relate to it and it opened them up. By the end of the
workshop the women had become genuinely interested in and supportive
of each other."
          Allen's workshop has prompted the Black Women's Health Project to
make the formation of self-help health 

groups across the nation a
major goal over the next few years. Already there are more than twenty
such groups under the sponsorship of the Project. Although they all
share the emphasis on reaching lower income black women and increasing
their access to and knowledge of health care services and principles,
these groups are very diverse in focus. A Florida self-help group, for
instance, aims at reducing high blood pressure through diet and
exercise, while a Georgia group has hosted a women's health weekend in
a rural area which included demonstrations on breast self-examination
and gynecological self-help.
          While the popular cry at the end of the Atlanta conference was for
another gathering next year, Avery cautioned that "the real work has
yet to be done." She does not project another national conference
until 1986. In the meantime, the BWHP has set as a goal the creation
of fifty new self-help groups, a newsletter, a report and a handbook
on health issues, regional conferences, and production and
distribution of video health education materials and the production of
a documentary on the national conference to be shown on Cable Atlanta
and other cable television systems.
          Individuals or groups who seek more information should contact the
Black Women's Health Project, M.L. King, Jr. Health Center, 450 Auburn
Avenue, Suite 157, Atlanta, Georgia 30312, (404) 659-3854.
          
            Betty Norwood Chaney, a former editor of Southern
Changes, lives in Atlanta where she is a teacher, mother, and
freelance writer.
          
        
        
          Findings from U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, A Growing
Crisis: Disadvantaged Women and Their Children, May
1983.
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 5, No. 5, 1983, p. 19
          
          
             In its 1982 report on health insurance coverage and employment
for minorities and women, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights noted
that black, Hispanic, and other minority women were disproportionately
without any type of insurance coverage in case of illness. The report
found that because of continuing discrimination in employment, many
minorities and women are not found in those groups normally insured by
private insurance companies. Noting that the insurance industry is not
adequately equipped to meet the needs of these minorities and women,
the report endorsed passage of national health insurance
legislation.
             Minority women and children have extraordinarily high rates of
morbidity and mortality. For example, in 1979 black women had a
maternal mortality rate about four times that of white women and their
children were twice as likely to die as white infants. The substantial
differences in maternal mortality and infant mortality between groups
and differences in utilization of services suggest that significant
barriers to good health exist that are not related to differences in
need.
             Disadvantaged women, particularly minority women, suffer from
a variety of health problems associated with poverty and, in some
instances, their race or ethnicity. Disadvantaged black women have
higher rates of breast and cervical cancer than other groups. Among
Hispanic women, who make up a large proportion of the migrant worker
population, health problems are compounded by exposure to potentially
harmful pesticides, debilitating living environments, and little or no
access to health care. Poor, rural, white women have health care
problems compounded by the extreme deprivations of poverty,
poor-sanitation and malnutrition.
             Significant barriers to health care confronting disadvantaged
women are (1) lack of a regular primary source of care for routine
services; (2) language and cultural differences for Hispanic women;
(3) the cost of health care; and (4) inadequate transportation to
facilities relocated outside of inner cities.
             Research documents that the medical establishment tends to
diagnose a majority of female complaints as psychosomatic while
treating the complaints of male patients more seriously. This has led
to a tendency to overprescribe drugs to women more than to men,
particularly mood-modifying drugs.
             Poverty, particularly when linked with single parenthood, poor
education, and the presence of young children, is a major cause of
emotional stress. Stress can elicit destructive responses, such as
alcoholism, drug abuse, depressive violence, and various forms of
mental illness. Disadvantaged women living in poverty experience
higher lovers of stress than other subgroups.
             Disadvantaged children have a greater susceptibility to
serious health complications than other children. Poor children are
also less likely to receive immunizations against dangerous childhood
diseases or have routine checkups than are their peers.
          
          For many black, white, and Hispanic women. poverty means inadequate
and infrequent use of medical services, reduced employment
opportunities, and increased household responsibilities. Children,
when their mothers live in poverty, run an increased risk of birth
defects and malnutrition and subsist in an environment that could
interfere with education and future employability.
          As more and more women and children enter the ranks of the
impoverished, the implications for the future of our society become
overwhelming. To ignore these implications is unconscionable
negligence. The bodies, minds, and spirits of millions of women and
children are being inevitably and ineluctably affected by the
dispiriting hand of poverty.
        
      
    
  