
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 5, Number 4,
	       1983
        
          Witness In Montgomery
          By Williams, RandallRandall Williams
          Vol. 5, No. 4, 1983, pp. 1-6
          
          Not since the celebrated bus boycott of 1955-56 or the Selma March
days of 1965 has the atmosphere in Montgomery, Alabama, been so
charged with racial tensions. The immediate cause is a string of
incidents involving blacks and the Montgomery police, but behind these
cases looms a larger issue, Mayor Emory Folmar, a conservative
Republican who was beaten decisively by George Wallace in the 1982
governor's election.
          Folmar is both mayor and de facto police chief of Alabama's capital
city, and his hard-line, love-it-or-leave-it attitudes on public
safety, community development, redistricting and other issues have led
to steadily deteriorating relations with the forty percent of
Montgomery's population that is black, as well as with a growing
number of whites. His critics, while recognizing that the recent
police confrontations were serious incidents, charge that a more
flexible personality and more responsive leader than Folmar would have
prevented their escalation into a full-scale community crisis.
          Now, the situation is reminiscent of the earlier civil rights era
in this city known as the Cradle of the Confederacy. The black
churches are again the scene of mass meetings. The black leadership
has held well-publicized but private strategy sessions from which has
emerged an unusual--for recent years, at least--unanimity, including
an economic boycott of the city's largest bank. Picket lines have been
thrown up against a white-owned black radio station. Protest marches
have been held. A cross has been burned in the yard of the spokesman
for the black leaders.
          Several incidents since the first of the year have contributed to
the current situation. Most recently, an armed black man was killed in
June by a white policeman 

responding to a report of a shooting in the
neighborhood. In May, a black man who was apparently drunk but unarmed
was killed by a black policewoman. In April, a white policeman
seriously wounded an unarmed black man who was mistakenly thought to
be an escaped prisoner.
          The first and most controversial incident occurred in February when
a group of black mourners was assembled in the deceased's home
following the funeral. Before the night was over, two white
plain-clothes policemen had been injured, one critically, and eight
mourners arrested. The police say they identified themselves, were
taken hostage and then beaten and shot. The mourners say the two
whites did not identify themselves as police but kicked down the door
to the house and charged in with their guns drawn, at which time the
blacks disarmed them and then called the police. Later, the mourners
say, more police arrived and the two whites tried to escape and shots
were fired.
          The two accounts vary so widely that Montgomery citizens can only
wait and hope that the upcoming trials will reveal the truth. However,
the police department's early handling of the incident was seen by
blacks and by many whites as a gross over-reaction and an attempt to
cover up possible improper conduct by the two officers. For example,
Police Chief Charles Swindall held a predawn press conference to
denounce the mourners as "wild animals who had their prey on the
ground." He used the word torture to describe the treatment of the
officers, said one of them had had his throat slashed requiring
seventy-five stitches, and made other highly inflammatory comments.
          This infuriated blacks, especially when the press later reported
that the most serious offenses on the records of any of the accused
were traffic violations, that the officer's "slashed" throat required
ten stitches instead of seventy-five, and that one of the officers'
guns was missing, despite the fact that police had immediately
surrounded the house and had searched everyone present, Also, the
police tape recorder did not work when it should have automatically
recorded radio transmissions and phone calls about the incident. In
addition, there were allegations that the accused were beaten
during;. interrogation.
          On the other hand, many whites and some blacks criticized
over-reaction by black leaders, too, notably the call by State
Rep. Alvin Holmes for federal authorities to place the city under
martial law. The circumstances of the incident cast grave doubt on the
conduct of the police, mused many Montgomerians, yet there was no
getting around the fact that two officers were severely wounded. Why,
asked whites, were there not some prayers for the two officers among
the vigils and protests that were being held in the black
community?
          The matter of the missing tape recording from police headquarters
was seen as similar to a mid-1970s scandal in which police wrongfully
shot a black man, then allegedly planted a gun on his body. The
automatic tape recordings in that incident had been erased by the time
the prosecutor asked for them, and ultimately the public safety
commissioner, the mayor and nearly a dozen police officers resigned or
were fired.
          The mayor at that time was James Robinson, and his resignation led
to a 1977 special election which was won by Emory Folmar, who had been
the city council president. Ironically, Robinson is widely perceived
by blacks as a basically decent man who was trapped in the Whitehurst
scandal by accident, while Folmar is believed by many blacks to be the problem with the police department. In addition,
Folmar is seen as being generally hostile toward black interests if
not actively racist.

          Robinson usually enjoyed good relations with the black
community. In fact, Robinson was instrumental in changing the city's
form of government in the early 1970s from a three-man commission,
elected at-large, to the nine-district council, thus paving the way
for the first black elected municipal officials in Montgomery
history. When the first council elections were held in 1975, four
blacks and five whites were chosen, and the nine then selected Folmar
as the council president. It was Folmar's first venture into elective
politics, and from the council's first organizational meeting, he made
it clear that he meant to be a force to be reckoned with.
          His District Eight constituents were overwhelmingly white and among
the city's wealthiest and most conservative residents. Through a
combination of representing his district and his own philosophy of
government, Folmar was frequently on opposite sides from black council
members on issues ranging from council appointments to the allocation
of community development funds. In fairness to Folmar, it should be
said that he was not alone--many council votes were split five to four
along racial lines; but blacks resented Folmar most because he was not
only the council president but also its most powerful personality, and
at least two of the white council members invariably cast glances at
Folmar before raising their own hands during votes on controversial
issues.
          Two council debates are good illustrations. The first concerned
community development money, which was intended by Congress to help
eliminate what the planners call urban blight. To the blacks on the
city council, this meant the money should build sewers, sidewalks,
street lights and community centers in low-income areas, particularly
in black low-income neighborhoods which had been neglected in all the
decades past; Montgomery had several black neighborhoods as late as
1975 which had to use outdoor toilets because sewer lines had never
reached them.
          Long battles were fought over this money and in the end many sewers
and sidewalks were built. But the community development funds also
helped build a golf course at a recreation complex located on the
eastern edge of Montgomery near the suburbs where white residents have
been steadily relocating since World War II. Community development
money was also used for three neighborhood parks built in
predominantly white residential areas which were definitely not
blighted. Folmar did not win these projects without help, but he was
instrumental in their passage and his attitude was interpreted by
blacks as one of "I don't care what Congress said, we whites, poor or
not, are also getting some of that government money."
          A second case which increased the black council members' distaste
for Folmar resulted when blacks moved to rename a street in honor of
Martin Luther King Jr. The street in question, Jackson Street, was the
site of King's home for the years that he was the pastor of the Dexter
Avenue Baptist Church; this was the house that was bombed in the
Fifties while Coretta King and the children were inside. Folmar spoke
and voted against the renaming and then introduced a compromise which
would have named a section of Interstate 85, which passes through the
city, after King. This debate had occurred before, in the early
Seventies when Montgomery still had a three-man commission form of
government, and the Interstate compromise had been suggested then,
too. But that compromise failed because of opposition from state
officials. The issue then took on a new significance after blacks had
achieved voting power in city government.
          The argument was that it would be wrong to dishonor Andrew Jackson
in order to honor King, so the Interstate memorial was an alternative
and would be even more visible. Getting the memorial was symbolically
very important to Montgomery blacks and it was the first major
question with racial implications to come up after the four black
council members had taken their seats. They were disappointed that the
whites had felt it was necessary to put up a fight on the issue, and
they were not totally satisfied with the Interstate memorial since it
was not city property. But they accepted the compromise anyway, only
to discover that federal highway regulations prohibit the naming of
interstates for individuals. Rightly or wrongly, many observers, white
and black, believed that Folmar had known this fact all along and
deliberately led the council down a rabbit trail Ultimately, blacks in
the Alabama legislature pushed through a resolution and overcame the
federal obstacles and today all who pass through Montgomery on I85 see
a huge green sign proclaiming it Martin Luther King
Jr. Expressway. But the incident did not increase Folmar's stature in
the black community, and relations with his black colleagues on the
city council have worsened since he became mayor and his power
increased.
          Gung-ho, stubborn, fiercely competitive, hardworking, and capable
are terms which are regularly used to describe the mayor. Hard-headed,
macho, dictatorial, intolerant, devious, racist, overly aggressive and
paranoid are some others.
          Employees at city hall say that if Folmar were judged on
administrative ability and dedication alone he would rank among the
best mayors any city could want. He is at his desk most days before
other employees have taken their morning showers. He is personally
wealthy-

before entering politics he was a shopping center
developer--and draws only a token dollar a year as his mayoral salary
(though a recent letter-to-the-editor writer argued-that he is
overpaid).
          He is an ex-Army officer who was a highly decorated hero of
Korea. He still keeps himself in rock-hard physical condition and has
a military approach to organization and discipline. Nowhere is this
more apparent than with the police, and it is in the area of law
enforcement that his critics are most severe. The critics come from
both inside and outside the police department.
          Outside critics charge that Folmar believes, and expects everyone
else to believe, that the police are always right; that he has
encouraged an us-versus-them mentality; that he tries to run the
department himself, and that the net result has been an increase of
harassment by police, especially of blacks and gays.
          "Just call our city Fort Montgomery and the mayor our
commander-in-chief," comments Joe Reed, a black city councilman who
has been Folmar's most persistent opponent in city government and who
is also the head of the Alabama Democratic Conference, the state's
leading black political organization.
          Adds Willie Peak, the white president of the city council, "Most
whites recognize there could be possible wrongs on both sides [of the
February confrontation]. Most whites are concerned about the 'we can
do no wrong' attitude of the police."
          Critics inside the police department also fault Folmar for trying
to run it like a military battalion with himself as general; for
imposing his decisions over those of experienced, career police
professionals, and for making promotions contingent on an officer's
personal loyalty and chumminess with the mayor.
          Since Folmar came to power, several high-ranking police officials
have retired from the department rather than accept the mayor's tight
control. Their privately stated grievances range from favoritism in
promotion, to what they view as a ridiculous obsession with spit and
polish, to Folmar's actual interference with field operations.
          It is true that Folmar has personally shown up at all hours of the
day or night to participate in or take charge of on-the-scene police
work, and that the officers who work as his bodyguards move rapidly
through the ranks, often bypassing officers of greater experience. To
give thy. example of just one officer, an example related by other
police, Folmar acknowledged the good work of the officer yet refused
to promote the man because "you're not loyal to me."
          Folmar is the police chief, observed one ax-officer. "He personally
promotes; Chief [Charles] Swindall doesn't have the gumption or the
power to do anything about it. Chief Swindall should have retired when
Folmar was reelected." Both current and ax-officers view this as a
bitter irony because they consider Swindall to be an excellent police
officer and actually a better chief than the man he replaced.
          Folmar's personal pistol-packing gave rise to the Montgomery joke:
"Question: Why is the Mayor's pistol chrome-plated? Answer: So it
won't rust in the shower."
          The police themselves tell and laugh at this joke, but they are
less amused by Folmar's parade inspections and pep talks. "These are
grown men he's having out here standing at attention. This isn't boot
camp," observed an ax-officer.
          Ex-police are also critical of the department's low salaries and
note that Montgomery taxpayers routinely spend five thousand or more
dollars to send a new officer through Police Academy training only to
have him leave for a better paying job after a year or two on the
force. Many ten-, fifteen-, and even twenty-year veterans are also
tempted out of police work for higher salaries with detective or
security agencies or state government job". Asked what he considered
to be the biggest problem with the Montgomery police, a high-ranking
official of the Alabama State Troopers replied, without hesitation,
"They have too many young officers because they don't pay enough to
keep experienced men."
          Several highly symbolic changes have been made in the police force
since Folmar became mayor. One was the repainting of all the police
cars from a pleasant, non-threatening light blue to stark black and
white. Another was the emergence of black SWAT-team style uniforms for
officers on the night shifts. The new uniforms replace the traditional
policeman's hat with a baseball-type cap without a badge and feature
bloused pants tucked into high lace-up military-style boots. The
people inside the cars and uniforms are the same as before, but the
difference in appearance is striking, and ominous.
          Ex-police say the night shift officers themselves sought the new
uniform because they believed it would be safer during the most
dangerous hours of police work--a shiny badge flashing in the night is
a better target. But the uniforms add to the military effect which
Folmar has encouraged for the department, and the change has not gone
unnoticed in the community. The uniforms were meant to be worn by the
third shift officers, but the hats, at least, have apparently been
adopted as a symbol by some officers, especially the younger ones, and
are routinely seen at all hours. Some older officers even doubt the
theory behind the new uniforms. "When we're out o~ the street," they
say, "we want people to recognize 

instantly that we're police"; and the traditional uniform tells them 
that.
          It is impossible to judge the accuracy of the allegation, but
people who say they have been harassed by Montgomery police,
especially young blacks, say in so many words that they believe there
are certain police or even squads of police who look for opportunities
to provoke people, and that these are the police who wear the
military-type uniforms. This may be only a perception, but it
increases fear and hostility and that creates trouble for the officer
on patrol. The state trooper official who spoke of low salaries
mentioned a second area of concern for Montgomery police:
"P.R.--they've also got a public relations problem. Brother, do they
need some better public relations."
          Even the ax-officers who are critical of the mayor, however, also
note that he reorganized the department into smaller divisions with
greater supervision and more officers on the street at all
times. Folmar and Chief Swindall claim that crime has been reduced
since Folmar took charge.
          A city government source from the Robinson era observed that Folmar
took office at a time when, due to the Whitehurst scandal, police
relations with blacks were at a low point. And then, rather than take
steps to identify and correct the problem, it seems that Folmar's
actions made things worse.
          Not all of Folmar's strong-arm tactics were aimed specifically at
the black community, however. Soon after he took office the police
conducted an illegal drug search of patrons at a rock concert at the
Montgomery Civic Center. Every person entering was searched, with or
without probable cause, and a number of arrests were made. The arrests
were nullified after a federal judge sharply rebuked the police
actions--and the mayor--but three years would pass before another rock
concert was held at the Civic Center.
          City hall insiders also view with suspicion the scuttling by Folmar
of the reorganization that former mayor Robinson had
engineered. Basically, Robinson divided the city's departments into
several major divisions, each of which was headed by a professional
administrator who took care of the details and answered to the mayor's
office on policy and procedure. Folmar has dismantled this system, and
every department head in the city is under Folmar's personal
supervision--and knows it.
          Such is the background against which the current racial troubles in
Montgomery must be seen. Legal challenges have been raised to a
Folmar-backed redistricting plan for this year's city elections. A
federal judge has agreed with black challengers that the city's new
reapportionment plan was drawn to discriminate against black voters
and black officeholders, particularly against long-time Folmar
opponent Joe Reed. After the ruling, Folmar said the city would
appeal, and he also issued what amounted to a personal attack on the
federal judge, who is black. Folmar's statement, to the effect that
the ruling was not unexpected considering the source, encouraged
disrespect for the law and for federal judges and bordered on outright
racism. Elections may or may not be held in October.
          Despite widespread discontent with Folmar, few have seemed
especially eager to challenge him. The strongest potential candidate
has been city council president Peak, but he has said he will not
run. The announced candidates to date are a young white businesswoman
who said she would drop out if a more experienced contender emerged, a
white contractor with connections to the business community, and
Franklin James, a member of a 

prominent Montgomery family and the
brother of former longtime mayor Earl James. Only James, who was once
the state's industrial relations director, has any political
experience. James announced his candidacy just as this issue was going
to press, and it is too early to assess his chances. However, his
political reflexes are evidently in good shape because he went
directly to the key issue: Folmar himself. James's opening statement
included references to the incumbent's ego, grandstanding tactics, and
lightning-rod administrative style. Montgomery needs a mayor, James
said, who can get along with all of the city's people, and who solves
problems rather than creates them. James also promised that his
industrial relations background would bring factories and jobs.
          Black council member Donald Watkins, an attorney who represented
the Bernard Whitehurst family after the 1976 shooting, has said he
will run against Folmar if "no credible white candidate comes
forward." (The statement was made before James or the contractor,
David Thames, announced their intentions; Watkins has not indicated
whether he considers Thames or James to be credible candidates.)
          Blacks acknowledge that no black mayoral candidate can win in the
face of a white electoral majority. However, the precinct totals
cannot be comforting to Folmar. He cannot be expected to get more than
a handful of Montgomery's black voters, and 30.2 percent of the
registered voters are black. He is also a Republican, and although the
city elections in Montgomery are not partisan contests, he would still
be vulnerable against a strong white Democrat who can avoid
antagonizing the conservatives while still expressing some of the
misgivings many whites also feel toward Folmar's brand of
leadership. Folmar did not carry Montgomery in the 1982 gubernatorial
race against George Wallace.
          Folmar recently presented petitions bearing what he said were more
than seventeen thousand signatures of Montgomery voters who wanted him
to run for reelection. However, no one has collected the signatures of
those who will vote for anyone else, and Folmar
is obviously sniffing the political winds. While he had, earlier
rejected calls for committees to probe issues causing racial tensions,
he changed his course a few weeks ago and announced his own bi-racial
committee. He appointed the chairman and vice-chairman and invited
council members to nominate three persons each to the new
committee. So far, three of the four black council members have
declined, saying the committee was created by Folmar for political
reasons and could never be effective while the chairman was appointed
by Folmar. Critics also say that Folmar made a mistake when he named a
white chairman and a black vice-chairman rather than two co-chairs,
and they view the structure of the committee as proof of Folmar's
determination to control even the discussion over Montgomery's current
problems. The committee received another wound when the black
vice-chairman, the president of Alabama State University, resigned
without attending a meeting, saying he could not take part in a
committee with such obviously political overtones.
          Meanwhile, an anonymous citizen known as Jack Smith has created the
Friendly Supper Club, which merely invites interested persons to show
up with a guest of a different race at an appointed time at a local
cafeteria to "break bread together" and get to know one another across
racial lines.
          The second of the dinners, in June, took place just one day after a
cross was burned in the yard of black county commissioner John Knight,
who is the spokesman for the boycott called by blacks against the
First Alabama Bank. Coming at a time of increasing attention to
Montgomery's racial troubles, the contrast between the cross-burning
and the Friendly Supper Club was too great for the media to pass
up. CBS and NBC both sent camera crews to town, and their reports
juxtaposed pictures of the charred cross in Knight's yard with shots
of blacks and whites smiling and talking around the cafeteria
tables. The local media especially made a point of the difference
between Folmar's beleaguered bi-racial committee and the independently
created Friendly Supper Club. Dialogue was the order of the day, but
it was not the Mayor who was doing the talking.
          One of those at the June dinner was Johnnie Carr, the president of
the Montgomery Improvement Association, which sponsored the bus
boycott in 1955-56. Dialogue is fine, said Mrs. Carr, but it is not
the solution. "When a city of this size can't find a decent leader for
mayor, I have to ask what is wrong. Folmar accuses us of crying
'racism,' but when you look at the man's record, how do you explain it
except as racism?"
          Mrs. Carr said the black community views Folmar's creation of the
bi-racial committee as a belated attempt to gloss over the current
problems. She believes the strategy will not work.
          "We don't need a bandaid," she said. "We need a good physical
examination, and then we're going to have to have some political
surgery."
          
            Randall Williams is a Montgomery resident and a
contributing editor of Southern Changes.
          
        
        
          Long Journey Home
          By Simpson, BlandBland
	       Simpson and Conway, CeceCece Conway
          Vol. 5, No. 4, 1983, pp. 17-19
          
          One of the world's great collections of Southern and country music
has come home, and therein lies a ballad.
          Early one morning in late April, a truck from California rolled
into Chapel Hill, bringing the John Edwards Memorial
Collection--nearly a thousand boxes of old 78-rpm phonograph records,
sheet music and faded letters--to its new and permanent home at the
University of North Carolina. For this archive, assembled by a young
Australian, shipped at his death in 1960 to a fellow collector in New
Jersey, then back across America to a long residency at the University
of California at Los Angeles, it was journey's end.
          "There's almost no end to the variety of material in 

those boxes,"
said UNC's Dan Patterson, after the dust had settled in late
May. Patterson, the energetic director of the Folklore Curriculum
here, was trail boss in the University's drive to acquire the
archive. "We hope we can find a copy of John Edwards' will in
there."
          Edwards' will directed that the original collection--country music
from the early period of its commercial history--be maintained in the
United States for research purposes. When recipient Eugene Earle
arrived with the archive in southern California in 1962, he and
several other scholars and collectors--Archie Green. D.K. Wilgus,
Ed Kahn, and Fred Hoeptner--formed the John Edwards Memorial
Foundation and found housing for the archive at UCLA's Center for
Comparative Folklore and Mythology.
          "We had wanted the collection to be housed in the South
originally," recalls Archie Green, "and we tried several
institutions. But in the early 1960s, no Southern university was
really committed to the serious study of any Southern vernacular
music."
          The founders of the JEMF, like Edwards, understood that the record
companies in the 1920's and 1930's had captured, in living sound, a
host of emerging and evolving musical forms--repertories that did not
interest scholars of that day. As documents of the vast impact of new
technologies and commercialization on the old homemade music, these
recordings in fact constitute a significant contribution to folklife
studies.
          During the two decades it was at UCLA on loan, the Edwards
collection received the combined holdings of all its directors and
other collectors and grew to include: fourteen thousand 78s, ten
thousand 45s; a thousand LPs; correspondence and taped interviews with
performers and other music business figures; six hundred song folios;
sheet music; books; posters; photographs, and much more. And the
Foundation enlarged its conception of the collection and embraced a
wide range of traditional and commercial American music forms: cowboy,
western, country &western, old time, hillbilly, bluegrass, mountain,
Cajun, sacred, gospel, race, blues, rhythm &blues, soul, and folk
rock.
          Even before scholars had become fully aware of the collection's
significance, young musicians of the late 1960s were learning old-time
styles and music from cassette tapes and from records pressed out of
the Foundation's collection. Now, the LP albums released by the JEMF
have been turned over to Californian Chris Strachwitz, owner of
Arhoolie Records and Down Home Music, who intends to keep the JEMF
records in print and the label's name alive and active.
          In a recent edition of its Quarterly, JEMF executive
secretary Norm Cohen wrote: "There is no denying that the creams of
the founders of the JEMF over two decades ago have not been matched by
reality . . . On the other hand, we have much to be proud of. We have
led the way, in both printed and recorded media, toward the acceptance
of country music and its related folk-derived forms as a subject for
serious study at American educational institutions."
          Dan Patterson agreed. "Their Quarterly made the JEMF known
all over the world." And photographs from JEMF files, as well as
references to materials there, abound in non-fiction works about
country music. Cohen himself, in LONG STEEL RAIL, and JEMF president
Archie Green, in ONLY A MINER, have used the collection's riches in
writing about railroading and mining songs.
          Still, Patterson said, "The JEMF directors seemed to feel the
collection was under-staffed and under-utilized at UCLA." The JEMF's
reputation was firmly established, but the fate of its archive was
not; the Foundation ran on grants, gifts and benefit concerts, and on
the proceeds from high-quality but slow-selling records and
publications. Patterson said he also believes the board in recent
years began to think the collection belonged in the South, adding: "I
think they decided it was unfair to deprive the South of a resource
for the study of its own history." At the heart of that study is the
influence of the machine and technology on the South and the
expression of Southern values in changing musical forms.
          The first notion Patterson had that the JEMF was considering such a
move came in 1979, when Green lectured in Chapel Hill. Patterson
recalls: "He remarked, 'Would UNC be interested in housing this
collection?'- something like that. I thought, 'Now, that wouldn't
happen."' But in April, 1981, when Cohen came to Chapel Hill for a
conference of the Association for Recorded Sound Collections,
Patterson felt, "They were looking us over." Cohen saw the 2500-LP
Folk Music Archive that Patterson and his folklore students had built
at UNC, and heard the plans the University had approved for its
expansion.
          It was Cohen who, in October 1982, suggested to Patterson at the
American Folklore Society's meeting in Minneapolis that, "If UNC is
interested in the collection, it should make an offer now."

          Patterson moved quickly once back in Chapel Hill. With partner
Donald Shaw--a former student, now a journalism professor and director
of UNC's Media Center--he interested University Library director James
Govan, a former Chattanoogan, in purchasing the l collection. But
Govan told Patterson and Shaw: "The library couldn't staff it
now--could you?"
          In short order, Patterson and Shaw strung together enough baling
wire to fence in the collection: interim storage space from the
Undergraduate Library, money to transport the collection from
California to North Carolina from the Music and English Departments
(including some discretionary funds offered by professor and novelist
Doris Betts), assistantships and summer staff from the deans of the
graduate and summer schools, and an initial operating budget created
with the help of the provost and the chancellor.
          UNC made its offer in January, 1983. The JEMF board accepted the
bid in February, generously sending the collection back home at a
fraction of its estimated half-million-dollar value. And Patterson,
Shaw, and a crew of students and library staffers were singing the
final chorus to the Ballad of John Edwards as they rounded up the 929
boxes on a Carolina loading dock the sunny morning of April 21st.
          "Negotiations went so fast," Patterson said, "that the collection
came at an awkward time. We can't open it till we have public
facilities. And we have to get staff positions and operating costs
into the University budget. We need to educate ourselves--about
equipment, so as not to damage the original materials when we make
protection copies of the recordings, and about the l copyright laws,
so there is no infringement when we make copies for the public. We
have to inventory and catalog what we've got, and begin efforts to add
to the collection."
          When UNC's main library moves into a new structure, a substantial
part of the basement of L.R. Wilson Library will house the media
collection- that Shaw is building. Here the JEMF Collection will be
the lodestar of the Southern Media Center and Folk Music Archive. But
the move that frees up the space will not occur until at least
December 1983, and Wilson Library will then undergo two years of
renovation. Patterson anticipates the grand opening of the collection
will be in 1985.
          What we in the South now have--with the Edwards Collection here,
and complementary collections at the Library of Congress in Washington
and at the Country Music Foundation in Nashville--is the world of
American country and ethnic music, from early times and in many forms,
in context and within reach of musicians, scholars and listeners. The
region owes a debt to an Australian who never set foot in the land
whose music he loved. His name will now remain tied to the songs of
the American South.
          
            Bland Simpson has co-authored the musicals Diamond
Studs, Hot Grog and Life on the Mississippi. He
has written the recent novel of country music, Heart of the Country
(Putnam, 1983) and its a lecturer in creative writing at UNC. Cece
Conway its a lecturer in English at UNC, a folklorist and co-director
of the recent film Tommy Jarrell--Sprout Wings and
Fly.
          
        
        
          The Freeze Down South
          By Roach, MargaretMargaret Roach and Tullos,  AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 5, No. 4, 1983, pp. 11-14
          
          In the fall of 1982, the Nuclear Freeze Campaign mobilized the
largest referendum drive in United States history. Over eleven million
Americans voted for the freeze. It won in nine of ten states and in
all but three of thirty-seven local referendums that were held in
towns, cities and counties across the country.
          Even if Southern state and city election laws made it easy to hold
popular initiatives--which they didn't--disarmament organizers would
still have the South's strong pro-military climate to contend
with. Congressional delegations from the South are among the
Pentagon's strongest supporters. Military employees and contractors
abound (see "Shaping the South's Pre-War Economy" in Southern
Changes, August September 1982). Nonetheless, citizens and
church groups in Dixie are fashioning a nuclear disarmament movement
tied to the large stirrings in the rest of the U.S. and in Europe. The
movement here, as elsewhere, continues to grow. Excitement and
expectation mingle with an awareness of the realities of the South's
web of military dependencies.
          Organizers for the Freeze Campaign (only one of several groups
active in the present peace movement) have much to report both inside
and around the South's border during the past several months. In
Miami-Dade County, one place where the resolution did get on the
ballot, voters approved the freeze by a fifty-eight percent margin. In
Atlanta, where a right wing group took legal action to block a Nuclear
Freeze/Jobs With Peace referendum, an exit poll conducted on election
day revealed that sixty-one percent of the voters supported the
freeze. In Austin, Texas, fourteen thousand of seventeen thousand
participants in a "people's election" voted approval. The West
Virginia house and senate have passed the freeze resolution. In North
Carolina, the resolution passed the house but was defeated in the
senate by a tie-breaking vote by Lieutenant Governor Jimmy Green.
          On March 7 and 8, some seven thousand citizens from around the
country (including more than six hundred Southerners) made the trip to
Washington to participate 

in the Citizens' Lobby for a U.S./Soviet
Nuclear Freeze. Among the Dixie delegations were 150 supporters from
Virginia, 120 from Kentucky, a hundred from Georgia, eighty from
Florida, sixty from North Carolina and fifty from Arkansas. These
activists were quite aware of the strong relationship between the
amount of military dollars a Southern state receives and the voting
habits of that state's members of congress.
          On the South's border, in Arkansas and West Virginia, where there
is an insignificant proportion of Pentagon money, congressional
delegations have outshown Deep South states in their votes for the
freeze and against building particular weapons systems.
          "We've been dumped on by the Pentagon. Arkansas is considered to be
expendable," says Bob Bland of Little Rock's SANE chapter, offering as
examples the Titan missile field where an explosion in 1980 killed one
airman and injured twenty-one others and the nerve gas production
facility at Pine Bluff. Neither represents much in terms of
employment. Dividing along party lines, Arkansas' two Democrats have
often voted on the side of nuclear disarmament while the state's two
Republicans have followed the Reagan lead. "We'll remove the
arch-hawks in '84," Bland says.
          Arkansas is the only Southern state whose senators are both
sponsors of the freeze resolution. Both David Pryor and Dale Bumpers
also oppose the MX missile. Pryor is presently waging a war with the
Pentagon as he seeks to prevent $130.6 million in chemical warfare
money from entering his state. "Nerve gas," he argues, "doesn't
kill-soldiers, it kills civilians."
          Like Arkansas, West Virginia receives few military contracting
dollars. There are no major military facilities in the state and only
two thousand Department of Defense employees, three-fourths of whom
are civilian. As in Arkansas, the only thing the Reagan-Weinberger
military build-up means for the people of West Virginia is a loss of
social programs and increased economic pressure for the unemployed
young to "be all you can be" in the armed forces. West Virginia sends
a greater per capita percentage of its young people to the military
than any other state.
          Both houses of the West Virginia legislature endorsed the freeze in
January: the senate by a vote of twenty-eight to five and the house by
voice vote. These victories contributed to other ones. "It was our
organizing around congressional districts and winning the endorsement
of the state legislature that made our influence felt in the
congressional delegation," explains coordinator Susan Walter of
Charleston.
          And felt it was. Only one out of its four representatives voted for
the freeze in 1982. In a skillful statewide campaign to "make peace an
issue in West Virginia's congressional races," West Virginians for a
Bilateral Nuclear Freeze (with chapters in twelve towns) worked hard
to replace their state's pro-military representatives. With three new
congressmen elected in November of 1982, the freeze stance moved to
one hundred percent.
          Certainly the issue of nuclear war was a key in the state's third
congressional district where incumbent Mick Staton said, "I believe
the earth would be destroyed when the good Lord in heaven decides it
should happen." Staton was replaced by freeze supporter Robert
Wise.
          West Virginia is also the home of Senator Jennings Randolph (D)
who, since 1945, has been proposing the establishment of either a
U.S. Department of Peace, or a U.S. Peace Academy to study the causes
of war and teach techniques for resolving conflicts. Although
Randolph's proposal has fifty-three cosponsors, it is currently
bottled up in a senate committee by its chief enemies, Alabama's
Jeremiah Denton (R) and New Hampshire's Gordon J. Humphrey (R). "I
have been gently told," says Randolph, "that even though my reasons
for establishing a peace academy are sincere and well-intended, I am
naive if I believe such an academy will serve as anything but a commie
front."
          As one moves toward the heart of Dixie, congressional supporters
for disarmament grow scarcer. In July of 1982, when the U.S. House of
Representatives considered the freeze and defeated it by a 204 to 202
vote, only twenty-two of 107 congressmen in the eleven states of the
old Confederacy voted in favor. The South remains the bastion for
die-hard militarists. Yet, even here, freeze activists have helped
engineer a few surprises. Consider North Carolina.
          In contrast with Arkansas and West Virginia, North Carolina ranks
fifth in the nation in the size of its military payroll and third in
the number of military personnel within the state. Fort Bragg and Camp
LeJune are two of the largest bases in the U.S. The state also has
Jesse Helms and John East.
          During the past year, several groups formed the North Carolinians
for a U.S./Soviet Nuclear Freeze. They mounted a statewide campaign,
gathering more than forty thousand signatures on the freeze
petition. Seven of the state's cities voted to approve the freeze
proposal. "We started with the cities and moved out to the rural areas
where we found terrific support," says Dale Everts, coordinator of the
campaign. Before losing by a twenty-five to twenty-four vote in the NC
senate, the freeze resolution passed the lower house by a sixty-five
to forty-eight tally in March.
          During the North Carolina house debate, J.P. Huskins, from
Statesville, a conservative on most issues, explained his opposition
to Reagan's military build-up: "It's like those cowboys who try to
outdraw themselves in front of a mirror. Those cowboys out on the
plains can't do 

it and the cowboy in the White House can't do it
either."
          By the time the freeze resolution appeared again in the
U.S. House of Representatives this year, newly elected members as well
as returned incumbents from the mid-term election were aware of the
freeze movement's strength among the American mainstream. Nonetheless,
thanks to the tolerance of proponents and the dogged persistence of
opponents in offering a succession of weakening amendments, nearly
forty-two hours of debate were required before a version of the
resolution passed. A final touch, facilitated by Georgia's Elliott
Levitas (D), made the proposition palatable to all but Reaganites and
irascible hawks.
          Levitas' modifications produced a resolution that requires the
suspension of any freeze agreement which is not followed by mutual
arms reductions within a specified period of time. Despite the
addition of the Levitas'-inspired convoluted language, the principle
of "freeze then reduce" remains intact and in contrast with the Reagan
Administration's attempts to build-up first-strike weapons. The freeze
resolution, however, remains both non-binding and largely
symbolic. The final House vote, taken on May 25, was 278 to 149 in
support of the amended resolution. Still, only forty-six of 116
Southern members of Congress voted favorably.
          The Southern delegation is doing more than opposing non-binding
resolutions; they are at the front of the Reagan-Weinberger
re-armament campaign with its proposed five year expenditure of $1.8
trillion. Certainly there are the old line war hawks--the likes of
Alabama's Edwards and Denton, Mississippi's Stennis, Texas' Tower and
North Carolina's two senators. These men make no apologies for their
militarism.
          Other Southerners, as illustrated by Levitas and by Georgia's
Senator Sam Nunn (D) and Tennessee Representative Albert Gore (D),
have begun to give the appearance of concern for eventual disarmament
while in fact encouraging the pursuit of nuclear weapons
modernization.
          Consider the current proposals of Nunn and Gore. Influential in
recent congressional voting and in the formation of legislative
consensus on military matters, these two men have become sophisticated
in their militarism--or, as folks used to say, wiser in their
wickedness. Nunn and Gore resort to the language of Orwellian newspeak in which lip service supportive of a
longed-for goal (the dismantling of nuclear weaponry) is accompanied
by actions which seek an opposite end (a "superiority" of arms). Under
Nunn's "build-down" proposal (which calls for the dismantling of two
older warheads for each new one produced) or Gore's suggestion (known
as "de-MIRVing") that the U.S. shift from multiple to single warhead
missiles, aging nuclear weapons will be replaced by more modern ones
and numerical reductions in nuclear warheads and missiles will result
in an actual increase in the speed, accuracy and destructive power of
the missiles which are deployed.
          Whether they are promoted as a compromise between the Reagan
Administration's approach to arms control ("Reagan does not like to
spend money on anything that does not explode," notes Arkansas Senator
Dale Bumpers) and a genuine nuclear freeze, or whether they are
promoted as bi-partisan agreements by Presidential panels such as the
Scroweroft Commission, the build-down and kindred schemes are
frauds. With a simple phrase, suggestive of disarmament, build-down
proponents seek to siphon off the broad and growing support that
exists for a serious movement to abolish nuclear weapons. "As in the
case with the nuclear freeze proposal," build-down co-sponsor Charles
Percy (R-IL) has admitted, "it benefits from an underlying concept
that can be readily grasped and embraced by the general public."
Unlike the freeze, which stops the arms race in its tracks, the
build-down offers an escalation in the production of weapons with
ever-greater first-strike potential. Ground, air and sea-launched
cruise missiles would be deployed. Trident II submarine-launched
missiles could replace Poseidon and Trident I missiles. New MX
missiles and the mobile Midgetman (favored by Gore) would replace
Minuteman. Comparable systems could be developed by the Soviets. There
would be fewer missiles, but these would be more dangerous--and move
us closer to a hair-trigger response during a national crisis or to
the contemplation of first strike: "Use them or lose them."
          "Remember that all political life is compromise," suggested Leslie
Dunbar of the Fund for Peace during a May gathering in Atlanta of
Southern disarmament activists. "But be clear what compromise is. When
Senator Nunn proposes a 'build-down' and Mr. Reagan shows an interest
in it, that's not our compromise. That's a
compromise between them and them. When men we have relied on in the past, like
Albert Gore, Jr., begin to allow how they'll support a few MXs in
order to get Midgetmen, don't even act interested. That's not a
compromise between them and us. The woods will be full in the next
months with so-called compromises like these."
          Thanks in large part to the compromises of Nunn and Gore, the
U.S. Senate and House, within a month of the successful freeze vote in
the House, approved $625 million in start-up costs for flight testing
and for development of basing plans for the MX missile. On the horizon
lay the shape of tens of billions to come. Ninety-eight of 116
Southern representatives gave their approval as did all but three
Southern senators (Bumpers and Pryor from 

Arkansas and Sasser of
Tennessee were the exceptions). "No strategic weapons system that has
ever passed this stage of funding."-warned Representative Les
AuCoin(DOR), "has been permanently canceled."
          In July both Nunn and Gore were still promising "to hold Reagan's
feet to the fire" and insist that he show some flexibility in his arms
control positions in exchange for their willingness to support the MX
as a bargaining chip with the Russians. "Those of us from the
prairies," counters Representative Byron Dorgan (D-ND), "know the
difference between a bargaining chip and a cow chip. Those who spend
twenty billion dollars for this kind of chip ought not to be trusted
with the taxpayer's money."
          As the $200 billion military authorization bill for 1984 steamed
its way through this summer's Congress, freeze activists pondered the
prospects and tactics for the coming months. The national Freeze
Campaign deems organizing in the South so important that it has
designated its field organizing project for this region. Training
workshops have already been held in Fort Worth and Atlanta. The
American Friends Service Committee's regional disarmament project is
looking at Southern congressional districts to determine where
pro-military representatives may be vulnerable for challenge by
pro-freeze candidates.
          At the June strategy session in Fort Worth, organizers debated the
question of whether to shift the focus from the freeze to specific
nuclear weapons systems. The Campaign re-affirmed its position that no
additional nuclear weapons "can be justified on grounds of morality,
economics or national security." The decision to oppose specific
weapons has been left up to local activists with the offer of national
assistance. The National Campaign has issued a call to participate in
local demonstrations on October 21-24 to oppose the deployment of
Pershing and Cruise missiles in Europe in December.
          The Freeze Campaign is also setting up a national political action
committee for the 1984 elections. The Campaign will target a
half-dozen senatorial races, fifty to seventy-five congressional races
as well as presidential candidate selection. With its seven primaries
and caucuses during one week in March, the South is considered a key
area.
          Some activists feel that the freeze strategy doesn't go far enough
and are calling for a "no freeze, no funds') approach: the targeting
of every new nuclear weapons system for opposition until a freeze is
achieved. In considering this position, Randy Kehler of the National
Freeze Campaign cautions, "even if we approach specific weapons
systems in a bilateral way--and we have formulated some proposals for
doing that--we will begin to lose the focus on the comprehensive
freeze on all weapons systems in a way that will lose us the popular
appeal the freeze has had." Kehler notes that efforts to combat
specific weapons systems have existed in the U.S. for years: "Even
when they are temporarily successful, as with the B-1 bomber, the
weapon comes back at us or it is replaced by another more dangerous
one. The proponents of these weapons systems know that even if we win
one battle, eventually they can tire us out on the weapon-by-weapon
approach."
          William Reynolds, southeastern representative at the Fort Worth
session, suggested that in the South, with organizers facing
congressional delegations who are still overwhelmingly in the
Pentagon's camp, "we still need to establish the freeze position with
its clear bilateral language. Southern senators and representatives
have spent decades working to bring military money into the
South. It's going to take a lot of work and time to reverse that."
          
            Margaret Roach is on the staff of the Atlanta Nuclear
Freeze/Jobs With Peace Campaign. Allen Tullos is the editor of
Southern Changes.
          
        
        
          "A Nation at Risk"
          By Mcdonald, Joseph A.Joseph A. Mcdonald
          Vol. 5, No. 4, 1983, pp. 8-10
          
          The Report from The National Commission on Excellence in Education,
"A Nation at Risk," has generated tremendous reaction. Newscasts,
newspapers, journals, and magazines, in the South and across the
nation, are devoting more space than usual to a commission
report. What does this document offer for our region's schools which
consistently rank near the bottom in test scores and finances?
Unfortunately, the Report barely scratches the surface in its analysis
of causes of our educational problems and thus reflects no
understanding of the role that poverty and racism play in subverting ~
quality education. One of the reasons for the impressive' and
overwhelmingly favorable attention, in fact, is that it allows us to
pay lip service to high ideals and express indignation over the state
of education without having to make any fundamental changes that might
threaten the status quo.
          To quote from the Report, "We conclude that declines in educational
performance are in large part the result of disturbing inadequacies in
the way the educational process itself is often conducted." This line
tells us that the report ignores the fact that our educational system
does not exist in a vacuum. Its form and content are shaped by the
larger society of which it is a part. We can never adequately
understand education unless we first examine this connection to the
larger society, yet this report fails completely to do so.
          Instead, the Commission cites four specific areas of criticism
about the educational process itself: content, expectations, time, and
teaching. In a nutshell, content refers to curriculum and the easing
of standards within the schools. Expectations refers to the decline in
demands placed on students by graduation requirements, grading
practices, college admission requirements, and so on. Time refers to
length of school day and school year as well as extent of homework
assignments. Teaching refers to training, abilities, shortages, and
salaries of teachers. Finding fault with all four areas, the report
recommends that we devise a new and tougher curriculum, raise
expectations by implementing higher standards, lengthen the school day
and year and assign more homework, and train and pay teachers
better. The Report concludes with great optimism: "We are the
inheritors of a past that gives us every reason to believe that we
will succeed."
          It is almost impossible not to be offended by this report. Its
obvious emphasis on symptoms rather than causes, the great care taken
not to be too critical, its refusal to deal with issues of power and
conflict, make it a document without teeth and without meaning for
educational change. It therefore is a document, ironically, which
supports the status quo, which argues for minor tinkering at best. It
allows politicians, business leaders, and the middle and upper classes
to demonstrate concern about education, to present themselves as
high-minded citizens without committing themselves to any change which
would threaten their interests. Its very acceptance by these elements
of the population informs us of its ideological compatibility with
these interests.
          To be more specific, this document is a smokescreen for the real
issue plaguing our educational system--the huge inequality
characterizing our society. That the Commission could spend eighteen
months researching and writing a document which does not mention
inequality and class structure is a slap in the face of the poor, the
working class, and minorities. Studies over the last twenty years
(Coleman in 1966 and Jencks in 1972 are the most frequently cited ones
out of a much larger number) conclusively show student performance is

strongly related to socio-economic status, or class background. More
than quality of schools or teachers, or money spent per pupil, or
class size, or nature of libraries, this factor explains why some
students do well and some do poorly. This explanation makes people
uncomfortable since it represents a challenge, a moral challenge, to
inequality. Thus it is ignored when possible and viciously attacked
when publicized.
          Class background is important because those with wealth, power, and
status can use their resources to insure that their advantages are
passed on to their children. Schools merely reproduce the inequality
in one generation in the next generation. Tracking systems, teacher
expectations, IQ tests, peer pressure, financing, and curriculum have
all been found to contribute to this reproduction. Clearly, schools
are not a vehicle for upward mobility. Again, this finding is rejected
by most because it means that quality education for all is possible
only through the reduction of inequality in our society. It is
interesting, and telling, that the United States is second rate in
education as well as in other areas indicative of the quality of life
of citizens, such as infant survival rate and the availability of
decent housing and medical care. All of these reveal the terrible
consequences befalling a society when one-fifth of the people receive
over forty-four percent of the income each year while another fifth
receives less than four percent. The distribution of wealth (financial
assets, property, valuables) is even more unequal. Since those who
monopolize income and wealth are also those with significant political
influence, programs involving income redistribution are kept to a
minimum. And as long as inequality is unlikely to be reduced,
publicity about the role of inequality in the production and
maintenance of educational mediocrity is unwanted.
          We can go even further. Perceptive analysts, over the years, have
pointed out to us that our educational system is actually performing
the exact function intended. Corporations, and politicians who must
count on corporate support, have certain needs. One of these is for a
labor force to handle semi-skilled and unskilled jobs without undue
complaint, armed only with the skills necessary to punch a clock,
follow directions, and tolerate repetitive, meaningless work. Our work
world has been so deskilled and dehumanized that the talents and
abilities basic education transmits can be reduced to a
minimum. Corporate America does not need well-educated people in great
numbers. The ones that are needed can be supplied by the middle and
upper classes. Middle level management can come from the middle and
lower middle levels with occasional upwardly mobile working-class
students allowed as proof that anyone can make it. In South Carolina,
for instance, the textile industry has strongly opposed Governor
Riley's call for increased taxes to improve the state's poorly funded
school system. The industry does not want to lose the large number of
semi-skilled and unskilled workers that the schools currently
provide.
          The schools thus accomplish two important goals. One, they keep
industry supplied with an ample supply of workers, and two, they
insure that wealth and power remain in the same hands from generation
to generation. Those who are exploited by these goals have the least
amount of power in our society to protest. Thus the only changes
publicized are those that would tinker with the system.
          But if this system is working as intended, why would political and
economic elites support the report and the tinkering (as they have
been doing)? I can think of several reasons. One, criticism of
education has become quite pervasive. This report might mollify the
critics and coopt the issue of educational-change, insuring that
proposals are acceptable to the elites. It also demonstrates, falsely,
to the parents of children being cheated by our educational system
that help is on the way. And it serves a further ideological purpose
in this regard by telling all of us that the problem lies within the
educational process which, if modified, would work well (with the
implication that children will have only themselves to blame if they
do poorly).
          Second, the Report offers a scapegoat for the tremendous economic
difficulties we are facing today. It strongly suggests that our loss
of dominance in worldwide markets and the faltering of our automobile
and steel industries have been caused by the "rising tide of
mediocrity" that afflicts our educational institition. There is no
mention, of course, of monopolistic practices, failures to invest in
new equipment, continued production of larger cars because of the
greater profits expected, expensive mergers, and the host of other
problems which lie at the bottom of our current economic
morass. Instead, our schools are to blame.
          Thirdly, and most importantly, the Report does reflect some serious
economic concern being felt by multinationals. The very first line of
the document states, "Our nation is at risk. Our once unchallenged
preeminence in commerce, industry, science, and technological
innovation is being overtaken by competitors throughout the world."
Some tinkering, therefore, is actually desired by the economic and
political powers that be to bring U.S. education more in line with the
demands being placed on our corporations by changes in the world
economic system. Specifically, education needs to be more technical,
more mathematical, more computer oriented. Social science is valuable
only so that future executives can understand the geopolitical
parameters of the battle against Communism and the exploitation of the
Third World.
          The Report falls woefully short in its portrayal of the personal
and humanitarian purposes of education. Little concern is expressed
over the failure of our schools to stimulate critical discourse,
social criticism, and other safeguards of democratic ideals. For the
economic and political elite, education is an instrument, an
instrument to promote advantage for a few and to instill acceptance,
conformity, and complacency in the many. Elites in the South do not
want the schools to become sources of challenge to right-to-work laws
or to the low levels of voter registration among blacks. As long as
public schools continue to be mechanisms for maintaining inequality,
these elites can continue to hold a disproportionate share of the
region's wealth and power. At the same time, they can send their own
children to the segregation academies.
          Until we come to grips with class and racial inequality 

in our
society, education will continue to serve the needs of the
few. Reports such as this offer no hope for significant change. The
Commission fails to mention even basic problems such as variations in
funding of schools depending on the wealth of local areas. It does not
mention the continued housing discrimination which keeps minorities in
poor neighborhoods, the job discrimination which makes it difficult
for the poor and for minorities to obtain good jobs even if they
succeed in school, or the need for continuation and improvement in
special programs for the disadvantaged.
          That the Report fails to mention such elementary ideas and instead
opts for minor tinkering with curriculum, teacher training and school
days is sufficient reason for progressives to reject it, loudly. The
Report is worse than meaningless. It will be used in justifying
challenges to teacher unions, making curriculum more conservative and
purging progressive personnel and ideas. Its omissions and the uses to
which it will be put place the report squarely behind the status
quo.
          
            Joseph A. McDonald is assistant professor of sociology at
Newberry (SC) College. He its currently investigating the impact of
textile mill closings on Southern workers and
communities.
          
        
        
          The Smokehouse of Politics
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 5, No. 4, 1983, pp. 14, 16-17
          
          
            John Lewis:
          
          If we were to measure the Reagan Administration by a "humanity
index," we would have to conclude that the politics and record of this
Administration are uncaring, insensitive and inhumane. From the
callous disregard of the poorest of the poor, to the increased threat
of nuclear holocaust, it can be said without stretching the point that
this Administration poses an ultimate threat to human life and the
survival of this planet.
          On the domestic front, the President's own Budget Director admitted
that "supply side" economics is nothing more than a giveaway program
to reward the wealthy at the expense of the poor. Poor and middle
class workers are deprived of jobs and income, home mortgages are
being foreclosed, and the family structure itself is being wrecked by
the nightmare of unemployment.
          Some of the most enlightened policies of previous Administrations
are being discarded, enriching the profits of multi-national
corporations, including the Southern Company, at the expense of the
health and safety of the American people. Our safety in the workplace,
protection from toxic industrial wastes, the right to know what is in
the food we eat, and environmental protection, are but a few of the
areas of our lives which are under the direct attack of this
Administration.
          The economic programs of this Administration are literally killing
us. They threaten the quality of life of unborn generations and the
lives of our senior citizens who, despite a mild winter, have had to
face the unthinkable choice of deciding whether to spend their money
on food or heat. The task before us is to develop policies and
programs which promote the common good and a redistribution of the
resources and wealth of this nation in an equal and fair manner. We
must find a way or make a way to ease the burden of high energy costs
on the poor. In 1983, in modern America, people simply should not be
faced with the stark choices of food or fuel. We live in the
wealthiest nation on the face of the earth, and it is immoral, and an
absolute sin, for any person here to be 

forced to choose between
giving up one necessity of life so that they can have another one. Not
some people, but all of our people, should have access to all of the
necessities of life, including food, shelter, health care, education,
and in a modern society such as ours, transportation, communication,
and an adequate access to energy.
          For the most part, Southern utilities have shown very little
interest in how their rate hikes and their total operation affect the
quality of life of poor people.
          In spite of the lack of utility involvement in programs to help the
poor, there are a number of actions which utilities could undertake to
help ease the impact of rising energy costs. An example of the few
utilities which have pursued progressive energy conservation programs
demonstrate two main points: first, that utility involvement in
conservation programs can work, and second, that public pressure is
necessary to implement the programs and make sure that they work
properly.
          To be successful in stopping rate increases, we must have a
grassroots organizing effort as well as legal intervention. Public
utility commissions are political bodies and they respond
politically. We must approach our rate cases in a political manner.
          We need to take the offensive in working with public utility
commissions. Rather than simply reacting to a rate hike request, we
need to begin petitioning the utility commissions to implement
progressive policies and require these to be adopted by the
utilities. It is clear from past history that utilities will not adopt
progressive programs voluntarily, but only when they are pushed into
it.
          We need to increase our involvement in the overall political
process. We need to run candidates for office and get actively
involved in electing candidates for utility commissions, for state
legislatures and for city and county commissions. These other bodies
all play a major role in the political process of rate-making, and we
must gain power in them. Our power and impact will be a function of
our ability to play a significant role in putting people in office.
          
            Jim Hightower:
          
          I want to thank Commissioner Jim Buck Ross for allowing me into the
state. You know as agriculture commissioners, among our many duties is
to regulate the various pests. I think it says a lot of him that he
let a Texan come in and he didn't even dip me at the border.
          Now I'm not going to give you a long speech, but I do want to share
some general thoughts on three subjects: public policy, power and
politics--which is really three ways of saying exactly the same
thing. Public policy is shaped by power. We're not shaping public
policy right now because we're not in power, because we've not been
paying enough attention to politics. That's the importance of what we
did in the state of Texas last year.
          Who's got the power? You go out there and talk with one of those
raw-boned ranchers in West Texas. You talk with him about going to the
auction where's he getting fifty-five cents a pound for his beef, and
then going into town to the Safeway where they charge him $3.93 for
the same beef. Who's got the power there? And you talk with people
living on social security who can't pay their light bill because the
electric company is building a nuclear plant and charging in advance
for the electricity. So who's got the power there?
          Where are we going to get our energy? Now the industry knows where
they want to get it. They want to get it from the nuclear source. And,
because they happen to be in power at the moment, that's where they're
getting it. They don't want to mess with renewable resources of energy
and they don't want to mess with conservation because they don't put
much money in their pockets. Even though these systems make not only
good sense, but probably the best sense.
          In a state like Texas, we've got more sun and wind than we know
what to do with. They're constants in our lives. For people in
Lubbock, on the High Plains, twenty mile per hour winds mean a calm
day. Out there they say if your hat blows off, don't bother chasing
it, just turn around and there'll be a better one coming along. We
live with the wind there, so why don't we use it? Well, the reason is
because we've not put enough into politics.
          Power doesn't give itself up. You've got to go take it. "Liberty is
not given, it is taken." A friend of mine says, "If you want some ham,
by God, go into the smokehouse." Like I said in my campaign, if we got
together and went into that smokehouse of politics, instead of coming
out with an old, salty slab of fatback, for a change we were going to
come out with a whole hog. And that's what we did. We sliced off some
of the sweetest meat of Texas politics. We got the governorship, the
agriculture commission, the treasurer's office, and attorney general's
office and the land commissioner's office. We had a sweep in our state
senate. That's a mighty good feeling.
          Having done it, we've got to perform. That's the hardest
part. That's the chore we're now facing, the battle that we're making
in Texas and the battle that you'll be making.
          In Texas, we've now got four or five good people elected to
statewide offices. We all sit on something call TENRAC, Texas Energy
and Natural Resources Advisory Council, which is an energy
policy-making body, heretofore big oil--Exxon and Mobil. Now we have a
chance to allocate some research monies in a different way, to pursue
a different sort of development strategy. We can deal with water not
by hauling a glacier down from Alaska and melting it on the High
Plains, but by conservation systems.
          Let's look at a few utility issues--the automatic fuel adjustment
clause for example. I understand that here in I Mississippi, a utility
company can post a bond and they go 

ahead and build a plant or pay
executives a higher salary than they're getting, then charge it to the
consumer. I call that a fool adjustment clause.
          The whole issue of rate structure is the sacred cow for the
industry. The first priority of most utility commissions in the United
States is to increase the return on investments of the
shareholders. In Texas, that runs on the average of well above fifteen
percent. They're out there fighting any tampering with the rate
structure such as "lifeline" or any graduated rate structure. Instead
they want to offer us charity. Now the utility companies are coming
out with a system in which consumers have a voluntary check-off of one
dollar added to their monthly utility bill to pay for poor people's
bills. Instead of having a fair rate structure. We're not upsetting
them any. We've got to go fight for fair rate structure.
          Some of you are from Louisiana. You might have heard of Earl Long
over there. One time, Earl told about the rich man who died and went
to the pearly gates demanding to get in. Of course, you don't just go
through the pearly gates. There's a clerk out front and Saint Peter's
sitting back there rendering judgment.
          Well, the clerk's looking over this man's life story. He says,
"Lord have mercy, I don't see how in the world you think you're going
to get through here, you never did no good to nobody."
          The rich man said, "Oh, now wait a minute. Back in 1925, I gave a
nickel to a blind beggarman."
          The clerk said, "That's very generous of you, but it's certainly
not good enough to come in."
          He said, "Yes, but in 1935, a widow woman needed cab fare home, and
I tossed her a nickel."
          The clerk said, "Well, that's good too, but it doesn't make up for
a life of leisure."
          The rich man said, "Yes, but I've got a consistent pattern of
giving. In 1945, I went by that Salvation Army Christmas bucket and
put another nickel in there."
          The clerk turned to Saint Peter, and said, "What in heaven's name
are we going to do?"
          And Saint Peter said, "Give him back his fifteen cents and tell him
to go to hell."
          These people want to offer us welfare programs. We're not
interested in welfare. We are interested in fair rate structures. It
doesn't matter whether you're talking utilities or food prices or bank
policies or whatever. The central issue is fairness. Too few people
have all the money and power. They're using that money against you and
me every chance they get. What are we going to do about it? Well, it's
very simple. We've just got two choices: to lay back or to fight
back.
          We've got to fight back. That's what we've begun to do in Texas and
I see that's what you're doing here. I believe we fight back mostly
through politics. Our lives are in our politics. I grew up in North
Central Texas, in Sam Rayburn's old country up there, old time
Populist country. They had a saying up there: "the water won't ever
clear up until you get the hogs out of the creek." Hogs just don't
waddle out of the creek, you've got to shove them out. You've got to
take some sticks to them. And that's what we've got to do. When I say
we, I mean all of us. It's got to be a unified effort: working
families, poor people, old people, family farmers, ranchers, small
business people. We got to get together again, put our shoulders
together and push those hogs out of the creek. And that means you've
got to take your politics directly to the people.
          When I first went back to talk politics in Texas, I found liberals
hanging around holding small meetings in very, very small
rooms. Wringing their hands and saying, "Lord have mercy, what are we
going to do?"
          "My friends," I told them, "you've got to go to the people. You've
got to talk not just to the bean sprout eaters. You've got to get out
and put that coalition together."
          And, not only do you have to go out to the people, you've got to go
to them on the issues and don't flinch.
          When I was running for railroad commissioner, I was told "You can't
go out to West Texas and talk to those farmers. They have gas wells on
their land and they identify with the gas company. They're going to
think you're somebody off Mars talking about how bad the gas companies
are."
          I went on out and I did talk about the gas companies and I found
out it wasn't any trouble at all. Why was that? Because those farmers
were selling gas to the companies at one price and buying it back, the
same gas--for their irrigation pumps--at three times the price they
sold it for. Pretty easy economic message to get across to them.
          I'll just leave you with this thought, a theme that I ran upon this
time. I stole the advertising slogan of a moving company over in
Austin: "If we can get it a-loose, we can move it." Well, we got it
loose.
          
            From the conference, "The South's Poor and Utility
Issues," held earlier this year in Jackson, Mississippi, we present
excerpts from. the observations of Atlanta City Councilman John Lewis
and Texas Commissioner of Agriculture Jim Hightower.
          
        
        
          Forestry and Equity
          By Hatley, TomTom Hatley
          Vol. 5, No. 4, 1983, pp. 19-23
          
          If you travel along a state highway during the Southern winter,
your eyes follow unavoidably the constants of the land: field openings
of red, brown, and dun-colored soil breaking against the highway, and
never far off, green seams of forest against the horizon. The
intervals of green in the Southern landscape, more, often than not,
signal the presence of pine and other fast-growing softwood trees. The
land is also green in another sense, however, for the sixty million
acres of softwood forest in the South today are financially
valuable. The harvest of trees in an agricultural product second only
to the value of tobacco cropping in North Carolina, and twenty percent
of that state's land area is covered with pine trees. The South
supplies nearly half of the nation's softwood timber today and can
grow even more wood in the future. Across the South, softwood trees
such as pine, sweetgum, and sycamore provide a main part of the
employment base for 1.3 million forest industry workers, in
occupations ranging from falling trees to making paper.
          Corporations and, increasingly, banks, insurance companies and
pension funds are investing in timberland in the South with the
expectation of dependable investment returns from four to six percent
over inflation. Boosters of this financial promise point to
Georgia-Pacific Company's decision to move its corporate headquarters
from Portland, Oregon, to Atlanta and the forty-million-

dollar
pulpmill being built by a Finnish-American joint venture in New
Augusta, Mississippi, as bellwethers of a new age. Much more than a
simple discovery of the South's potential to become the new
"woodbasket of the nation," corporate decisions to invest in the South
often have to do primarily with changes and dislocation in the global
market for wood products. For instance, the Baltic region of
Scandinavia cannot continue to meet the West European demand for paper
pulp, which it has supplied since late mediaeval times, off of its own
cold and wet land alone. Whatever the underlying reasons for the shift
to the South, the increasing worldwide wood demand, whether for
cooking fuel, paper pulp, lumber, or methanol, means that the changes
taking place in the Southeast will be long-lasting.
          On the Southern forest today, small-sized land ownerships remain
the rule. This particularly holds true for the valuable mature or
near-mature pine stands across the South. Forty million acres of
pineland are in private hands. In North Carolina, 250,000 owners held
eighty percent of the state's private land. Each of these individuals
owns a tract which is on the average less than one hundred acres.
          Black people in the South hold a substantial share of this wealth
in land and trees. Yet an unfortunate combination of economic and
social forces is pushing these blacks toward landlessness. Dependable
statistics concerning black land ownership--how many acres, how many
owners--are very difficult to come by. The Census Bureau itself
estimates that the number of black farmers was undercounted by
fifty-three percent in the 1974 Census. Similar problems appear in the
counts of many agencies concerned with rural trends. In a sense, this
statistical fuzziness reflects the indeterminate (or even
unrecognized) standing of minority landowners and their problems for
many government programs.
          Some alarming trends show themselves in spite of the imprecision of
the statistics on certain points. Over the past decade the number of
black farms diminished at two and one-half times the rate of white
agricultural holdings. Today roughly 85,000 farms are being operated
by blacks; there were 130,000 in 1969. Of course, not all black
landowners are farmers. Department of Agriculture figures suggest that
there is a large group of blacks (perhaps fifty percent of the size of
the number of active farmers) who own rural acreages but do not
actively farm them. The rate of decline in the holdings of black
farmers proper probably crosses over to this group as well, as it does
for the relatively small holdings of native Americans.
          The trend toward land loss by minorities, particularly in the
South, where their holdings are concentrated, is not new, but,
instead, of slowing, it is increasing. The 1982 report of the US Civil
Rights Commission, "The Decline of Black Farming in America", warns
early on that "At [the present] rate of loss, there will be virtually
no blacks operating farms in this country by the end of the next
decade."
          The situation which the Commission addressed in its report is often
labelled a crisis in farmland ownership. But the problem extends
beyond the image of cultivated fields and pastures that the word
farmland calls to mind. Valuable and appreciating minority-owned
forests, whether on a section of a family farm's acreage or on
non-farm holdings, are also vanishing. Of farmland owned by blacks in
the South, certainly more than half is forested; non-farm rural land
is even more wooded. In the changing economic landscape of the South,
the small landowner, particularly the black landowner, is losing
substantial present and future forest assets to corporations and
individual investors seeking tax shelters.
          E.F. Hutton Group, Inc. offices in medium-sized cities across the
nation are at this moment offering shares in a second limited
partnership of twenty million dollars to purchase woodland in Georgia,
Alabama, and Florida. Promising a turnover time of as little as seven
years, a return of eight percent during the life of the partnership,
and significant tax shelter aspects, Hutton fully subscribed the first
offering in less than four months. This arrangement (and others like
it offered by Merrill Lynch and First National Bank of Atlanta)
capitalizes on the very large standing stock of mature pine timber in
the South today. Though the promotional literature for these plans
stresses the long-term potential for a bull market in the Southern
forest, each plan is basically designed to harvest both trees and tax
credits. As Hutton's promotional brochure notes: "Southeastern
timberland is avail-

able." Sadly, the long-term loss of minority-owned
land in the South has contributed to the tragic 'availability' of
woodland formerly held by small owners.
          The billion-dollar-plus land and timber asset owned by minority
landowners in the South remains a significant potential equity
resource of Southern blacks. Yet putting an exact price tag on this
land is difficult. Land prices are highly variable throughout the
South. One hundred acres within the asphalt reach of a city like
Charlotte or Jackson may have a high development value; a similar
piece of land in a rural section may bring only a fraction as
much. The share of land value contributed by the forest is also
difficult to pin down. Perhaps as much as one-half of the total value
of black-owned forestland (again, representing roughly fifty to
seventy percent of the total black land-holding) can be attributed to
the value of the trees growing on the land. Because of their high
value in today's market, pine stands disproportionately contribute to
this total value.
          Markets for forest products are highly changeable. Yet the
financial advantage of selling pine timber relative to other species
seems very likely to continue for the next ten to thirty years. During
this same period, local or regional markets (such as in North
Carolina's furniture belt) may also be strong for hardwood species
such as oak, walnut and maple. But the greatest forest asset of small
owners today, and the best promise for financial return, remains pine
softwood stands--many of them on minority lands--growing across the
region.
          Pine stands demand special management techniques, and both the need
for such techniques as well as the potential scale of forest income
are peculiarly rooted in the historical origins of the pine
forest. Exploring the social and ecological past of the Southern pine
forest can bring the current situation of forestland in the South--its
opportunities and problems--into sharper focus.
          Of the forty million acres of pineland in private ownership in the
South, most are the unexpected inheritance of agricultural change
during the years from 1930-50. Stephen Boyce of the US Forest Service
has told this story best in a series of fine technical articles on
wood supplies in the South. The generation of Southern farmers of this
period realized that with the help of new tractor and chemical
fertilizers, they could make their production goals on much smaller
acreages. New farm policies seeking to restrict production encouraged
them in this adjustment, and this, along with direct dislocation,
contributed to the acreage of land left unplowed and fallow. When the
land was left uncultivated, pine seeds, windblown from trees along
field edges, took root and grew into a new extensive pine
forest. Today these twenty-five to fifty-year-old pines constitute
much of the regional forest asset that investors are now
discovering. True to their beginnings, the Southern pinelands remain
largely in the hands of farmers and small landowners black and
white.
          An aerial photograph showing green. old field patches of pine in
the corner of a Piedmont or Coastal Plain county can be read like a
still-shot of land change. Five or so major species of pine are the
dominant old field species in the South because they germinate and
come to maturity under full sunlight better than other trees. They are
not tolerant of the shade cast by a neighbor. Common ecological
threads tie together all of the pine stand patches. The trees are
often growing on less productive soils that follow the farmers' logic:
steeper, drier slopes and eroded fields were the first abandoned. The
pines can slowly heal some of the damage done to this ground.
          Once it takes hold, the pine forest has a lifespan stretching to
150 years. The early life of the pine stand sees seedlings gradually
crowd out the yellow of broom-sedge and asters to form a thick
canopy. By middle age, the number of trees in the stand drops off
sharply, and those that are left grow taller and more
valuable. Eventually the growth rate of these trees tapers off, and
longer-lived trees such as oaks or elm and hickory begin to grow
faster than the pines and finally outlive them. Forest management can
be effective in improving the value of pine stands during the middle
years--roughly from thirty to sixty--of their life.
          Most of the millions of acres of pine forest growing on small,
privately-owned tracts across the South are now entering this critical
period. Though these thousands of individual stands are not all
equally promising, the larger acreages have a particularly strong
potential to make forest management pay off through building long-term
income. As the trees on private land age, this possibility will begin
to diminish. Around the end of the century, about the time that the
post war generation of Southerners reaches retirement age, a decline
will be in full swing.
          Today so many of these old-field pine stands, now entering maturity
in the financial sense, are being cut that forest economists are
predicting a dip in the Southeastern softwood supplies. At the same
time, small landowners are not renewing these stands through tree
planting or other measures. What is showing up in the 

graphs as a
small tilt today will become a serious shift twenty or thirty years
down the road, when the current southern softwood surplus has been
opportunistically consumed. Even though corporations have begun
extensive planting programs to try to insure a portion of their future
wood supplies, they cannot make up the deficit on their lands alone. A
serious and unfortunate consequence is that corporations are
responding to this dilemma by turning toward establishing intensive
forest plantations on Southern wetlands such as peatlands and alluvial
river bottoms. Serious environmental damage results from converting
natural forest ecosystems to simplified, single species
landscapes. The consequences of wetland conversion range from losing
genetic diversity as native plants and animals are pushed out by
uniform monocultural plantings, to short-circuiting the complex
pathways by which wetlands regulate water flows and buffer
pollution. In light of this, it makes environmental sense to continue
and even intensify the harvest of trees off oldfield stands with a
history of disturbance like those commonly on small land-holdings. The
alternative is, all too plainly, to allow corporations to continue to
gamble with large scale modification of natural systems valuable to
all Southerners.
          Intensifying the management and harvest of trees off private lands
makes good economic sense for the small landowner as well. However,
just as there are makes opportunities to make this choice worthwhile,
minority landowners are being pushed out of a market that they, along
with other small holders, have dominated for years.
          Part of the problem has to do with the way in which small
landowners view the financial potential of their forests. Most are
accustomed to treating forest land as a nest egg or savings account
with a small investment return. Yet anyone who has counted the annual
growth rings on a stick of firewood has witnessed the rate of which
trees add to their "principal". And the market price for wood has
increased steadily over this century Given this, long-term forest
income can more closely resemble an annuity with continued growth
beyond inflation. However, active forest management is nearly always
necessary to make this promise a reality.
          Most of the pine forests owned by private individuals in the South
grow and are cut without the benefit of sound forestry practices. When
these lands are not properly managed, or are sold or foreclosed,
another corridor to a stronger rural economy is closed off for
blacks. On the mature pine stands, the manner in which trees are
harvested has a great deal to do with the future income that can
result from the forest. For example, clear-cutting/he family property
all at once will often result in a second forest of far less value
than that initially on the land, particularly if the original forest
was an old field pine stand. Over the past decade, only twenty percent
of the pine stands cut in the South have returned to pine through
natural reseeding from nearby trees. Another twenty percent, mainly on
larger holdings, was replanted. For financially hardpressed
landowners, the investment in purchasing and setting out seedlings
makes planting a difficult step to take. As a result, cashing in on a
nest egg of old-field pines may well be impossible the second time
around.
          Foresters have developed middle-of-the-road cutting techniques that
may offer a way out of the cycle of clear-cutting and neglect that is
today's rule. Two methods of cutting and regenerating the
forest--"group selection" and "shelterwood"--are promising. These
techniques work with the existing mature forest to renew the stand as
the forest is harvested over a period of years. Under shelterwood
management, thinnings are carried out early in the life of the forest;
then, when the forest stand reaches middle age, two or more
substantial cuttings are made. As the canopy is opened, light falling
on the forest floor will allow a second generation of pines to grow
under the old stand of trees. When the original stand is removed, a
new vigorous pine generation will be ready to take its place. The
group selection technique creates a forest of patches of
different-aged trees by making many small openings in the forest
canopy from year to year.
          Shelterwood and group selection management styles may hold
financial advantages for the small owner as well. Since frequent
cuttings are made, income will be received on a regular schedule
rather than all at once. When a stand is finally harvested, another
stand will be approaching a point at which it too will be financially
productive. These techniques are not useful on all lands--particularly
less fertile ones. However, they are currently being used on only a
small fraction of the Southern forest on which they could be
effective.
          The difficulties of bringing minority-held forest land under
productive forestry practices also lie outside of, as well as in, the
woods. The average size of forest tracts held by black owners is
small, probably less than fifty acres. On land-holdings of this size,
it is difficult to obtain management advice while the stand of trees
is growing, and to 

schedule sound patterns of harvest for profitable
sales. However, as the trees mature, there are many possible
strategies for overcoming these handicaps. Organizing marketing and
management cooperatives among small landowners may offer one way out
of this problem. The chief advantage is that, by combining ownerships,
co op members can gain more leverage and demand better prices from
buyers of timber and pulpwood. Yet cooperatives without a loyal
membership and good technical advice have a hit-or-miss record of
success.
          Small landowners also must find a path through the tangled thicket
of forest law. Timber sales, contracts, and the determination of tax
liability all require special knowledge. Because forestry policy
making is a very specialized domain, isolated from scrutiny by the
general public, much of what is on the books is pitched toward
corporations and larger owners. Yet there are opportunities here as
well, particularly with regard to taxation and direct
subsidies. Owners of forestland or timber are afforded favorable
long-term capital gains status on the sale value of their trees, and
on management costs that improve forest growth. Also on the positive
side, a joint state-federal "Forestry Incentives Program" can pay up
to half of the cost of reforesting cutover land, or caring for the
forest. In many areas forest lands qualify for special ad valorem
property tax status, which can reduce the cost of owning
land. However, all of these programs remain under-subscribed by small
land owners. Most do not know of their existence.
          In every Southern state there are federal and state agencies that
could be key players in offering forest management assistance to
minority landowners. These public service organizations are split
between groups concerned specifically with the forest--such as State
Forestry Services--and groups like the Farmers Home Administration
(FmHA), the Soil Conservation Service, and Agricultural Stabilization
and Conservation Service--that are concerned mainly with farmers and
farm owners. The latter group of agencies, especially the FmHA, has
come under sharp criticism for failing to directly address the
problems faced by black farmers. The Civil Rights Commission report
found that the FmHA "has not given adequate emphasis or priority to
dealing with the crisis facing black farmers today . . . The level of
assistance provided [to minorities] is insufficient to correct the
effects of past inequalities or to reflect the urgency of the problem
at hand." One reason for lack of involvement by the FmHA is the small
size of most black farms. American agriculture, and American forestry
as well, emphasize bigness, leaving behind the small scale family farm
for an integrated, corporate, tomorrow. Yet there is persuasive
evidence that small farms are not in themselves less efficient in
terms of crop productivity or energy expenditure. Instead, the problem
largely lies in the language of regulations, in market structures, and
in the perceptions of loan bankers and some agency personnel.
          The same biases and problems carry over to small-scale forest
owners and the agencies they could call on for help. State forestry
services are often closely allied to forest industry, and, in spite of
this alliance, many are relatively poorly funded. These agencies have
also failed to focus imaginatively on the problem of underproductivity
of small landowners in particular, much less on the especially urgent
problems of minority holders. Yet in forestry there remains a
widespread allegiance to the worth of small forests, and this belief
could provide an underpinning for building programs targeted to aid
minority property owners.
          Realizing the full potential of forests to contribute to the
financial health of small landowners will require effort. State and
federal agencies concerned with forestry and conservation will need to
work hard to reach minority landowners. Links to wood and lumber
markets will need to be forged, and small landowners must be open to a
new way of viewing their forest land--as an asset to be carefully
cultivated. This is a long and difficult agenda, but a basic
resilience in the Southern land, which engendered today's productive
pine forest out of agricultural dislocation, gives room for
optimism.
          A sense of this strength in the land comes through in Ellen
Glasgow's turn-of-the-century novel Burren Ground. The
post-Reconstruction southside Virginia is resistent to the efforts of
farmers at cultivation: Although "Spring after Spring the cultivated
ground appeared to shrink into told fields' where scrub pine or oak
succeeded broomsedge and sassafrass as inevitably as Autumn into
Winter," still. "Now and then a fresh start would be made." Like these
lines, the succession of chapters--"Broomsedge, Pine and Life
Everlasting" in the book also signal regeneration. Good management of
the natural tendency of land toward forest can be turned to the
advantage of small landowners, and give them an edge on
survival. Forestry practiced in a way responsible to the land as well
as to the ledger can help minorities to remain in possession of their
rural Southern heritage.
          
            Tom Hatley, native of North Carolina, forester and
writer, is spending the summer at the International Institute for
Applied Systems Analysis in Laxenburg, Austria.
          
        
        
          Can We Be Saved from School Savers?
          By Gaston, PaulPaul Gaston
          Vol. 5, No. 4, 1983, pp. 10-11
          
          Before I had a university professorship, wrote a book, received a
Ph.D., won a Fulbright to study abroad, and graduated from the college
of my choice, I spent fifteen years (three of them as a
kindergartener) working in wood, clay, leather, and silver; singing;
acting; folk dancing; playing sports and games of all sorts; and, yes,
basket weaving (using Alabama long-leaf pineneedles)--all in a school
where these things were thought to be as educational--as basic--as
reading and mathematics.
          In fact, we didn't categorize things that way, which is one reason
why I react badly every time someone talks about going back to the
basics. What are the basics basic to, I always wonder. In our school,
folk dancing was as important as American History; Arts and Crafts as
essential as Chemistry. When we were very young, before we were eight,
nature walks were part of our daily routine and learning to read was
something we didn't do--there would be plenty of time when we were
ready for it. Everything we did was basic and some of what others now
call "the basics" we left out until it was time for them.
          I don't believe the members of the National Commission on
Excellence in Education would share the enthusiasm I have for my
school. But, then, I feel the same way about their " imperative for
educational reform." AII of those litanies to "excellence," "quality,"
"standards," and "tough demands"--not to mention the
jingoism--frighten me with the vision of joyless students obediently
churning out higher test scores.
          Every time I am confronted with such blatant examples of
competition, coercion and mindlessness as the American way of
learning, I think back to the School of Organic Education, in
Fairhope, Alabama, where I went, and wish that its values and
assumptions could be our inspiration.
          The founder of our school--a remarkable woman named Marietta
Johnson--always said "education is growth." By this she meant that
education should not be training or preparation for future demands but
the proper nurturing of immediate needs of the whole organism. She
called her idea "organic education" and she strongly believed that no
part of a child's development should be isolated from another without
the danger of warping the child. The spiritual, mental, and physical
must always be kept in balance; stressing one to the detriment of
another would damage the whole child.
          Because this philosophy pervaded the school--not just the faculty
but also the pupils--we never thought about which courses were
academic or more basic than others, which would assure you of the
college of your choice and which would condemn you to a trade
school. There was no "tracking system" and had anyone ever proposed a
"college preparatory" class the idea would have perplexed us. The best
preparation for the future, we believe, was unselfconscious absorption
in the things that naturally and properly interested us at any given
stage of growth. We quite literally prepared for the future by not
preparing for it.
          I don't remember if there were SATs in my day. I'm certain that if
they existed as a requirement for college admission we would never
have set them up as goals to work toward. Tests were as alien to our
idea of education as were honors courses, acceleration,
specialization, and preparing for a career. We had no tests or marks
in pottery or drama--everyone understood we did those things because
we liked them--and it worked the same way for Spanish and Shakespeare:
we studied because we wanted to, without being ranked, compared, and
classified. One of our major articles of faith was that learning is
its own reward.
          And we found that learning is intensely satisfying. Because our
teachers helped us to care about what we studied, treated our opinions
with respect, and encouraged us to share, defend, and refine them, we
learned to read and write and reason because those things were
important to us, not to meet someone else's expectations of what we
ought to be.
          Tests, examinations, grades, promotions, honors, rewards and other
invidious distinctions masquerading as incentives to learning were all
perversions of the educational system, we believed. If you worked to
get a good grade or to beat out somebody else, you were warping your
own growth, undermining your own education. Why would anyone do
that?
          No one failed at our school; and, with no failure, the roots of
fear were cut off. That released power in many persons who might
otherwise have been crushed early in life. With no honor rolls--no
awards for any achievements--there was less chance for false pride to
develop and more support for the idea of achievement as its own and
sufficient reward. With no grades there was no cheating. Cheating was
one of those absurdities we 

jokingly called "un-organic." Later, when
we went to college, we looked on those who boasted of their
anti-cheating "honor codes" as being curiously perverted.
          We varied greatly in our talents and backgrounds--we were a good
cross section of the community--but the school helped each of us to
grow to our potential. There was no mechanical formula for this, no
system that could be designed and mandated by some educational
authority. Far more important than method or technique were the values
and assumptions of our teachers. They believed in the school's
philosophy, in organic education. They had faith that if you valued
each pupil as a unique individual, took them where they were and
worked from there, everything would turn out fine in the long run.
          There were certainly standards--we all knew we were expected to do
our best--but we never had what the National Commission would call
"objective" standards that would show whether an individual student
was measuring up to the norm or not. There simply were no fixed
reference points by which we could be placed in a continuum in
relationship to our peers. We were ourselves in an environment deeply
mistrustful of measuring and comparing.
          There was discipline, too. We were not a "do as you please"
school. But the discipline we had was not imposed by rules and
regulations, fear of punishment or lust for reward. It was
self-discipline that emerged quite naturally from our confidence in
the school and in ourselves and our keen sense of what was right and
what was wrong.
          Along with confidence we had great pride in the school. Our school
spirit--intense and pervasive--was rooted in a belief that we were
part of an important experiment in social democracy. John Dewey
visited the school in 1913, just six years after it opened, and he
made a famous report, stating that the school was showing "how the
ideal of equal opportunity is to be transmuted into reality." Our
founder said many times that equal opportunity exists only when all
children are provided the conditions for the full development of their
capacity. We believed those conditions existed at our school. I
suppose we were naive, but we held proudly to the idea that our school
pointed the way to a sounder, more just and humane democratic
society.
          Thirty-seven years after graduation I am still naive enough to
believe that we had the right idea. I know the National Commission
doesn't have it.
          
            Paul M. Gaston teaches history at the University of
Virginia and its the author of The New South Creed
(Knopf) and the forthcominq Women of Fair Hope. He is a
member of the executive committee of the Southern Regional
Council.
          
        
        
          Denial of Tenure At Vanderbilt
          By Gaillard, FryeFrye Gaillard
          Vol. 5, No. 4, 1983, pp. 7-8
          
          By almost any measure, the last year has been a good one for
Elizabeth Langland. Her first two books, published by the University
of Chicago Press and the University Press of New England, have drawn
praise from the critics, and a third book--Society and the
Novel--has been accepted by the University of North Carolina
Press.
          In addition, her teaching is going well at Converse College in
Spartanburg, S.C., where Langland is the 34-year-old Chairman of the
English Department. Teaching generally goes well for Langland. She was
widely acclaimed by the students at Vanderbilt, where she taught until
1982, and where students lined up one hundred and twenty at a time for
her British Novels class.
          But Langland was forced to leave Vanderbilt. The University's Arts
and and Science Dean, Jacque Vogeli, overruled a recommendation by the
school's English faculty that she become the first woman in the
department's history to be granted tenure. That decision has sparked a
federal lawsuit and a national controversy, and Vanderbilt's image has
taken a beating.
          The court case will be heard sometime in October. In the meantime,
Vanderbilt officials have sought to defend themselves against charges
of egregious sexism, which is a difficult task, given the facts that
are available to the University's critics. At the time of Langland's
tenure vote, for example, Vanderbilt's Arts and Science College had
two hundred and ten tenured faculty members, of whom two hundred and
three were male.
          There were already "grumblings about those statistics. But the
complaints grew louder after June 13,1981, when Langland was summoned
to the office of English Department Chairman James Kilroy. "The news
is not good," Kilroy told her. And he read her a letter from Vogeli,
approximately two pages of single-spaced type, informing her that her
tenure request was being denied. Vogeli, who had approved tenure for
twenty-nine men and one woman during his time as a Vanderbilt dean,
ordered Kilroy not to show Langland the letter or allow her to take
any notes on its contents. Just read it to her once, Vogeli had
said.
          Still, Langland got the gist of it. Vogeli found her scholarship
deficient; she had failed, he said to establish "a national
reputation" in her field.
          Langland was shaken and dismayed. but many of her colleagues were
outraged. One of the angriest was Susan Ford Wiltshire, a tenured,
Southern-bred classics professor who arrived at Vanderbilt in
1971. Wiltshire knew that no woman hired after that had been granted
tenure at Vanderbilt, despite lofty assurances by the school's
administration that Vanderbilt was committed to equality.
          In addition, Wiltshire was familiar with Langland's credentials as
a teacher and a scholar--the three books she had written or edited
during three years at Vanderbilt, a time during which she also wrote
several scholarly articles, chaired the University's Women Studies
Program and taught at least three courses a semester.
          "Elizabeth was widely recognized as one of the genuinely excellent
teachers on campus," said Wiltshire. "As for Jacque Vogeli's
estimation of her scholarship, there are a great many
people--including the majority of her own department, and more
recently, critics around the country--who clearly disagree with
him."
          For Wiltshire and many others, the issue boiled down to this:
Despite Vanderbilt's atrocious record in promoting women faculty
members, a University dean went out of his way--took the unusual step
of overruling the recommendation of a respected department--to deny
tenure to an excellent teacher and promising young scholar.
          The move seems all the more surprising in view of Vanderbilt's
national reputation for excellence. The English department has long
been one of the best in the South, with writers such as Robert Penn
Warren and John Crowe Ransom passing through in recent decades. 

And
during the political and social turbulence of the 1960s, Vanderbilt's
chancellor at the time, Alexander Heard, stood up strongly for
academic freedom--keeping his campus peaceful not by threats of
repression, but by honest open dialogue that impressed even the most
radical of students.
          Vanderbilt people take pride in all that. But they also wince at
the University's shabbier moments, including its decision in 1960 to
dismiss the Reverend James Lawson from its graduate divinity
program. Lawson was black, and his offense, in the eyes of the
Vanderbilt administration, was to lead sit-in demonstrations at
Nashville lunch counters.
          Harvie Branscomb, Vanderbilt's chancellor before Heard, explained
the University's position this way: "There is no issue involved of
freedom or thought, or of conscience, or of speech, or of the right to
protest against social custom. The issue is whether or not the
University can be identified with a continued campaign of mass
disobedience of law as a means of protest."
          Susan Wiltshire and other critics argue that the same institutional
defensiveness and startling lapse of vision have characterized
Vanderbilt's handling of the Elizabeth Langland case. As proof, they
cite Vogeli's recent quotes in a student publication:
          "(The press) reported that I denied tenure. I do not deny tenure. I
sometimes fail to concur with a department recommendation. There is a
difference. Deny has a pejorative ring. Deny implies that tenure is
something that rightfully belongs to a faculty member, and that I am
preventing that member from receiving it. It is like saying your
professor denied you an A."
          Wiltshire, Langland and many of their colleagues were unimpressed,
at the least, by Vogeli's stance, and they formed an organization
called WEAV (Women's Equity at Vanderbilt) to push the Langland case
and to raise the larger questions about women's equality. Regardless
of the outcome of the Langland suit, the WEAV members are convinced
their efforts will have a long-run effect.
          "The history of this institution will be significantly altered by
what has happened in the last year and a half," concludes
Wiltshire. "Elizabeth Langland and Jim Lawson each said 'no' to the
'no'--and that makes all the difference."
          
            Frye Gaillard, a Southern author and editorial writer at
the Charlotte Observer, is a graduate of Vanderbilt,
class of '68.
          
        
      
    
  