
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 5, Number 6, 1983
        
          Kissing Honest Politics Goodbye, Again?
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 5, No. 6, 1983, pp. 1-3
          
          George Wallace's election with significant black support in Alabama
in 1982 reaffirmed that politics makes strange bedfellows in the
South. This November, Bill Allain's close election in the Mississippi
governor's race suggests in 1983 that bedfellows make strange Southern
politics.
          A state attorney general who has opposed Mississippi's big
utilities and the Delta leaders of the state legislature, Allain
almost lost his bid for governor when, three weeks prior to the
general election, supporters of his Republic opponent produced
affidavits from three black males alleging that Allain had sought
their services as male prostitutes. In the middle of October, before
the public allegations, Allain was leading in the polls by a margin of
more than thirty percentage points. After the disclosures, he won by a
margin of less than ten percent of the vote.
          While the truth of the allegations remains undecided, the episode
is the clearest instance of a new trend in the dirty politics of guilt
by association. In the South's politics, the most durable form of such
trickery is, of course, race baiting. For generations, any white
candidate associated with blacks or black causes earned instant
discredit with white voters.
          As late as the 1960s and '70s, key segregationists owed their
political careers to race baiting. One of the most effective recent
examples came in 1970 in Alabama when George Wallace's supporters used
a photograph to taint his opponent, Governor Albert Brewer. After the
primary election, Wallace found himself behind Brewer in a run
off. Faced with the need to get out as many white voters as possible,
the supporters of Wallace went to work. At almost every crossroads
store in south Alabama, leaflets appeared showing Brewer's daughter
holding hands and smiling at a young black teenage boy.

          While Brewer agonized publicly about the "vicious attacks" upon his
family, he was fixed. He could not attack Wallace directly for
doctoring the photographs. Because a good black turnout was absolutely
necessary to defeat Wallace, Brewer could not make the Southern white
politician's traditional response: that he would never allow his
daughter to hold hands with a black boy. His failure to rise to the
charges was sensationalized into the political imagery and gossip,
picturing Brewer as approving race-mixing, interracial dating and
interracial marriage. With a heavy turnout from rural, white counties,
Wallace won the election.
          These techniques are still found in local politics in the South,
but race-baiting in statewide Southern politics now appears to be the
exception. Although the 1984 North Carolina Senate compaign is already
heated with racial rhetoric, most candidates seeking statewide office
today seek black support. Those who do not, usually fear the reaction
of whites to a campaign of race-baiting. Yet, as Bill Allain's
problems show, "gay-baiting" has now arrived, and in several
instances, has succeeded race-baiting in statewide campaigns.
          The Mississippi race isn't an isolated instance of gay-baiting,
only the most recent and most public example in Deep South
politics. In the last two races for governor in Alabama, rumors have
been spread to taint one of the candidates as a homosexual. In 1978,
Attorney General Bill Baxley was seeking the governor's chair and
political gossip suggested that bachelor Bill was gay and hired
homosexuals on his staff. The stories spread and were accepted with
amazing credulity even among the most crafty political observers. A
lawyer who had helped mastermind George Wallace's election in 1962 on
a segregationist platform said to me in 1977, "Of course it's
true. Look at the boy's rosy cheeks. He's funny all right."
          Last year, gay-baiting reappeared in Alabama's governor's
race. Lieutenant Governor George MacMillan, who has a high-pitched
voice and a gentle, if energetic, demeanor, was running for governor
against George Wallace. Rumors spread that MacMillan was
homosexual. The gossip was supported by reference to MacMillan's
physical traits. "Just listen to that boy. Watch him. He's as sissy as
they get," I was told in 1982 by a Montgomery lobbyist. MacMillan lost
the runoff.
          Now in Mississippi, the political technique has been refined even
further: rumors are "substantiated" with news conferences. For several
weeks before the news release against Allain, rumors were spread
across the state that the state attorney general was a
homosexual. Allain is single by divorce. He is also so white-skinned
that his cheeks flush very visibly at times. Qualified by
stereotypical characteristics, Allain was rumored as a sex-starved
homosexual who cruised Jackson streets in search of male
prostitutes. In late October when the signed affidavits were made
public, the attorney general angrily denied the charges. His ex-wife
went on television denying them. Still, Allain's standing among
Mississippi voters dropped and he lost much of his enormous lead.
          While Allain and other candidates can deny these sorts of charges
without fear of offending a large segment of statewide voters, they
have trouble making an effective political response. In Mississippi,
Allain and his ex-wife's defense was met with references to their
divorce papers in which she alleged that the two had not slept
together for a few years. Allain also could not run the political risk
of viciously attacking, in the racist rhetoric of the old Southern
politics, the personal credibility of his three black accusers. He was
dependent on blacks as voters, not as scapegoats.
          While Allain's responses were politically limited, his opponents
were able to taint and taunt him, a white male Southern politician,
with the accusations of interracial homosexuality.
          In Alabama, when candidate Baxley faced the rumors, state political
reporters speculated that both his marriage and subsequent fatherhood
conveniently met political needs.
          Four years later, facing rumors about his sexual preference, George
MacMillan began every political speech by calling his wife and
children to the podium. MacMillan also began speaking and acting more
imperatively and abruptly--an obvious effort to show some "manly"
mannerisms. At the end of the campaign, he appeared at times a
caricature of a Southern orator with exaggerated gestures that seldom
matched what he was saying. His efforts simply made him look awkward
and inarticulate, contradictions of the two characteristics which had
won him past political success.
          Although no candidate's defeat can be attributed only to rumors of
homosexuality, the charges obviously have a deteriorating effect upon
politics in general. Physical attributes take on unreasonable
importance. Gay stereotypes go unquestioned or get carried to greater
extremes of exaggeration. Significant issues are abandoned for
precious days or weeks during a campaign while the media and public
explore what a candidate does between the bed sheets. And, the most
likely victims of gay-baiting in 

politics, as with race-baiting, turn
out to be those candidates with support from progressive or liberal
voting groups in the South.
          Perhaps the most troubling aspect of the prospect of gay-baiting is
that nothing in the present Southern political scene appears to be an
obstacle to its increased use as a ploy. While the increase of black
voters was able to slow down race-baiting, the South's gay population
is not a political force in any statewide election and is not likely
to become one in the foreseeable future. Thus, supporters of
candidates who spread rumors or bankroll the search for affidavits
about a candidate's homosexuality have nothing to lose and every
advantage to gain if their rumors and charges are circulated.
          In Mississippi today, Governor-elect Allain portrays his victory as
the repudiation of gay-baiting. Yet, political strategists are not
likely to ignore the fact that he lost twenty percent of his support
in only three weeks simply because of the allegations of
homosexuality. Rather than demonstrating a firm rejection of this
trick, Mississippians have made it an even more seductive come-on for
the Southern politician who lusts for victory at any cost. With the
passing of race-baiting as the universal ploy in this area of the
South's statewide politics, gay-baiting may become the surest
political kiss of death.
          
            Steve Suitts is the executive director of the Southern
Regional Council.
          
        
        
          New Federalism and Minority Rights: After Three Years
          By Willingham, AlexAlex Willingham
          Vol. 5, No. 6, 1983, pp. 3-5
          
          When Ronald Reagan was elected President, he was widely regarded as
a threat to the progressive social policies gradually put in place
over the preceding five decades. In the main these policies--in civil
rights, economic justice, environmental protection, care for the aged
and handicapped, rights of the accused--had been based on an expanding
federal role in domestic affairs. Reagan attacked these policies
directly. He criticized them as costly. He questioned the very
propriety of federal involvement. The arguments were not new but
Reagan's attack was particularly troubling because persons sharing his
views made major gains in decision-making positions during the
election of 1980.
          Furthermore there was a self-conscious effort to avoid compromise
or moderation in developing alternative policies. The new President
believed that a major part of the problem had been a reluctance even
on the part of conservative administrators, including Jimmy Carter's,
to put forth bold plans to brake the expanding role of the federal
government. His strategy was to redefine federal-state relations. Thus
the "New Federalism" of Reaganomics was a direct challenge to the
array of protections that social liberalism had valued since the
1930s.
          Reagan did make a bold step to change things, particularly in the
heady first year when his influence was highest. But in the three
years of his administration, dramatic change in federal-state
relations has been minimal--a curious circumstance given the
self-conscious attention brought to the question of federalism. We
might ask why the results have been so small? The answer lies, I
believe, in a certain contradiction within the Administration's
philosophy of government.
          We may review the record. Attempts by the Reagan Administration to
change federal-state relations started with proposals for a "block
grant" system that would continue federal funding to local govenments
but eliminate federal administration. The block grant tactic was a
sort of half-way house between the old categorical federal aid system
and a system of unregulated revenue sharing. Under the categorical
system the federal government sets specific purposes and guidelines
for administration. Under revenue sharing there are no strings
attached to federal money sent to local governments.
          Even though the latter system would fit better the "states' rights"
philosophy of Reaganism, it was unacceptable primarily because it
contradicted another of this Administration's cherished principles:
that social wellbeing is only promoted through private sector market
relations. Therefore, coupled with the return of federal power to the
states was a proposed cut in the level of funding amounting to between
twenty and twenty-five percent in the funding levels of block grant
programs in the 1981 proposals.
          Reagan's federalism reform attempted to serve two contrary
purposes. The call for local control evoked values of democracy. It
painted the traditional liberal policy with its over-reliance on
Washington as antipopulist. When pursuing this line, the
Administration tried to take advantage of a growing conviction, among
diverse local officials and community based groups, that it is
desirable to expand local initiatives. This conviction reflected a
residual American distruct of central government and a growing
confidence among some community groups that local alliance 

could be
struck to protect and expand hard won opportunities.
          That conviction was evident in several forms. During the first year
of the Reagan administration one of the more loyal spokesmen for the
reform plan was Georgia Governor George Busbee, then chairman of the
National Governor's Association. And, while national staffs of
associations of local officials remained skeptical about the proposal,
local chapters tended to support it. Civil rights groups were dubious,
especially concerning the impact in the rural South, but even in race
relations there was no denying the growing legitimacy and influence of
black voters and public officials at the local levels. Empowerment of
minorities was likely to coninue if, as finally did happen, federal
voting rights protections were reenacted.
          In this atmosphere the Reagan Administration did make some bold
moves. A specific proposal for block grants was included in the
Economic Recovery Plan put forth within months of taking office. A
more detailed plan was subsequently proposed to Congress when the
revised FY 1982 federal budget (Reagan's first) was submitted. That
budget emerged as the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, still the
crowning legislative achievement of the Reagan presidency and a symbol
of his power at its highest. The Act contained nine block grants,
substantially fewer than the President wanted but still a change of
large dimensions. The $7.7 billion would eventually change hands based
on funding limits set in the Reconciliation Act.
          In 1982 the administration proposed a "revolutionary" New
Federalism plan that would replace the block grant system already in
place. This was the widely publicized proposal containing the
"swap/turnback" scheme and the federal trust fund. Under the swap, the
federal government would take full responsibility for all medical
assistance programs while the states would take responsibility for
AFDC, food stamps, and a number of other categorical programs. The
"trust fund" would be funded by federal excise taxes. The fund would
be distributed to the states over a four-year period. They could
either continue present services or divert the trust fund money to
some other area. Reagan proposed to phase out this trust fund after
four years--a firm target date when the federal role in local affairs
would end.
          The 1982 New Federalism proposal was sketched out in the January
State of the Union Address. Specific legislative proposals were to be
sent later. Meanwhile, the President continued his initiative by
proposing to expand block grants. These proposals were placed in the
Executive Budget submitted to Congress. The budgetary proposals would
follow the example of a year earlier, creating new block grants that
would in effect relinquish federal responsibility in certain program
areas. The reform of federal state relations was moving on two
tracks.
          All observers, including the President's detractors, concluded that
during the early months of 1982, he had succeeded in focusing public
attention on federalism reform. It was labeled the centerpiece of his
domestic policy. These federalism proposals were promoted with the
same optimism as the proposals in the budget battles six months
before. The sheer magnitude of the proposed changes, and a certain
regard for the president's momentum, commanded attention as many
groups debated the merits. Congress reviewed the expanded block grant
system in the federal budget while it awaited the Administration's
legislative package embodying proposals for the broader
reform. Intense public debate occurred in the context of expectations
of inevitable change in federal-state relations.
          But the federalism reform movements of 1982 never got on track in a
practical sense. By midyear the Administration had not sent a specific
legislative package to Congress as promised. Public discussion,
although intense, was limited to the proposals sketched in the January
speech. These were subject to diverse interpretations. The President
did not communicate an overriding goal for federalism reform and,
increasingly, his motives became the issue. Was he aiming to increase
local autonomy? Was he primarily concerned about reducing the role of
government?
          Local officials who would welcome the former feared the latter,
especially in an era of declining economic conditions in the
states. Many became convinced that the call for local control, while
couched in sometimes appearing philosophical terms, in fact masked a
concrete drive to cut back federal resources in the local communities
and, generally, to cripple the public effort in social development. In
this way the 1982 federalism reform proposals lost credibility with
local officials and stirred the ire of traditional liberals.
          The Administration may have been able to build a consensus had it
not met its own internal contradictions. It was unable to unify its
forces. The budget cutters supported the programs as a way to reduce
the federal budget. Conservative ideologues feared the proposal
because the expansionary implications of the swap for medical services
seemed to carry the beginnings of a bureaucracy which could ultimately
lead to "socialized" medicine. In spite of an auspicious start, no
part of the 1982 federalism reform proposals have become law. The
Reagan Administration never submitted a specific legislative package
and Congress refused to accept any of the proposed block grants in the
budget.
          The turn-around was dramatic in other ways, too. The year before,
Busbee, as chairman of the governor's group, had pleaded for support
of the federalism reform even as a member of the opposite political
party. In 1982, his replacement (Richard Snelling of Vermont), though
generally a loyal Republican, became increasingly critical of the
federalism proposals, declaring them dead in December.
          But Reagan's federalism reform was to have one more chance. In
January of 1983, the President once again called for major overhaul in
federal-state relations. In February, he submitted a comparatively
modest plan to Congress based on the block grant system. But the
debate of 1982 had taken its toll. The 1983 proposals were given a
flashy introduction and supportive testimony to Congress was made by
Budget Director David Stockman. But, after that, the proposals
received no serious attention.
          Nor are the prospects very bright for any federalism reform in
1984. An election year makes any major change difficult. Ironically,
the improved business climate argues against justifying any such
change to pecuniary enterprise. Finally the President himself seems to
have decided that foreign affairs need his attention and has entered
major engagements of American troops abroad.
          Has the Reagan federalism reform effort been a failure? The answer
here would have to be yes and no. There clearly 

has not been the whole scale reform
that Reagan wanted. In that sense he has failed. On the other hand a
fledgling block grant system is in place and the effect has been
increased latitude for local officials. It is a significant system
that will be of interest to community groups and others concerned
about empowerment at the local level.
          Does the apparent end of the Administration's states' rights push
mean an end to its challenge to federal institutions that protect the
disadvantaged? The answer is no! It only means that one tact has so
far proved ineffective. The Reagan Administration still has full
control of other federal compliance mechanisms (with the possible
exception of the U. S. Civil Rights Commission, a non-enforcement
agency), and has established a track record of lax enforcement
faithful to its anti-liberal views. The failure, so far, of the
Administration's federalism reform is merely brief respite in an
otherwise continuing attack on the rights of minorities.
          
            Alex Willingham is a political scientist currently living
in Shreveport, Louisiana. This article is drawn from his research as a
research fellow in public policy of the Southern Education
Foundation.
          
        
        
          Blockading the Bomb Plant
          By Bowman, SueSue Bowman
          Vol. 5, No. 6, 1983 pp. 5-7
          
          Demonstrations against the deployment of US Cruise and Pershing
missiles have been mounted all over Europe this fall. In West Germany
the campaign is called "Hot Autumn." Included in the protests are
civilly disobedient blockades of the American bases, scheduled as the
deployment sites for the first-strike missiles.
          In the early morning hours of October 24, the Natural Guard
blockaded the "Bomb Plant" in South Carolina, the birthplace of every
one of the United States' nuclear weapons.
          The pre-dawn light revealed about one-hundred people filing down
the shoulder of Highway 125 toward the Jackson gate of the Savannah
River Plant. Cars zipped by, their headlights glancing off the signs
and banners that the protesters carried. The drivers looked straight
ahead and kept moving--it was seven a.m., shift change, and they were
among sixteen hundred workers entering this gate to be at work by 7:45
at SRP, the nation's current producer of bomb-grade plutonium and
tritium.
          At the precise moment it was light enough to distinguish human
forms from shadows, two cars travelling abreast on the highway slowed
and stopped, halting the entire flow of traffic. Occupants of the car,
members of a Natural Guard "affinity group" from Charleston, jumped
out and positioned themselves and their banners in the road. The two
cars pulled away, leaving the determined human roadblock.
          Police, who had expected the protest but were unsure of the form it
would take, immediately moved to arrest the blockaders, but as those
people were dragged away, another group thirty yards back stepped into
the road. This was repeated by three more groups.
          Forty-five minutes later the traffic was still blocked. At one
point the stoppage stretched back to Augusta, Georgia, twelve miles
from the gate. Fifty-four people were arrested at the Jackson gate, as
supporters cheered from the sidelines and chanted, "No Pershing, no
Cruise, either way we all lose!" and "The people united will never be
defeated!"
          At the New Ellenton gate of the three hundred and twelve square
mile facility a group of approximately sixty women who had
participated in a peace camp sponsored by the Women's International
League for Peace and Freedom (WILPF) converged on a busy intersection
at a red light. Twenty-five women blocked that entrance for fifteen
minutes.
          Seventy-nine blockaders were charged with refusing to obey police
officers' orders to leave the highway. Bond was set at $110.25. Some
refused to give their names and were denied bond, some chose to stay
in rather than pay bond for financial or moral reasons, and others
bonded out the same day. Trial was initially set for November 8, but
requests for jury trial have pushed the date to January 9.
          The blockade capped a weekend of anti-nuclear actions that began
with a Saturday rally at a site approved by SRP officials. Speakers at
the rally included Anthony Guarisco of the National Association of
Atomic Veterans, who spent sixty-seven days at ground zero in the
Bikini Islands; Rebecca Johnson, a participant in the two-year-old
peace encampment at Greenham Commons, a US base in England and one of
the first deployment sites for the cruise missiles; Kay Camp, former
member of President Carter's Nuclear Disarmament Committee just
returned from meetings with European peace activists; and many
others.
          The events were sponsored by the Natural Guard, a coalition of
peace, environmental and human rights groups. The platform for the
actions called for a halt to the global testing, production and
deployment of all nuclear weapons, the funding of human needs over the
military, and an independent study of the health and economic impacts
of nuclear weapons production at SRP.
          The Savannah River Plant was constructed hastily in the early
1950s, part of the government's anti-communist thrust and the global
powers' race to gain thermonuclear superiority. The federal Atomic
Energy Commission swallowed 312 square miles--two towns, six thousand
people and 6,100 graves--in a rural corner of South Carolina, taking
chunks out of Barnwell, Aiken and Allendale counties. Displaced
farmers couldn't buy land for what the government paid them, and the
economy quickly shifted from its agricultural base to a dependence on
the Bomb Plant. Today nearly ten thousand people work there. It is
difficult to find a person in the surrounding communities who has no
personal or family connection with the plant.
          SRP is owned by the Department of Energy, direct descendent of the
AEC, and has been operated since the beginning by E.I. duPont de
Nemours. DuPont has so downplayed its connection with the military
that few know of its integral role in nuclear weapons. The company
operates SRP on a cost-plus contract as its "patriotic duty,"
according to a DuPont report entitled "Certain Information About the
Savannah River Plant."
          The facilities include five reactors, three now churning out
plutonium, one inactive, and the L Reactor, scheduled to restart this
year. The L Reactor recently became the subject of a heated
controversy when the state of South Carolina joined a suit by
environmental groups to prevent the reactor from operating without an
Environmental Impact Statement. The DOE reluctantly agreed under legal
order to do an 

expedited EIS, but other questions remain unresolved
and troublesome. The reactor will dump 176°F. water into Steel
Creek because the reactors, unlike commercial plants, have no cooling
towers; radiation releases are not controlled by containment
structures: and the Tuscaloosa aquifer beneath SRP is threatened with
eventual radioactive contamination (officials are now dealing with
chemical contamination in the aquifer).
          Meanwhile, production is being stepped up, with the possibility of
a new reactor being sited at SRP, although there is increasing
sentiment expressed by experts that the plutonium and tritium are not
needed.
          The Bomb Plant has operated for thirty years under the government's
cloak of mysticism--national security. Consequently, most of the
reports on radioactive releases from the plant have been
classified. Dr. Carl Johnson, former Director of Health for Jefferson
County, Colorado, who has done extensive studies on health effects
around the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons facility, examined declassified
documents from SRP and found that routine and accidental releases of
radiation have been several times that reported to the
public. Although vital statistics indicate that rates of infant
mortality, cancer and heart disease are higher study done surrounding
counties, there has never been an independent study of the health
effects caused by SRP's operation.
          An unpublished by DuPont has shown that "lung cancer and leukemia
were significantly increased" among workers at the Savannah River
Plant when compared with other DuPont workers and the general public,
according to Bob Alvarez of the Washington based Environmental Policy
Institute. Alvarez was asked to participate in a Center for Disease
Control evaluation of the study.
          Why did the Natural Guard take on the Bomb Plant with civil
disobedience?
          "Six years ago the Natural Guard took the point on opposition to
nuclear waste and reprocessing with eight-hundred arrests in 1978 and
1979," commented Natural Guard organizer Brett Bursey. "We were then
viewed as the lunatic fringe. Now the governor and even Strom Thurmond
have come around on that issue. Direct action is but one of the
factors that change social and political realities--but I believe it
is a dynamic catalyst that can light fire under an issue. The issue of
nuclear disarmament will be resolved when the social and political
costs outweigh the gains. We plan to be a significant cost they will
have to consider."
          Jill Morris of Athens, Georgia, said she blockaded SRP "because the
Bomb Plant is killing us--and if we don't commit civil disobedience at
the Bomb Plant we're commit tiny ourselves to suicide."
          Local farmer Steve McMillan, who has long been a vocal opponent of
SRP in every other forum available to him, said, "To tell you the
truth, I'm putting my money where my mouth has been. I felt kind of
lonesome out there--I knew I would probably get criticized by a lot of
local people who would look down their nose at me and think I'm crazy,
but it was time for me to take a stand for what I been saying."
          Randy Tatel commented, "When I decided that nuclear weapons were a
political and humanistic insanity, I turned to find a legislator who
represented me...and there were none. Consciously, it fell to my
shoulders to be my own representative and take the military machine
head-on. Civil disobedience then was a natural decision."
          Bursey notes that it is not a frivolous decision. "What we're
seeing now is that the government is ready and willing to crack down
on civil liberties to stem mass protests like this." He pointed to a
legal maneuver by the federal government just before the blockade
which would have drastically altered the character of the
demonstration. "A federal judge virtually declared martial law in
South Carolina."
          One week before the blockade, a US Attorney, prompted by the
Department of Energy, asked federal judge Charles Simons for an
injunction to prevent the Natural Guard from interfering with the
operation of the Savannah River Plant. The injunction would have
provided criminal contempt of court charges against anyone who
trespassed or blocked access to the plant. Wording of the request went
as far as to request that the injunction prevent anyone from aiding,
abetting or assisting someone in trespassing or blocking access to
SRP. It attempted to certify the Natural Guard as a class, subject to
a class action suit, although it is not a membership organization but
"an ad hoc coalition called together to host a specific event."
          U.S. Attorney Henry Dargan McMaster said the broad nature of the
injunction meant protest organizers could be cited for contempt before
the blockade and jailed without bond for six months and possibly
longer. Bursey asked hypothetically, "Does that mean if a church takes
up a collection to support the blockade, they could be held in
contempt for aiding and abetting the blockaders?"
          It was only the point of interfering with access that actually
concerned the blockade plan. The Natural Guard's stated objective was
to block traffic on state property, never intending to trespass on
federal land. The state misdemeanor carries a maximum penalty of
thirty days and/or one hundred dollars, while trespass on SRP property
would have brought a fine of one thousand dollars.
          Federal officials, frustrated that they would have no jurisdiction
and fearing that the state penalties would not discourage protesters,
sought to extend federal authority onto state property. The idea was
that with the injunction in place, the federal government would have
the power to deal with anyone who even looked cross-wise at the
Bomb-Plant if they could convince the court that such activity would
irreparably threaten national security.

          Judge Charles Simons was glad to oblige the US Attorney's
request. Simons is used to power. As Strom Thurmond's former law
partner, maneuvered into judgeship by Thurmond under Nixon, he has
long wielded a stern gavel in South Carolina. In numerous cases before
him Simons has been openly hostile to anti-nuclear protesters. He said
on the record that wherever Brett Bursey goes "violence is likely to
follow". He clearly expresses his view that the Natural Guard is more
than a bunch of pesky demonstrators but a dangerous threat to national
security.
          During the three hour hearing, Simons told Natural Guard attorney
Danny Sheehan, "We do things a little different in South Carolina,"
and proceeded to talk at though he had already ruled even before he
had heard the defense. When defense attorney Lewis Pitts protested,
"We just feel the ballgame's over," the judge snapped, "I happen to be
in the driver's seat and we will move forward."
          "Regardless of the legal niceties I would be inclined to do
whatever is necessary to protect the operation of the bomb plant,"
Simons said.
          The judge was riled by the suggestion that he may not have the
authority to issue the injunction. "I don't care if they (the
protesters) are up in Columbia. I'd have not hesitancy about issuing
an injunction if the operation of the SRP was in question."
          "If I don't have the authority to enjoin, I'd be surprised," he
growled.
          Natural Guard attorney's argued that the injunction violated
separation of powers because there were already penalties established
by state and federal legislators for the violations protesters
intended to commit. Sheehan noted "They are actually subordinating
fundamental constitutional structures to get at these people."
          "Waving the red flag of national security is used frequently to
blind the court," Sheehan insisted.
          Simons was not impressed and he slapped on the injunction with
apparent relish. The ruling confused many people planning to attend
the legal rally on Saturday, who believed Simons had made even that
exercise illegal.
          The Natural Guard made a mad dash for the Fourth Circuit of
Appeals, racing to get a decision before the rally now only days
away. On Friday night, an expedited hearing before one judge gained a
suspension of Simons' order pending a full hearing. Fourth Circuit
judge Francis D. Murnaghas, Jr., ruled that the proposed actions would
not be a grave threat to national security and that the First
Amendment rights of the protectors would be impermissibly infringed
upon by the injunction.
          The constitutional nature of this case has prompted legal
assistance from national and state organizations of the American Civil
Liberties Union as well as several large firms specializing in
constitutional law. The outcome will have implications for any group
planning to demonstrate at federal facilities linked to national
security.
          The many-faceted international opposition to nuclear weapons,
combined with a growing awareness of "the bomb in our backyard," is
tugging away SRP's cloak of mysticism. The reality behind it is
becoming more frightening. Antinuclear activists in the southeast will
be increasingly called upon in the near future to "Blockade the Bomb
Plant" not only with civil disobedience but with every means available
to sane, intelligent and nonviolent people.
          
            Sue Bowman lives in Columbia, South Carolina and writes
regularly about Southern disarmament activities for several
publications.
          
        
        
          Demonstrating at Weapon World
          By Bernstein, DanDan Bernstein
          Vol. 5, No. 6, 1983, pp. 7-8
          
          The people who gathered on a baseball field under cloudy skies were
as diverse a group as you could imagine. There were teen-agers and
grandmothers; doctors and musicians; hippies and priests.
          But they had all come to Orlando on Saturday, October 22, for the
same reason: to protest the planned deployment of nuclear missiles in
Europe.
          About five hundred people, half the anticipated number, braved
heavy rains to march for an hour and a half through a portion of this
central Florida city. Singing songs and chanting slogans, the group
formed one of a series of demonstrations across the United States and
Western Europe opposing the placement of five hundred and seventy-five
Pershing II and Cruise missiles in five European countries in the next
five years.
          Orlando was chosen as Florida's sole protest site because the
Pershing II is being built by Martin Marietta, a defense contractor
with a plant just outside the city. Hence, the protest's title: "Halt
the Pershing at its source." And hence, signs like "M &M melts your
mouth and your hands." (In addition to the protests, candlelight
vigils were held at the plant grounds the night before and the day
after the march.)
          While many of the demonstrators said they doubted the protests
would stop the missiles from being deployed, they said they still felt
the need to march. "Silence is complicity and we don't want to be part
of that complicity," said TJ. Powers, an Episcopal priest from
Gainesville, who carried a large red sign reading "Choose Life, Pax
Christi."
          Aside from the busloads of people who came from throughout Florida,
the march and afternoon rally attracted some people from outside the
state, including a group from Atlanta.
          Many of the protectors said they had been involved in the Vietnam
War protests. They agreed that the nuclear freeze movement represented
a greater cross-section of America and said it was farther reaching
than Vietnam because it involved a possible world war with millions of
deaths as opposed to localized fighting by guerillas.
          Some said they were too young to get involved in the Vietnam
protests, but have been very active in the freeze movement. "If
nothing else, Ronald Reagan has spurred us on the road to peace," said
Chris West-Harazda, a thirty-year-old prep school teacher from
Tampa.
          Indeed, some marchers seemed to be using the demonstration as a way
to attack the President. "Ronald Reagan, he's no good/send him back to
Hollywood," was among the chants heard from the group during the
march. One speaker at the subsequent rally referred to Reagan as
"Hatchetman."
          Other speakers appealed to different levels One had a comedy
routine. Others harmonized. A University of South Florida cancer
researcher spoke about the medical effects of a nuclear war.
          "The bottom line," said Dr. Gary Lyman, "is that if one 

or two
percent of the nuclear weapons in the Soviet Union were fired at
Florida, there would be five million immediate deaths and three
million severe injuries."
          Before the speeches, the crowd held hands and formed a large circle
around the baseball field near the Tangerine Bowl. Softly, they sung,
"All we are saying, is give peace a chance." The haunting John Lennon
lyric was repeated over and over.
          During the rally, buttons, T-shirts and books were sold to raise
money to offset the $2,500 it cost to put on the march, $1,500 of
which was to pay the city for police protection.
          The Central Florida Nuclear Freeze Campaign, which organized the
march, has challenged that fee on the grounds that it hinders free
speech. A federal district judge ruled in favor of the city, and the
money has been placed in an escrow account pending the outcome of an
anticipated appeal. Lawyers for the freeze group said the case could
end up in the lap of the Florida Supreme Court.
          As for their part, police reported no problems during the three and
a half mile march or the rally, which continued despite a constant
drizzle. At one point during the march, a policemen noticed that a
peace sign had been placed on the windshield of his parked
motorcycle. He quickly pulled off the soggy cardboard and kicked it
into pieces.
          
            Dan Bernstein is a reporter for the Tampa
Tribune.
          
        
        
          The Movement Remembered: "Like A Banked Fire"
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 5, No. 6, 1983, pp. 8-13
          
          Worth Long: When did you first realize that
there was a need for civil rights change, for change in the state of
Mississippi?
          Aurelia Norris Young: Even before my children
were born. I noticed that there were no parks or playgrounds or
libraries. We could not get into the Scouts, Boy Scouts nor Girl
Scouts. I really didn't want to rear my children in Jackson. But my
husband was from Mississippi, and in spite of efforts of my father to
get him transferred to Ohio, he said he'd rather stay. So I began to
work in the community to get activities for children.
          We started a little library on Farish Street, by donating our own
used books and buying used books. That was the time that I realized
that the black community needed more than we had.
          I was mainly interested in starting a music program. There was no
degree program for music in the state. I began working at
Tougaloo. They promised that they were going to set up a program, and
did not. So the president of Jackson State promised that if I'd come
there, he'd set up a music program. So I moved to Jackson State,
stayed there thirty years.
          It was not a university then and I was simply one of two music
teachers. We taught practically thirty hours a week. We had to do
everything, even going out recruiting students for the program.
          Jackson State had a laboratory school and I took my children with
me everywhere I went. They went to the nursery on campus, and
elementary school. My husband was working at the post office and
making shoes at night. So he got home very late, I was young and it
didn't seem like such a big job then. I couldn't do it now.
          As in many black communities in the South, our community of black
people was self-contained. We seldom had to go to the white community
for anything. Very little contact, so I really did not know what we
could do. We worked trying to get things for that little small
community.
          Long: You said your husband was born in
Mississippi. What was his name and where was he born, and under what
circumstances?
          Young: Jack Harvey Young. He was the third child
in a family of four. His mother was a widow. His father died when he
was nine. He worked after school to help her support the other
children.
          He was a postman for twenty-five years. One day I saw two law books
and found out that his desire was to study law. I kept insisting that
he study, but we couldn't find any school in the South that would take
a black person. So he read law under Sidney Redmond in St. Louis. He
read at night. He would come in from his work, eat, rest and about ten
o'clock get up and study. When he passed the bar in the Fifties he
began practicing right away. Those were hard times for us. We felt
that if you were to work in the post office and practice law on the
side, you would always be known as the postman rather than the
lawyer. But, it was fortunate because when the civil rights movement
came he was available to help.
          Long: How many other attorneys in the city would
take civil rights cases?
          Young: There were only two others. Carsie Hall,
and R. Jess Brown. Carsie and my husband went all through high school
together and they studied together, Carsie passed the bar a year
later.
          Long: So that meant how many black attorneys in
the state of Mississippi?
          Young: At that time I think there were five or
six. One in Mound Bayou, one in Meridian who was quite aged and these
three. But only the three here in Jackson took civil rights cases. So
they ran all over the state.
          Long: Do you remember during those years who was
able to register and vote? What were the prerequisites?
          Young: There had been people who had been
registering in the city of Jackson for many, many years without
problems. But in the rural areas and in the towns smaller than Jackson
they could not register. Prerequisites varied from city to city. It
depended on who was asking the questions. How many buttons on your
clothes, recite the constitutions. So there was no such standards, but
the main idea was to ask the questions they could not answer.

          Long: How did change happen when it did come?
          Young: I suppose it's like a banked fire, and
just suddenly it breaks out. That's the way it happened in Jackson. It
started here with nine students at Tougaloo in March, 1961, sitting-in
at the public library. They were arrested. My husband got them out of
jail right away, and they were to appear for trial the next day.
          Now we didn't have any papers, so the grapevine got around. We
could get news out within five minutes. You just called one of the
schools and tell the teachers and they would tell the children, and
they would tell the parents, or call the ministers, they would call
their people. It was very effective. So, the next day, people were
standing on the courthouse lawn. Students from Millsaps College (a
white Methodist school) decided they were going to march in sympathy
and meet the Jackson State students at the courthouse.
          The Millsaps students were turned around without incident. The
black students were chased through a ravine that ran through the
city. They were sprayed with tea gas. At the courthouse the police
brought dogs, people were bitten and some were beaten. That was the
beginning. I think that prepared us for the actions of the Freedom
Rides in May of that same year.
          Long: What effect do you think the Freedom Rides
had on the consciousness of the people in Jackson?
          Young: Well, the whites were angry. The blacks
were complacent; we didn't feel involved at first. It was as if we
were onlookers. Gradually we became involved. Later in the summer
there were demonstrations by high school students, trying to integrate
the parks and the playgrounds. When your own children are threatened,
you become actively involved. And that drew the entire community into
it.
          Long: What role did you play during the
demonstrations?
          Young: I started out as more of a secretary,
answering telephone calls. Arrests were happening so fast. Trying to
keep in touch with my husband and letting him know who was arrested
and where. And simultaneously, things began to break out in the
smaller communities throughout the state. He was running from here and
there trying to get people out on bail and raising bail.
          I began collecting toilet articles, dietary supplements for the
students in jail and began to draw many other people into the
movement. I would solicit things from the grocery stores and
drugstores and those people became interested and involved.
          During the middle of the summer, there were more than three-hundred
Freedom Riders. I gave telephone information to parents of the
out-of-state students who were arrested. The first ones who came in
were from colleges. So the colleges were calling--Cornell, Rutgers,
Oberlin. Then reporters came. We had them as far as Europe and
Canada. Then we began to receive them into our homes as well as the
religious people from the schools, the deans and that sort of
thing. Then lawyers were constantly coming in. In the late summer,
legal groups were sent down to relieve my husband and R. Jess Brown
and Carsie Hall. So they stayed at my house.
          It was not long before we began to get the threatening and obscene
phone calls. They would count down my husband's life. So that summer
we sent our children away.
          Later on, I began to write letters after the students were 

sent to
Parchman, the state penitentiary. They'd send one group in, another
would come out. They all bathed and dressed in our home and I'd feed
them. Some would leave right away; some would stay two or three
days. By talking to them, I found out the conditions in Parchman. So,
being a mother and knowing how worried parents were, I would write to
the parents.
          Long: Did this event happen before the so-called
"fairground incident?"
          Young: The "fairground incident" happened when
several hundred high school students had a demonstration. There were
so many of them, the police took them down in trucks and placed them
on the fairgrounds. They were mostly local people who had been sitting
in at the municipal zoo, in the parks and swimming pools. They were
trying to integrate the recreational facilities. But they were just
caught up in all of the civil rights activities. They would attend the
meetings we had almost nightly. They heard the appeals from the
churches for money. They had the natural exuberance of young
people. And they were about to get out of school that summer.
          The police put them in the cattle pens where the stock fairs were
held. It was hot. But, there again I think their youth stood them in
good stead. I doubt that older people could have stood that kind of
treatment, but the young people are a little more resilient.
          During that period a lot of notable black figures came down, Medgar
brought them down for a weekend: fighters, singers, ball players. We
found homes for them in the city. We had mass meetings. The people in
the community, some of whom had never taken part, were thrilled to
say, "Well, Marguirette Belafonte is staying at my house." That made
them an integral part of the movement.
          One little sidelight. Gloster Current of the NMCP and I, just
talking one day, decided that there ought to be something we could do
to shake up the white community. During that time hootenanny's were
very popular. And they were about to have a big hootenanny that fall
at the Mississippi State Fair. So I wrote to Delta Sigma Theta, my
sorority, and asked them if they could put some pressure on the
booking agencies to ask these performers not to perform at the
Fair. So the hootenanny singers as well as several opera singers and
actors agreed not to perform. And the State Fair had a terrible time
trying to find entertainers. And this was all done with a letter to
Delta. It made the white community know that we had some strings to
pull outside of the state.
          Whenever I needed money I always wrote to Delta Sigma Theta, and
they always came through. For instance, when the farmers were thrown
off the land in the Delta for registering to vote and they moved into
tents, we found out that they were without winter clothes and that
they were needing food. The winter rains had set in. They didn't have
boots and raincoats and blankets and clothing. I called the national
office of Delta and they sent money to provide those things for
them.
          Long: Were there other community or social
institutions that were in support of the movement at that time?
          Young: Not at first. I became ill and couldn't
feed the people coming out of Parchman. My husband sent me to New
Orleans to rest. Then they fed them at the Episcopal church. Then a
group called Church Women United took over that role and I had only
the lawyers and reporters and the religious leaders to feed.
          Long: What about local colleges, what was their
role in social change in the sixties?
          Young: Tougaloo played a very important role,
and Campbell College, the AME school. When the students came back for
arraignment there were more than three hundred of them. They were
housed on the college campuses. Jackson State played no part in the
movement at all. Sadly enough, they were in the best position to have
used the Lynch street and the offices there as a laboratory, but they
did not.
          Long: Was this because Jackson State was a state
university, and because of President Reddix and his policy.
          Young: Probably so.
          Long: But, you had the full confidence of the
students at Jackson State?
          Young: Oh yes, I had taught many of their
mothers and fathers, so they knew me, and having had musical groups, I
performed all over the state in their churches, and in the recruitment
drives. Then, my husband had a very imposing manner, he was tall and
always well dressed, and he became an image for many of the
students. He went around to all the towns. It had been years since a
black had passed the bar. He was called on to give commencement
speeches, and speak at lodges and churches. So he was well known
throughout the state. So I was either simply "lawyer Young's wife" or
"Mrs. Young the music teacher."
          You have to remember that back in the thirties and forties there
were few positive black images in Mississippi, men or women, because
we had no newspapers, we had no TV, no radio. And I was surprised in
these late years to find out that we were models. So, they did listen
to me. And, I suppose anybody who teaches extra-curricular classes has
an entree to students' thoughts. I had a listening laboratory and they
would be listening and of course not realizing that when they were
talking to one another that I could hear, that they were shouting. So
I knew all about their private lives. I suppose a coach would have had
the same kind of influence.
          Long: So you were able, based on your
understanding of the larger society, to direct them in a way so that
they could stay alive and survive?
          Young: Yes. And then I had more intimate
knowledge as to what was happening legally by the lawyers being in my
house. And I think they had a little faith in my knowledge of what was
going on.
          Long: Were there particular incidents where
students might have been killed?

          Young: I remember they were about to demonstrate
one day. There had been a series of demonstrations in the city, and
down at the jail my husband had said the mood of the cops was just one
of anger. They were called in to extra duty. And I suppose without
extra pay. He had said, "I believe somebody's going to get killed
because the cops are very very angry."
          A student ran into my room about 5:30 that afternoon and told me
that the students were about to go out into the streets. The cops were
lined up on either side of Lynch street.
          I ran up to the president's office, where he and the business
manager were in conference. I told him what was happening and that we
should stop them cause some of them were going to get hurt. He said,
"I've done all that I can do, if they just want to do that it's up to
them." And they both got into the president's car and drove off.
          I ran up on the campus, and they were all massing themselves on the
dining hall steps. And I pushed my way to the front where they had a
microphone, and I began to shame the leaders, I said "You gonna stand
up here, and send those other people out in the streets." I asked the
other students, "Where is your head? You know they are gonna send you
out there first and see what happens to you and they might bring up
the rear."
          The students began to laugh. And they didn't go out.
          I came home one day from school and my son was sitting on the
porch, he and his friend. Now they were in high school, and tears were
running down their cheeks. I asked him why he was crying. He said
"This is tear gas. Policemen are down the street shooting tear
gas."
          Well there was a barricade in front of my house because I lived at
the end of my street, and policemen were there. That was to keep
people from going into town. I never felt such anger before in my
life. It felt like my body had just blown up as a balloon. And I stood
out on the steps and tried to curse--I'm not a cursing woman. They
only thing I could think of was "damned stupid cops," and I said that
over-and over and over. I wanted them to shoot me or do something. I
was always fearful of what my own anger would do.
          Long: Who were some of the Jackson movement
figures, those persons who were in leadership from the early
movement?
          Young: Well, mostly the people who raised the
bail. Now of course, Medgar Evers, field secretary of the NAACP, was
the leader. And there was Rev. R.L.T. Smith and Houston Wells; and
Mr. Broadwater who is now a federal marshal. The ministers of course,
the ministerial alliance.
          Long: Was there a general strategy on the part
of the local leadership?
          Young: No, we took things as they came. That
first summer things were just popping out so fast, we tried to rise to
every occasion.
          Long: What about Medgar Evers and his basic
strategies? Did the NAACP on a local and state level seem to have a
basic approach for change?
          Young: I remember a strategy meeting at our
house a little later in the movement, trying to decide about putting
up somebody to run for office. And it. was decided at that time not to
try for any of the major offices or for the legislature, but to try to
put black people in some of the small town offices where blacks had to
go daily. Blacks were treated so harshly in courthouses and by the
highway patrol and police that we felt it would be better to
concentrate in each city. For a long time we didn't have anybody in
the legislature and later, only one. But we were concentrating on the
minor offices. In Jackson we were asking, under Medgar's leadership,
for school crossing guards, for policemen and later for firemen.
          These were some of the demands given to the mayor. We had a mayor
then, Allen Thompson, who had been in office many years. The city was
controlled by him and his cohorts. We didn't have street lights in
black neighborhoods. Many of the streets were unpaved. At that time
there were even a few outdoor toilets.
          Most black people would go to town only to get what they needed and
come back. The buses were segregated, but few people rode them. There
were certain stores where you could try on clothing, hat and shoes and
dresses and others that would let you take them home and try them
on. No restaurants were open, no lunch counters. But as I said, our
community was almost self-contained. There was seldom much need to go
downtown. Farish Street was our main street and West Jackson had
developed quite a few businesses. There were small restaurants and
shoe shops and things. I suppose this would have been found in most
Southern cities.
          Long: Would you talk about your remembrances of
Medgar Evers during this period?
          Young: Well, I remember him as a very gentle
kind of person. He was in and out of our house quite often, had many a
meal there. I knew his wife, Myrlie, fairly well, not as well as we
knew Medgar, and of course, we'd met the children. He was very
level-headed, not overly emotional. I thought he was a fine person,
and would have liked to have him for a friend even without the civil
rights movement.
          Long: When did you last see him before his
assassination?
          Young: It was the night that he was killed. I
had some lawyers staying at my house. Gloster Current was there and
Frank Reeves from Washington. I had been ill. Medgar came by, it must
have been about 10:30 or near 11:00 and said he was hungry because he
hadn't eaten all day. I told him that I didn't have any
leftovers--people were always 

bringing us a ham or turkey or
something. So he said, "Well, I'll just go on home."
          About that time the telephone rang. Gloster got it. My husband was
calling from the office and said that they had run out of mimeograph
paper. Medgar said he had some paper at the office; he'd go get it and
drop it by on his way home.
          The next time the telephone rang, it was Myrlie, and she just
screamed at me, "Oh, Medgar's been shot!"
          I really didn't think he'd had time to get home. But they say he
didn't stay long at the office. Must have been about a quarter of
twelve then.
          I called a friend whose son was a physician. She got so excited she
dropped the phone and I couldn't call anybody out. I ran next door to
the hotel and they got in touch with lack and the other lawyers, and
he said, "Don't go, we'll come by and pick you up." I didn't realize
until then that there might have been any danger to us.
          So we drove out to the house. The children had been taken across
the street to neighbors at once. They had just taken Medgar to the
hospital, so Barbara Morris and I stayed with Myrlie. We tried to keep
her busy, helping her gather up his things to take to the hospital.
          She kept walking. She'd walk outdoors, and there was this big pool
of blood, and I know she didn't know what she was doing, but she would
manage to step over the blood. She would not step in it.
          Barbara and I followed every footstep she made, then later the men
came to say that Medgar had died.
          That was one of the most horrible things during my lifetime cause I
never knew there was so much blood in a human body. I'd never seen
anybody killed before. And I didn't know that blood was thick. It was
just like somebody had poured a lot of jelly in the driveway.
          I didn't go to his funeral. But a lot of people gathered at my
house and I fed them. Houston Wells, in the furniture business'
brought a freezer to my house and several grocerymen filled it up with
food. The chef at Jackson State would periodically bake a large ham or
turkey for me.
          I remember so many people being in my house that day. They were
sitting everywhere, on the beds and everything. Eating from plates in
their laps. The phone rang and we heard that the students were
demonstrating downtown--this was after the memorial service. John
Doar, a lawyer with the Justice Department, threw his plate down and
jumped in somebody's car and went down. He walked down the middle of
the street and calmed the students. At that point we all felt we
didn't want any more bloodshed.
          Long: What was the effect of Medgar's death on
people in Jackson?
          Young: There was a smoldering resentment. People
were angry. At first there was shock and then the smoldering kind of
anger set in.
          Things were happening concurrently. I suppose everything grew out
of Medgars Evers' death, and yet we had deaths following that.
          I believe the whites began to feel ashamed, and when they act for
the good, whether out of shame or fear or guilt, I think the results
are the same. There were many white people who, I suppose, decried
what was happening all along, but they didn't come out. They were as
repressed as black people. Then they began to get together in some of
the white churches. Began to identify each other much as we did. We
began to identify those who were really with the movement and those
who were not.
          We had a big dog and all the neighborhood children loved him. I was
surrounded on three sides by whites, but we had lived there so
long. We knew everybody. And my dog would go around and play with the
children, make his rounds, and the come back home.
          Early one morning a little white kid came up and said, "Mrs. Young,
dog catcher has your dog."
          There was an old white couple who lived around there and didn't
like children or dogs or anybody. They had caught the dog and had
pinned him up on their porch until the dog catcher came.
          I went around the corner and there was a police car. I was there by
the time the dog catcher arrived. When he ran to get the dog, I braced
myself. He drew back his hand as if he was going to hit me. My
daughter came around the corner and screamed, and of course that
brought people out. A policeman came up and wanted to know what the
trouble was. I thought they were taking me to jail. I said, "Okay, I
live right around the corner. I'll get my toothbrush and I'll come
with you."
          They just cruised along slowly while we were walking back with the
dog following us. They opened the car door and the dog jumped into the
police car. He liked to ride. I wanted to kill the dog.
          This was all before nine in the morning. I called my husband and he
went down and got the dog out. Later he told me that he went to the
chief of police and told him that he didn't want his family harrassed
because of his work. The chief told him nothing would happen to us
unless we committed a serious crime. We didn't tell the children,
because we could see our boys speeding and running stop lights just to
see if they would get picked up.
          So I had the assurance that they were not going to harrass
me. However, I did have FBI agents. I would go to the store and they
would appear from nowhere. That was the first time I realized that
they had black agents. We'd had them since Medgar's death because the
rumor had gone out that they were going to kill my husband, Reverend
Smith and the other leaders. Five of them were on a hit list.
          I'd go to the store and I'd look around and there'd be a person
standing. Our community is so small that we knew strangers. And they
looked like FBI people. Before I'd get home, there'd be another one
and then they would disappear.

          I guess I was fearful, apprehensive, but not anymore than I'd been
when Jack would go out in the little towns. He had a couple of murder
cases where I just knew he was going to get killed before he got
back. I guess that sort of prepared me. Then we went over to
Birmingham and I talked with the black lawyers' wives over there. I
admired them. Mrs. [unclear]ores'
house had been bombed. I think that helped me to at least put up a
show of being fearless. But after a while you get so that you aren't
afraid of the fear.
          
            The following edited interview with Ms. Aurelia Norris
Young (born 1915 in Knoxville, Kentucky) chronicles her involvement in
the 1960s' Jackson, Mississippi freedom struggle. Ms. Young is
currently president of the J.C. Maxwell Group, minority operators of
WMPR-FM, a Mississippi public radio station scheduled to begin
broadcasting within the next few weeks from Tougaloo,
Mississippi. Worth Long of the SRC's Civil Rights Radio Project
continues in this interview a series documenting the modern civil
rights movement in the Deep South.
          
        
        
          The North Georgia Forty
          By Jones, GreggGregg Jones
          Vol. 5, No. 6, 1983, p. 13
          
          Their rallying cry is "Keep public lands in public hands," and
Dr. Phillip Greear hopes it will help save national forest land from
the auction block.
          An ecologist at North Georgia's Shorter College, Greear takes
credit for coining the phrase that is appearing on bumpers around the
United States in protet of the federal government's talk of selling
national forest lands.
          In all, 856,000 acres of national forest are being considered for
sale in the fourteen state Southeast region--a little less than ten
percent of the region's twelve million forest land acres--sprawling
from Virginia's Potomac River to the Brazos River of Texas. Georgia
lands for possible sale include 95,000 acres in the Chattahoochie
National Forest and 34,000 acres in the Oconee National Forest.
          Greear has been joined by farmers, teachers, college students,
artists, labor leaders and even state senator Ed Hines, some forty
north Georgians in all, fighting the possible sale of parts of the
Chattahoochie and Oconee national forests in the state.
          Selling government land has been proposed by the Reagan
Administration as a means of reducing the national debt. Under the
Administration's directive, Secretary of Agriculture John Block is
drafting legislation that would allow the sale of forest lands,
according to Roy Gandy, director of lands and minerals for the
U.S. Forest Service Southeast Region. (National forest lands fall
under the control of the Department of Agriculture.)
          "We decided that since the proposal has to go before Congress, we
had to speak out and let congressmen and senators know that we object
to the plan," says Greear, a pipe-smoking environmental activist. He
has successfully fought potentially environmentally damaging federal
proposals before in the North Georgia mountains, and he views this as
yet another threat on forest land around the country.
          Greear grew up in the mountainous North Georgia forests. He saw the
government acquire depleted forest land from private lumber interests
and nurture it to a more pristine state as the Chattahoochie National
Forest.
          It wasn't long after he came into office that President Reagan
sowed the seeds for the forest land fight. In 1981 he created the
Property Review Board, which was instructed to study national forest,
park and wildlife lands for possible sale. In turn, regional federal
officials began reviewing public lands. Last spring, the Southeast
Region of the U.S. Forest Service released its list of lands that
might be sold.
          Greear and other opponents of the proposed sale banded together and
began raising funds. They rallied five hundred sympathizers in May and
began sending out newsletters to the media and the public. As a recent
move to underscore the importance and value of the Chattahoochie
National Forest, group members began work on a forty-seven mile trail
that will provide recreation benefits to thousands.
          The program to sell off "surplus federal property" already has
picked up steam this year in Georgia and other Southeastern states,
reports Barney Maltby, of the General Services Administration's
regional office in Atlanta. In 1982 only two small pieces of federal
land were sold in the state, fetching eight thousand dollars. As of
September, 258 acres of federal land in Georgia have been sold for
nearly one million dollars in 1983. Maltby said he expects the sales
in the Southeast to top twenty million dollars by the end of this
month.
          The proposal has resulted in environmentalists leveling yet another
broadside at the Reagan administration and its environmental
policies. Public reaction was harsh enough to prompt former Interior
Secretary James G. Watt to decide against selling his department's
refuge and national park lands.
          The issue of selling forest lands, however, remains very much alive
before the Agriculture Department. The sale question will likely be
decided by Congress, and Gandy says "just about anything" could
happen.
          Greear and the North Georgians, meanwhile, are whipping up support
and lobbying state and federal legislators. They vow to continue the
fight "until we get the government to drop the plan," says
Greear. "Our main goal is to keep the issue alive and keep pressure on
Congress, and hopefully prevent legislation from ever being
introduced.
          
            Gregg Jones is a reporter for the Atlanta
Journal-Constitution.
          
        
        
          Reaping What We Sow
          By Fowler, CaryCary Fowler
          Vol. 5, No. 6, 1983, pp. 14-18
          
          American agriculture is imported. All the major food crops grown in
North America originated elsewhere.
          It is believed that agriculture began independently in Southwest
and East Asia, Mesoamerica, and probably South America and Africa in
prehistoric times and gradually spread to other lands (see Chart
A). The different grains and vegetables as we know them did not exist,
for their present form is the result of thousands of years of
evolution and domestication.
          The conscious planting and harvesting of plants for food over wide
geographic areas helped create enormous natural, genetic diversity in
crops. Some of the seeds of plants that had successfully survived the
growing season were not eaten, but saved to be replanted the following
year, thereby perpetuating their own characteristics. Thus, countless
genetically distinct varieties of each crop developed in response to
different ecological conditions and human needs. Natural defenses
evolved to the different pests and diseases encountered in each
locality.
          Modern agriculture changed all that.
          
            Sacrificing Seeds
          
          By the early 1950s, major efforts were underway at research centers
supported by private and government sources to breed grains which
would produce high yields when pumped full of fertilizers and
water. Food crops, especially vegetables, were also bred to fit the
demands of brutal harvesting machinery and the rigors of long-distance
transportation. Taste and nutrition were forgotten, even scorned.
          Modern agriculture needs predictability; therefore, plant breeders
strive for uniformity. Plants are bred and inbred to develop the
desired characteristics. The result has been the creation of new
varieties that are extremely genetically limited.
          These new varieties have quickly spread around the globe, replacing
old, traditional varieties. "Suddenly in the 1970s," writes Garrison
Wilkes of the University of Massachusetts, "we are discovering Mexican
farmers planting hybrid corn seed from a midwestern seed firm, Tibetan
farmers planting barley from a Scandinavian plant breeding station,
and Turkish farmers planting wheat from the Mexican wheat program."
          Seed companies, governments, and international aid agencies have
gone into areas where traditional varieties predominate and promoted
the new plants, often calling them "miracle varieties." Convinced of
the "superior" qualities of the new variety, the Third World farmer or
peasant ceases to grow the traditional crop. Instead, leftover seeds
of the traditional variety may be used as food for the family or their
animals. In a moment's time, thousands of years of crop development
and seed selection become meaningless, as another variety becomes
extinct.
          As food crops become more uniform, so do cultures. Foods and crops
are an important part of a people's heritage; they perpetuate and
enrich its customs. As food crops become more uniform, so do
people. As traditional varieties become extinct, human cultures lose
something very special and irreplaceable.
          
            The Ultimate Gamble
          
          Where thousands of varieties of wheat once grew, only a few can now
be seen. When these traditional plant varieties are lost, their
genetic material is lost forever. Herein lies the danger. Each variety
of wheat, for example, is genetically unique. It contains genetic
"material" not found in other varieties. If, because of genetic
limitations which result from inbreeding, new varieties are no longer
resistant to certain insects or diseases (conceivably even insects or
diseases never before known to attack wheat), then real catastrophe
could strike. Without existing seeds which carry specific genes
conferring resistance, it may not be possible to breed resistance back
into wheat, corn, or any other crop.
          Serious problems result from lack of genetic diversity. We now know
that the Irish potato famine of the 1840s was caused by such lack of
diversity. The two or three varieties of potatoes introduced to
Ireland had come from the five thousand plus varieties growing in the
Peruvian Andes, original home of the potato. It took many years for
the spores of the potato fungus--the black rot--to reach Ireland from
South America. When it did, the results were catastrophic. The
genetically vulnerable potatoes were wiped out. Although wealthy
landlords still had traditional crops to export out of the country,
the potato-dependent poor had nothing.
          By the mid 1840s, two million Irish had died, two million more had
emigrated and the remaining four million faced a bleak future.
          In 1970, a corn blight struck in the U.S. Old, open" pollinated
varieties were not affected, but most farmers were growing the new
hybrid models--all of which were susceptible to the blight. Nearly
fifteen percent of the nation's crops was destroyed. In some Southern
states where the corn smut found weather conditions favorable, the
losses topped fifty percent.
          A study the next year by the National Academy of Sciences showed
that just six varieties of corn accounted for seventy one percent of
the acreage planted. This same lack of diversity is seen in all the
major crops in American agriculture. Could it happen again? Listen to
what is being said:

          
            The key lesson of 1970 (year of the corn blight) is that
genetic uniformity is the basis of vulnerability to epidemics. The
major question the Committee on Genetic Vulnerability of Major Crops
asked was, "How uniform genetically are other crops upon which the
nation depends, and how vulnerable, therefore, are they to epidemics?"
The answer is that most crops are impressively uniform genetically and
impressively vulnerable.
          
          -National Academy of Sciences
          
            The array of diseases that pose threats to wheat, rice,
maize, and sorghum is formidable. Except for the case of the Irish
potato when neither plant pathology nor genetics had been born,
research teams have been able to move fast enough to salvage our crops
from complete devastation. But, we are becoming more and more
vulnerable and there is no assurance that we can always react in
time.
          
          -Dr. Jack Harlan Professor of Plant Genetics Department of
Agronomy University of Illinois
          Thus far, as Dr. Harlan notes, scientists have been able to work
fast enough to avoid major catastrophes. When new varieties have been
discovered to be genetically vulnerable to pests or diseases,
scientists have scurried to collect old varieties or even "wild
relatives" in a search for genetic material that could be bred back in
to confer resistance. In recent years, wild potatoes have been used to
breed in protection against eight major pests. Wild tomatoes have
similarly provided resistance to a few pests. But all over the world,
the new varieties are rapidly replacing old varieties. The National
Academy of Sciences states that centers of wheat diversity are being
destroyed "at an alarming rate."
          New wheats and rices have washed over Asia and the Near East with
remarkable speed. New rice varieties came to occupy over seventy
million acres in Asia in less than a decade. In Turkey, many priceless
relatives of cereal grains are now found only in graveyards and castle
ruins. U.N. scientists now estimate that the, Near East, center of
genetic diversity for many of our grains, will simply disappear before
the turn of the century.
          Much, if not most, of this genetic wipe out is occurring due to the
replacement of old varieties with new ones. International trade in
seeds--the sale of seeds developed in North America and Europe to
peasant farmers using old varieties--is the biggest factor behind the
problem.
          Other factors are also involved. Tropical forests, which contain
the majority of the world's higher plant species (including valuable
food crops and plants used for making modern drugs), are being
decimated by agricultural expansion and reckless timbering. These
forests are now disappearing at a rate of up to twenty-seven million
acres a year.
          Recently, a rush of mergers and corporate takeovers has hit the
seed industry. Many old family-owned seed companies have been bought
out by large multinational corporations. The petrochemical and drug
industries--major producers of pesticides and fertilizers--have been
especially active 

(see Chart B). Their interest in the seed business
raises three provocative questions. First, will corporations who are
big producers of pesticides and fertilizers encourage their new seed
company subsidiaries to breed plant varieties that require more or
fewer pesticides and fertilizers? Second, will the acquisition of
small seed companies by corporations who are active around the world
tend to create international seed companies that will be better able
to spread their new varieties to regions where old varieties still
predominate? Will they therefore speed up the process of driving these
old varieties out of existence? Finally, will the takeover of seed
companies like Burpee by ITT bring slick, uninformative advertising to
the seed business?
          
            Patent That Plant!
          
          As seeds have become big business, pressure has been put on
governments around the world to insure high profits for the seed
industry. Until recently plants were considered "public property." One
could own a "Big X" tomato, but one certainly could not prevent
someone else from raising that variety of tomato and selling it or its
seeds. The seed industry has been successfully challenging that custom
and at their request many nations have established a system of patents
for new plant varieties. Now companies are able to patent a form of
life.
          In the U.S., plant patenting laws were first passed in
1970. Controversial amendments expanding the scope of U.S. laws were
passed by Congress and signed into law by President Carter in
December, 1980, despite strong opposition. The Rural Advancement
Fund/National Sharecroppers Fund spearheaded a nationwide campaign to
oppose the amendments, arguing that they would encourage seed company
takeovers, lead to higher seed prices and contribute to the
replacement and ultimate extinction of many traditional vegetable
varieties.
          But the seed industry, a powerful appendage of multinational
petrochemical and drug corporations, was not to be denied a victory
for its special interest legislation.
          In Europe, where patenting laws were first passed, thousands of
traditional varieties (including the Big Boy tomato) are being
literally outlawed. Common Market countries are phasing in a system
which makes it illegal for seed companies to sell the seeds of the old
varieties. The crime committed by the traditional varieties is that
they compete with the new, patented varieties being offered by the big
companies who are entering the seed business.
          Dr. Erna Bennett, formerly of the U.N.'s Food and Agriculture
Organization, predicts that by the end of this decade, fully
three-quarters of all the vegetable varieties now grown in Europe will
be extinct!
          One thing is certain. Patent laws make seed companies attractive
investments for larger corporations. Shell Oil of Great Britain has
bought fifty-six seed companies since passage of a patent law there
would encourage takeovers in the seed industry. They need only look at
what has happened in the U.S. for a preview.
          Although big-time seed industry officials argue that patent laws
will encourage research and development of new varieties and thus aid
the public, it seems that precisely the opposite might
happen. Scientists at some research centers have already noted the
increasing reluctance of seed companies and other researchers to
exchange information and resources.
          Under existing plant patenting legislation, corporations get
protective patents, royalties and vastly reduced competition. Farmers
and gardeners are faced with illegal varieties, hybrids whose seeds
cannot be saved and royalty fees they never had to pay for
non-patented seeds. Plant patenting laws offer protection for
corporate profits while further narrowing the genetic basis on which
agriculture itself depends. Declaring certain varieties illegal and
patenting others is a bizarre luxury we cannot afford.
          
            The Seed Bank
          
          All major crops without exception originated in that part of our
globe we call the Third World. And it is in these areas where genetic
diversity is greatest that conservation efforts are most
important. For some years now primitive crop varieties and wild
relatives of modern crops have been collected and brought back to
industrialized countries for storage in refrigerated seed banks.
          But these efforts are perennially crippled by anemic
budgets. Expeditions to collect endangered wheat varieties in the
Mideast are no one's priority. Seed banks to store them in are poor
competition for jet fighters in budget debates.
          The U.N.-supported International Board for Plant Genetic Resources,
the agency charged with coordinating the collection of crop genetic
material and its storage in a system of some sixty seed banks, has an
annual budget of only three million dollars. Collection of some crops
like rubber and cocoa will be left to industry by necessity despite
the fact that no international codes exist to guarantee access to such
genetic material.
          
            
              CHART B: Update on Recent North American Seed Company
Takeovers
              
                Parent Company
                Seed
Company
              
              
                Abbott-Cobb (USA) 
                 Twilley
Otis
              
              
                Agrigenetics (USA) 
                Arkansas Valley
              
              
                
                Keystone 
              
              
                
                McCurdy 
              
              
                
                Taylor-Evans 
              
              
                Amfac (USA) 
                American
Garden
              
              
                
                Gurney Seed
              
              
                
                Henry
Field
              
              
                Atlantic Richfield (USA) 
                Dessert
Seed 
              
              
                Cargill (USA) 
                Dorman 
              
              
                
                Kroelor 
              
              
                
                PAG 
              
              
                
                ACCO 
              
              
                
                Paymaster Farms
              
              
                
                Tomco-Genetic Giant 
              
              
                Celanese (USA) 
                CelPrill
              
              
                
                Joseph Harris
              
              
                
                Moran 
              
              
                
                Niagara 
              
              
                
                Nugrains 
              
              
                Ciba-Geigy (Switz.) 
                Funk's Seed
              
              
                
                Louisiana
              
              
                
                Stewart 
              
              
                Clays-Luck/ Participex (France)
                Neumann 
              
              
                Dalgety (Gr. Bri.) 
                Driscoll
Strawberry
              
              
                DeKalb Pfizer Genetics (USA) 
                Clemens
Farm 
              
              
                
                Jordan Wholesale
              
              
                
                Sensors 
              
              
                
                Trojan 
              
              
                Diamond Shamrock (USA) 
                Golden Acres
Hybrid
              
              
                Grain Processors Corp.(USA)
                L. Teweles 
              
              
                
                Americana 
              
              
                
                Morton &Sons 
              
              
                ITT (USA) 
                Burpee 
              
              
                
                O. M. Scott 
              
              
                Int'l Multifoods (USA) 
                Baird
              
              
                
                Gildersleeve
              
              
                
                Lynk
Bros. 
              
              
                Kleinwanzlebener SAAT (W. Ger.)
                Cokers Pedigreed 
              
              
                
                KWS Seeds 
              
              
                Limagrain (France) 
                Ferry Morse
              
              
                
                Advanced 
              
              
                
                Hulting Hybrids 
              
              
                Monsanto (USA) 
                DeKalb Hybrid
Wheat
              
              
                Occidental Petroleum (USA) 
                Excel
Hybrid 
              
              
                
                Missouri
              
              
                
                Moss 
              
              
                
                Payne Bros. 
              
              
                
                Stull 
              
              
                Pioneer Hi-bred (USA) 
                Green
Meadows
              
              
                Reichold Chemicals (USA) 
                Florida
Feed &Seed 
              
              
                Sandoz (Switz.) 
                Northrup King
              
              
                
                Gallatin Valley
              
              
                
                Woodside Growers
              
              
                Southwide Inc. (USA) 
                Cotton Seed
Distributors
              
              
                Stauffer Chemicals (USA) 
                Blarney
Farms 
              
              
                
                Prairie Valley
              
              
                Tate &Lyle (Gr. Bri.) 
                Seed &Farm
Supply 
              
              
                Tejon/Times-Mirror (USA) 
                W-L
Resources
              
              
                Upjohn (USA) 
                Asgrow 
              
              
                
                Farmers Hybrid 
              
              
                
                United Hagie Hybrid 
              
              
                Yates (Aus.) 
                Yates Arthur
              
            
            
          
          The flagship of the U.S. seed bank fleet is the National Seed
Storage Laboratory (NSSL) located on the campus of Colorado State
University in Ft. Collins. Unfortunately, the NSSL does not meet the
IBPGR's standards for classification as a preferred "long-term"
storage facility. For fifteen years its dedicated staff and once
modern facilities languished without any budget increase. Budget
considerations hold its total staff below twenty-five. An unbelievable
forty thousand dollars a year is all the U.S. government devotes to
collecting vanishing resources on which the future of agriculture
rests.
          Dr. Jack Harlan of the University of Illinois claims that no seed
collection in the world is adequate--"all are incomplete and
shockingly deficient." According to Dr. Harlan, "These resources stand
between us and catastrophic starvation on a scale we cannot
imagine. In a very real sense, the future of the human race rides on
these materials. " Can we entrust the responsibility for creating an
international seed protection system to an under-funded staff of four?
Can we rely on the Fort Collins collection? Dr. Harlan gives us a
blunt answer. "If you are willing to entrust the fate of mankind to
these collections, you are living in a fool's paradise."
          
            Sowing Seeds of Action
          
          Bringing diversity back to our food crops, stabilizing world food
supplies, and insuring the future of agriculture are goals we should
all work towards. There is not an individual in the world who cannot
do something. Everyone's contribution is important.
          The debate over seed patenting proposals alerted many 

to this
crisis. Through the efforts of farm, garden, environmental, and church
groups, and many concerned individuals, thousands of American learned
of the genetic vulnerability of our major crops, the silent crisis
that stalks world agriculture. Out of this increased awareness can
come solutions.
          What can we do individually and collectively?
          (1) Support increased funding for collection and storage of our
plant genetic resources, before those resources disappear
forever. Storing seeds is only a partial solution, however. We need as
many varieties as possible out in the real world, growing in their own
diverse environments so they can continue to change and adapt. In
addition, all seeds eventually lose the life they hold within
themselves. Periodic" ally, all stored seeds must be taken out of
storage and grown into plants who seeds must be collected and stored
afresh. This would be a monumental task; even the inadequate Fort
Collins collection contains over thirteen hundred species.
          (2) Help promote "plant preserves." Here, wild ancestors of our
major food crops could be allowed to live in safety much the same way
that lions and elephants are protected in African game preserves. If
traditional varieties are to be preserved, their environment must
likewise be preserved. At present, "plant preserves" are more concept
than reality. Public awareness of the need for plant preserves could
help make them a reality.
          (3) Multinational corporate involvement in the seed industry should
be closely monitored. Manufacturers of pesticides and fertilizers
should not be allowed to own seed companies. Companies that export
seeds to Third World areas should be required to file statements
documenting the environmental impact of those seed exports. If old
varieties will be replaced, the company should be responsible for
seeing that they do not become extinct. If a company will not make
this guarantee, it should be prohibited from marketing m a given
area.
          (4) Oppose plant patenting legislation. Most governments do not
expect much public awareness over this issue; therefore, a few letters
expressing concern would have a big impact.
          (5) Governments at all levels should be encouraged to offer
marketing incentives to small farmers who grow the older varieties,
for example, price supports for traditional varieties. Other
government farm benefits could be offered to farmers willing to devote
a small amount of acreage to endangered varieties.
          (6) Farmers should consider banding together to buy bulk quantities
of traditional seeds and to market the produce in bulk or through
farmers' markets. When selling the old varieties, farmers should help
educate the public by labeling their produce with the name of the
variety. Consumers can then learn to tell the difference and begin to
put pressure on supermarkets to carry good produce.
          (7) Individuals, churches, community groups, colleges, and town
governments can begin to plant and safeguard the old varieties. In
some areas, groups have established small "preservation" orchards
devoted to traditional varieties of fruit trees. These efforts bring
people together to promote awareness of the problem, while
contributing to its solutions.
          
            Planting a Future
          
          In the end, the future of agriculture can be insured only by
healthy, vibrant small farms. The old varieties are threatened today,
not because they taste bad or are nutritionally deficient, but because
they do not suit the requirements of the factory farmers and the food
processing industry. The California farmer who grows tomatoes to be
shipped all over the country cannot grow the old, tasty
varieties. Their skins are not tough enough. Their insides are not
hard. If the old varieties are to flourish, they must be, as they have
always been, grown by small farmers and sold to a local market. This
system of agriculture has provided sustenance to people for well over
ten thousand years. It is an enduring agriculture that we tamper with
only at great risk.
          Seeds are a unique product of the efforts of people and nature. In
seeds, culture and agriculture are linked. This bond dissolved, both
are threatened. Our ancestors knew this and lived accordingly. Thomas
Jefferson once professed his belief that "the greatest service which
can be rendered to any country is to add a useful plant to its
culture." For our generation, the challenge will be to preserve the
useful plants we already have.
        
        
          Fred Hobson. Tell About the South: The Southern Rage to
Explain, Louisiana State University Press, 1983.
          By Gorn, ElliottElliott Gorn
          Vol. 5, No. 6, 1983, 20-21
          
          I recently attended a workshop for historians held at a Southern
university. One scholar, who teaches in New York state and whose field
of study is Latin America, confided to me that he couldn't understand
all the fuss over the South. Most of those attending the workshop were
Southerners, and their teaching and writing focused on their native
region. My newfound friend was sure they were wasting their time. At
best, the South deserved passing notice as a slight national
aberration, to be quickly discussed and dismissed in general United
States history classes. While not primarily a Southernist, I argued
that slavery, Jim Crow, staple agriculture, enduring folk traditions,
rurality, and other factors all contributed to a distinct Southern
past. I failed to convince him. The next time I find myself slipping
into such a fruitless discussion, I'll save my breath and hand over a
copy of Fred Hobson's Tell About the South. If Hobson
fails to convince, the case is hopeless.
          Hobson's fine book concerns a strangely neglected subject, or
perhaps more accurately a subject which scholars frequently skirt but
rarely address frontally. Tell About the South, as its
subtitle implies, concerns "The Southern Rage to Explain." Not the
contours of history or the aesthetics of fiction, but Southern
consciousness--the awareness of being Southern--is Hobson's
theme. Apologias, jeremiads, calls for reform, justifications, paeans
of praise, all were united by their author's impassioned, even
feverish consciousness of Southern identity. A professor of English,
Hobson reaches beyond short stories and novels to include essays,
tracts, speeches, journalism, polemics, even sociology, in a sub-genre
of South-centered writing.
          Hobson is not a newcomer to his subject. His much praised
Serpent in Eden: H. L. Mencken and the South, and this
year's Lillian Smith Award winner, South Watching: Selected
Essays of Gerald W. Johnson establish his credentials as a
capable scholar of Southern Studies. But Tell About the South leaps
beyond these monographs to a comprehensive discussion of a dozen and a
half of the region's most penetrating and influential commentators. It
is the bringing together of pre-Civil War spokesman like George
Fitzhugh, Edmund Ruffin, and Hinton Helper, voices from the post
bellum industrializing South such as Thomas Nelson Page, Howard Odum,
Donald Davidson and Wilbur Cash, along with Southerners of the Civil
Rights era like Lillian Smith, Richard Weaver and James McBride Dabbs,
which gives the book its sweep and power.
          Hobson's prose is always highly readable, and at times moving. But
both style and substance are at their best in the book's midsection,
the era spanning the last third of the nineteenth century and the
first third of the twentieth. Here social and moral conflicts haunted
Southern thinkers, conflicts which spurred the imaginations of great
novelists from Twain to Faulkner. The moral dilemma of slavery in a
world obsessed with equality was difficult enough. The outcome of the
Civil War simply added tangled new problems to explain or interpret:
Defeat, humiliation, and impoverishment; a twinkling of racial justice
snuffed out as suddenly as it appeared; industrialization,
urbanization and a new spirit of capitalist boosterism, amidst tenant
farm and milltown squalor.
          Hobson places his dramatic personae in two broad categories of
Southern thought which he labels the school of guilt and shame and the
school of remembrance, the former critical, introspective, often
liberal, the latter celebratory, nostalgic and conservative. Thus, in
the antebellum period we have George Fitzhugh and Edmund Ruffin
defending slavery and the plantation ethos against the assaults of the
modernizing North, while Hinton Helper railed against slavery and
eventually the entire black race as impediments to the advancement of
the poor white majority. A century later, Richard M. Weaver took his
conservative stand for a traditional Southern ethic--including a
mistrust of abstraction, idealism and progress, a knowledge of tragedy
and failure, and a love of place, nature, the spoken word and all that
was tangibly Southern--while Lillian Smith wrote prophetically on the
human destructiveness of racial and sexual segregation.
          But it was the era of Jim Crow beginning late in the nineteenth
century through the Northern assault on the "benighted" South during
the 1920s and 1930s which produced not just critics or defenders, but
great and self-conscious dialogues on the meaning of the South. As the
region underwent the most intense period of economic transformation,
pairs of antagonists took it upon themselves to define the meaning of
the South for their contemporaries. Each developed a group of
followers, and the opposing sides helped shape and define each
other. Thus, Thomas Nelson Page eulogized the life of the old upper
South for its heroism, gentility and grace, all those qualities which
made Robert E. Lee a representative man. But his distant cousin,
Walter Hines Page, looked with a more jaundiced eye on what he
considered sloth, intellectual sterility, poverty, and the dangers of
growing industrialization. By the 1920s the focus shifted to Southern
universities, particularly Vanderbilt and North Carolina, as
Southerners responded to the Northern intellectual community's attack
on their region's racial, intellectual, and religious "backwardness."
Donald Davidson led the agrarians of I'll Take My Stand
against the liberal modernizing juggernaut they saw embodied in Howard
Odum and the Southern sociologists. Here the defense shifted from the
aristocratic South to the conservative values of the deep South's
plain folk, while the social scientists who criticized their own
region sought ways to merge economic and social progress with enduring
rural ways. By the eve of the second World War, Wilbur J. Cash and
William Alexander Percy become the leading antagonists in the drama,
the former assuming the mantle of reform, the latter writing in an
elegiac manner on the lost life of the Delta aristocrat.
          A review cannot possibly capture the depth and subtlety which
Hobson brings to his subject. Above all what comes through in his work
is the passion of these writers for telling about the South. Not what
they said but the way they said it was crucial:
          
            The radical need of the Southerner to explain 

and interpret
the South is an old and prevalent condition, characteristic of
Southern writers since the 1840s and 1850s when the region first
became acutely self-conscious. The rage to explain is understandable,
even inevitable, given the South's traditional place in the
nation--the poor, defeated, guilt-ridden member, as C. Vann Woodward
has written, of a prosperous, victorious and successful family. The
Southerner, more than other Americans, has felt he had something to
explain, to justify, to defend or to affirm.
          
          Personal and regional identity merged. Prophets, Jeremiahs,
patriots, all were possessed by the need to explain their cause and
give it meaning:
          
            If apologist for the Southern way, he was felt driven to
answer the accusations and misstatements of outsiders and to combat
the image of a benighted and savage South. If native critic, he has
often been preoccupied with Southern racial sin and guilt, with the
burden of the Southern past--and frustrated by the closed nature of
Southern society itself, by the quality which suppressed dissent arid
adverse comment.
          
          William Faulkner's Quentin Compson in Absalom,
Absalom is Hobson's prototype for the Southerner obsessed with
telling the tale. Like the fictional Compson, four of the writers
discussed by Hobson finished their story then took their own lives.
          There are, of course, criticisms to be made. Tell About the
South is occasionally repetitious. Moreover, the dialogue
Hobson traces is primarily between liberals and conservatives. One
wonders how the Southern radical tradition fits in, especially the
populist voices at the turn of the century. I also suspect that
Hobson's implied eulogy for the passionate Southerner amidst sunbelt
blight is a bit premature; commercialism and hype have not completely
drowned out the voices of enraptured Southerners. But all of this is
quibbling. Tell About the South is an important book
about an important subject.
          
            Elliott Gorn is assistant professor of American Studies
at the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa.
          
        
        
          Marie Faulk Rudisill. Truman Capote. William
Morrow & Co., 1983.
          By Swift, HarrietHarriet Swift
          Vol. 5, No. 6, 1983, pp. 21-23
          
          Marie Faulk Rudisill, Truman Capote's aunt, has succeeded in
accomplishing what most people thought was impossible: she has brought
her nephew and the homefolks in Monroe County, Alabama, into complete
agreement. Both Capote and Monroeville are deeply offended by
Rudisill's new book, Truman Capote, and are united in
their opinion of the memoir: It's all wrong.
          The book, subtitled "The story of his bizarre and exotic boyhood by
an aunt who helped raise him, "tells of Capote's childhood, filtered
through the history of lore of his mother's family. Rudisill, now
seventy-two and living in Beaufort, South Carolina, wrote the book
with the help of James C. Simmons, a California writer with an
academic background in Southern literature.
          Rudisil1 opens her story with the 1954 suicide of Lillie Mae Faulk
Persons Capote, her sister and Truman's mother. After an intimate
pre-funeral chat with her nephew about his homosexuality and her
dashed hopes for a match with his childhood friend and Monroeville
neighbor, Nelle Harper Lee (author of To Kill a
Mockingbird), Rudisill settles down for one of those languid,
repetitive family brooding sessions that every Southerner is
acquainted with from birth. AII family closets and cupboards are
emptied and ruminated over, underlining the favorite themes of love,
love lost, betrayal, the inevitability of hardship and the evil in the
hearts of men, women and small children.
          Rudisill chronicles the fortunes of the Faulk tribe from the time
of the War between the States, which she says devastated the huge
family plantation and left the family destitute. One daughter, in the
best Scarlette O'Hara tradition, grasps that King Cotton's rule is
over and determines to build a new life. She parlays her sewing talent
into a small shop that offers hats, lingerie and other feminine finery
to the town carriage trade. Jenny Faulk, who never marries, is a woman
of iron will and razor-sharp business instincts. She builds a house in
Monroeville and becomes head of a family which includes her widowed
mother, a brother and two spinster sisters. Later, two young cousins
from Mississippi are added to the household when their parents' deaths
leave them orphans.
          One of the orphans begins a family of his own at eighteen, briefly
bringing his sixteen-year-old bride to Miss Jenny's house before
striking out on his own as a horse trader. When he is mortally injured
while breaking a horse, Miss Jenny brings his widow and five children
to her house. The young widow grieves herself to death and Miss Jenny
takes on the raising of the children. The eldest is the beautiful and
spirited Lillie Mae. She and Jenny fight constantly.
          In the middle of this unending battle of wills is Lillie Mae's
younger sister Marie, nicknamed Tiny, who is alternately Lillie Mae's
confidante and victim. The imperious Lillie Mae sets her cap for a
rich husband and fetches up one Archulus Persons, the unattractive and
unambitious son of a Fine Old Alabama Family from Troy. Their son
Truman 

is born in 1924 and is more or less consigned to Miss Jenny's
household until Lillie Mae acquires a second mate in 1931, a wealthy
Cuban businessman who lives in New York City. There are regular visits
back to Monroeville but Truman has been molded by growing up amidst a
family headed by a stern matriarch, an indifferent mother, an
obsessively devoted older spinster (Sook, the model for the sweet,
simple-natured cousin in A Christmas Memory), and the
other "bizarre and exotic" members of the household and citizenry of
Monroe County.
          Although Truman Capote now issues a blanket "no comment" through
his literary agency on his aunt's book, he was quoted in The
Washington Post shortly after its publication as saying "If there are
twenty words of truth in it, I will go up on a cross to save
humanity." Monroeville, always more circumspect in its pronouncements
than its most famous son, puts its feeling another way: "Why would she
do this to her family?" is the first response when the home folks are
asked about Rudisill's book. "Why would she do this to Monroeville?"
is almost always the next comment.
          Capote's discomfort is easy to understand. No matter how
uninhibited one has been about coming out of the homosexual closet and
making literary hay of an unorthodox family background in the
mysterious South, it can only be painful to have childhood foibles and
parental indifference committed to the printed page. Especially when
the story is being told by a relative one has not seen or spoken to in
fifteen years.
          Monroe County's unhappiness with the book is part of a larger
problem. This dignified, tranquil Black Belt community prides itself
on an unremarkable gentility that prized good manners, bland opinions
and unbroken calm. There were no civil rights demonstrations in Monroe
County, no "incidents" that made their way to the six o'clock
news. There was no Ku Klux Klan to speak of, and the county has
remained a bastion of temperance to this day. Into this peaceful
Southern Eden came unwanted and distasteful celebrity through the
successful writing careers of Capote and Nelle Lee. To Monroeville,
Marie Rudisill's memoir is yet another cross to bear.
          Although the hometown reaction is rooted in a code that believes in
keeping family skeletons in the closet and settling disputes behind
locked doors, the predictable wail of "It's not true! That isn't the
way it happened!" seems justified. There are some odd errors and
omissions in the memoir that nod darkly toward hazy memories of half a
century ago shaped for publication by, say, a California writer with a
background in Southern literature. For the reader unfamiliar with
Alabama and Monroe County, Rudisill stretches her credibility with
supposedly verbatim quotes of long conversations that took place over
fifty years ago and, in some cases, before her birth. For the reader
who does know anything about Monroe County, the story is riddled with
inaccuracies and puzzlements.
          One of the strangest assertions concerns the love of Lillie Mae's
life, a proud Indian doctor from a nearby reservation. There are no
Indian reservations in Monroe County and never have been, according to
those familiar with the generally unimpressive history of the
county. Rudisill places the reservation on the edge of town, Claiborne
(consistently misspelled as "Clairborne), at the edge of the Alabama
River. The names of families and institutions are misspelled
(including her own college) and well-known facts are scrambled. She
says, for instance, that Nelle Lee's only brother died at birth, when
he in fact was the model for To Kill a Mockingbird's
Jem.
          Monroeville's indignant howls of "how could she do this!" go to the
heart of the book's purpose and the town's annoyance. Actually, it's
easy to see how Aunt Tiny could do this to her family (two sisters,
reportedly very unhappy over the memoir, still live in
Monroeville). The book is less about Monroeville and the shaping of a
literary legend than it is about the settling of old scores. Lillie
Mae Capote has been dead almost thirty years, but the wounds she
inflicted on her younger sister have never quite healed. Lillie Mae,
the egotistic beauty, delighted in humilating others and her
apparently eager to please young sister was a target too easy to pass
up. The guileless Tiny even followed Lillie Mae to New York, but
complains bitterly about being used and manipulated by her sister. The
sins of the mother are visited in the son, who seems never to have
properly appreciated all that Aunt Tiny did for him.
          "How could she do this to Monroeville," is a bit more
complex. Although Rudisill spins yarns that she knows go against
Monroe County's grain, telling of wanton young white women (Lillie
Mae), interracial alliances producing children acknowledged by white
fathers (in one case her uncle), wild bucks who rode horses into
stores and staid businesswomen with secret lovers from New
Orleans (shudder), she emphasizes her family's refinement,
uniqueness and charm at every chance. Her father's horses weren't just
horses, but "magnificent white stallions," they all attended
"prestigious" schools, ordered clothes from "the finest stores," and
were included among the "gentry" of Monroe County. The Faulks, one is
supposed to see, were a Fine Old Family of charming eccentrics in the
best Southern tradition. Even without the notoriety bestowed by Truman
Capote, the Faulks were an impressive and intriguing bunch, her book
insists. Aunt Tiny may have been an overlooked middle child, but she
is emphatic that her family was counted among the aristocracy.
          Monroeville, however, is having none of it. Tiny has captured some
of the atmosphere of the time, those who have read the book say
politely, citing her descriptions of 1920s and '30s which recount the
long summers of heat and ennui, the insular life in the Black
Belt. But the balance of the book is not credible, they add, taking
special exception to Rudisill's depiction of the Faulks as a leading
family. She has "flowered up" the family's story, to use the words of
one Monroeville matron who hated the book. "The Faulks were rather
common," she says calmly, "not our kind of people." There was no
Taraesque plantation, say others who knew the family, vaguely
recalling some acreage outside of town. The general consensus paints
Miss Jenny and her clan as hardworking country people who took care of
their own but were regarded as a peculiar bunch and relegated to the
edges of the "nicest" circles.
          Truman Capote (the book) has garnered so-so to 
hostile reviews in
the literary world, causing only a small ripple of interest. In Monroe
County, it is being received with a sigh of resignation. There's a
waiting list for the town library's one copy. Those who have ordered
personal copies from bookstores in Birmingham and Atlanta are plied
with requests from family and frieds for a look-see. The town 

that
Nelle Lee described in To Kill a Mockingbird as a
"tired old" place in 1935 has grown and even prospered a bit. There's
a big Vanity Fair (lingerie) sewing factory, a junior college and
several large pulpwood mills on the Alabama River. But it's still a
very conservative place, completely satisfied with itself. A little
probing convinces one that the oft-stated indifference to celebrity is
genuine. Even if Nelle Lee were not obsessive about her privacy (she
has not published since the huge success of Mockingbird in 1960, she
does not give interviews and cuts off anyone who is quoted in print
about her) and if Truman Capote did not live what is delicately
referred to as "an unusual lifestyle," Monroeville would still not be
interested in being known for its writers.
          There is a market for Monroeville. Ann Pridgen, the town librarian,
reports a steady stream of letters and visitors from all over the
United States and several foreign countries seeking information about
the town and its famous son and daughter. Steve Stewart, editor of the
county's excellent weekly newspaper, The Monroe
Journal, is often called on by visiting writers and
journalists who single out Monroe County when writing about the
South. Yet there are no To Kill a Mockingbird T-shirts
to be had in Monroeville, no signs proclaiming this the childhood home
of Lee and Truman Capote, only a mimeographed handout available at the
library of Chamber of Commerce office explaining that the Lee house is
now the site of a Dairy Queen and Boo Radley's tree does not
exist. The reading room in the musty museum in the old courthouse is
the Nelle Harper Lee-Truman Capote Room, but even that concession to
fame seems unenthusiastic and underplayed. Something was expected of
the town, and that seems to be [unclear]response.
          "We're the safest folks in the world," explains one shrewd
character in To Kill a Mockingbird to the disillusioned Jem and
Scout. The safest folks are nice to know and pleasant to visit but ill
at ease with the world of ideas and mystified by fame that seems to
them based on stories that are not "true" and images that are
distorted. Monroe Country, which did not choose to run for literary
immortality, has nevertheless been elected, but firmly refuses to
serve.
          
            Harriet Swift, currently a reporter with the
Oakland Tribune, is a native Alabamian who spent her
childhood summers on her grandfather's farm in Monroe
County.
          
        
        
          Stephen Oates. Let The Trumpet Sound: The Life of Martin
Luther King, Jr. Harper and Row, 1982. Paper edition by Plume,
New American Library, 1983.
          By Hanks, Lawrence J.Lawrence J. Hanks
          Vol. 5, No. 6, 1983, pp. 23-24
          
          Let The Trumpet Sound is the first biography of King
to appear since David Lewis' King: A Critical Biography
was published in 1970. One still might reasonably ask, "What could
Oates possibly add to the telling of such a well-known life since four
book length biographies have already appeared?" (Lawrence Reddick's
Crusader Without Violence, 1959;Lerone Bennett's
What Manner of Man, 1964; William Miller's
Martin Luther King, Jr. His Life, Martyrdom, and Meaning for
the World, 1968; and the Lewis biography.) To begin with,
Oates is the first to use newly available King materials at Boston
University and at the King Center in Atlanta. He has also made
excellent use of government documents, oral histories and many
writings touching upon King's life and the civil rights movement that
have appeared in the last ten years.
          Oates allows King to speak for himself whenever possible, infusing
the familiar portions of the biography with new vitality. At times,
this device makes the work seem autobiographical, with Oates adding
analysis: it creates a sense of listening to King.
          Writing that he has "no interest in adding to the deification of
King as a flawless immortal " Oates deals compassionately with his
frailties. The result is the best and most complete account we now
have of King's life, revealing an individual striving toward
philosophical consistency. He wished to be more like Gandhi. yet his
desire to take a vow of poverty and discard his middle-class wardrobe
struggled with a strong sense of family responsibility and the image
of his leadership role. He wanted to take a day for fasting and
praying each week but the pace of his schedule often took
control. King wanted to take a vacation from the movement and
completely develop his non-violent philosophy, but his charismatic
presence and fund raising skills always seemed to be required.
          King reacted to the frequent charge of being middle-class by
largely rejecting the more negative superficial middle-class values;
he abhored conspicuous consumption and refused to enrich himself from
speech making. donating these earnings to the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference and other civil rights groups. He refused a
number of lucrative jobs in order to stay with the movement.
          The sacrificing of personal needs found little compensation in
King's role as leader. There were jealousies, factionalism and genuine
strategic disagreements. And, he was extremely sensitive to the common
perception of the modern black struggle for civil rights being called
the "King Movement."
          While accepting the role as the most well-known figure, King felt
that this was a result of his being the chosen leader of the movement
rather than a result of personal ambition. He repeatedly pointed out
that the real heroes and heroines were the blacks of the South who
found the courage to fight for their rights--he was simply an
"instrument of history." He made this point in Stride Toward
Freedom and in his Nobel Peace Prize acceptance speech.
          Oates' examination of King's ordeal with the FBI and the campaign
waged against him by J. Edgar Hoover is perhaps the only part of
Let The Trumpet Sound that is "new." Determined to
discredit King. Hoover received official sanction from President
Kennedy to tap his home telephone and those of the SCLC. Between
October 1963 and December 1964 the FBI bugged rooms wherever King
stayed. In January 1965, the FBI sent a composite tape of these
recordings to the SCLC.
          Oates argues that "whether or not the tape with its alleged sounds
of sexual activity actually incriminated 

King may never be known." He
dismisses Andrew Young's and Coretta King's denials of the tapes'
incriminating potential as attempts "to protect King." Although it is
never explicitly stated, Oates' contention that King was guilty of
infidelity is based on statements made by King to confidants,
statements in his sermons and personal statements by confidants. The
case is strong, albeit circumstantial, even to those who wish to
deify. Since well-known papers such as the Chicago New,
the Washington Post, the Atlanta
Constitution, and the New York Times all
refused to carry the King "sex stories" when they were offered by the
FBI, the rumors never became widespread public knowledge during King's
life. Even within the movement, only a few confidants knew about the
tape. King perservered to confront Selma, Chicago, Memphis, the Viet
Nam war, and to make plans for the Poor People's March on Washington
before his assassination.
          At the time of his death, King was becoming a more radical critic
of America. He had grown to realize that segregation and
disenfranchisement were only symptoms of a larger problem: the
economic exploitation of poor people regardless of color. The Civil
Rights Bill of [unclear] and The
Voting Rights Act of 1965 did little to improve the daily lives of the
nation's poor blacks. The Acts did not bring economic independence to
rural Southern blacks or anything substantial to northern ghetto
dwellers. Bayard Rustin had argued since 1962 that the civil rights
movement should expand its agenda to focus on wealth and poverty in
America as well as race. King could now see the merit of Rustin's
position and he was ready to act. The Poor People's Campaign would
have been his first effort toward the goal of bringing about a
redistribution of wealth in America.
          King theorized that part of the reconstructing of American society
"might require nationalization of vital industries, as well as a
guaranteed income for impoverished Americans." While Oates stops short
of placing an ideological label on King's new philosophy, others have
argued that King was moving toward democratic socialism (See David
Garrow, Illinois Times, 31 March-6 April, 1983, "From
Reformer to Revolutionary"). One can easily argue that King, if he
were alive today, would support the women's movement, disarmament, and
abhor the growing middle-class consciousness among black Americans.
          Having the credentials to insulate himself from the harshest
aspects of class and racial discrimination, King could have easily
lived a comfortable life. He could have pursued his personal dream and
taught theology at a university. Instead, he felt compelled to
advocate [unclear] rights and humanity
of others that he jeopardized his own self-preservation. Let
The Trumpet Sound is a comprehensive and compassionate account
of this great life.
          
            Lawrence J. Hanks is a graduate student in government at
Harvard University. His dissertation research focuses on black
political participation in the rural South since the 1965 Voting
Rights Act.
          
        
      
    
  