
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 6, Number 2, 1984
        
          Figures of speech--High Tech Drifter
          By Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, pp. 1-3
          
          
            There is an unmistakable glint in Dirty Gary's eye
as he takes point blank aim at the man who holds the Democratic Party
hostage. "Go ahead Mondale, make my day."
          
          
            "Dry up and blow away, Gary, " snaps the bleary
Fritz, his arm tightening around the neck of the Nomination as he
backpedals toward San Francisco.
          
          As the Live Eye opens, the hawk-faced Coloradan is taking
questions.
          "Senator, your rapid rise this primary season brings to this
reporter's mind the recent blockbuster movie 'Sudden Impact.' But just
how long can you continue to build a presidential campaign out of
Clint Eastwood scripts?"
          "Just as long," counters Dirty Gary, "as Eastwood continues to call
himself an independent, Western, charismatic, Jeffersonian Democrat,
not especially big on gun control."
          "But Eastwood's not fresh," argues a columnist. "He's a
dinosaur. Why don't you get with the team?"
          "It's true," says Dirty Gary, "Eastwood's films have roots in the
vigilante past, but they respond to the hidden agendas of the new
idealism of self-interest. They are for youngsters of any age. They
also happen to be the only scenarios which can beat the
Death-Valley-warmed-over plot lines of Reagan in November. I offer a
choice between the past and the future: government on horseback and by
twenty-muleteam or the digital cowboy on the microwave range--the
Western Sizzler."
          "Aren't you getting a bit ahead of yourself? What about
Mondale?"
          "Mondale is mush. Until after New Hampshire all he did was retreat
beyond understatement. He's part of the complacent, back-scratching,
bloated menagerie of Washington insiders who have the look of
losers. Their butts have the shape of the chairs behind their
desks.
          "Eastwood," continues Dirty Gary, "always has to move against the
corrupt, bureacratic organization men--the bosses on the take--at the
same time as he pinches 

off the heads of the low-life hoodlums who
make life hard for young, urban professionals in parking garages and
in the elevators of fitness centers."
          "How do you respond," asks a savvy anchor, "to the often heard
criticism that both you and Eastwood are steely, aloof loners with an
Irish fatalistic sense of inevitability?"
          "Look," snaps Dirty Gary, "I put on my business suit like everybody
else--one Lucchese boot at a time. I'm often called detached and laid
back. That's just the way I am."
          "Senator, what do you mean when you say, 'People will know about me
through what they read or what they see'?"
          "I mean television spots, airport fly-ins and full page newspaper
ads. As you know, our campaign has set the pace in making democracy
safe for television. Iowa and the New England states were our test
markets, but I've given up more than a year to learn how to appeal to
the young and the restless--the voters who can decide the '84
election.
          "Mondale dared to be cautions for too long while we have taken the
initiative in making caution look daring. Consider my defense
proposals for instance. I call for an increase even beyond Reagan's
military budget and at the same time am able to appear both modern and
pragmatic, and to lay claim to the high moral ground of the Nuclear
Freeze.
          "We're patching up voter indifferences with a play to the young at
heart. Computer graphics give us the look of the future in our video
ads. We've benefited from my easily communicated maverick astringency
and hatred of phoniness. We've also gained from Mondale's own TV
appearances with his crime boss' wet look, banker's suit and leaden
eyelids. And, once the primary votes began to come in,
Mondale--despite his fighting phrases--has not yet been able to wipe
the chagrin off his face--even after Illinois.
          "Then," continues Dirty Gary, his words coming in an
uncharacteristic rush, "you know the advertisement that the New York
Times runs for itself? The one that goes, 'Every
message is at the mercy of its environment'? Well, we've made our
media shots with that ad in mind. First, we've concentrated on the
main entertainment shows of television--the local newscasts. You've
seen how in a single hour at an airport I can appear live on the news
shows of every station in a local market. Also, we buy commercial time
as close to the newscasts as we can get. Our spots look and sound as
technically flashy and as newsy as the news appears entertaining.
          "Second, we choose key words, dramatic moods and poses in our ads
to resemble those in commercials which are popular with the same
audience that we are targeting. That way, successful products
reinforce our message. Every time Chrysler touts the New Chrysler
Technology, or AT&T flashes up their futuristic hardware and logo
while talking about A New Revolution from AT&T Information Systems, we
benefit. Think of what happens when Michael Jackson sings and dances
for Pepsi: There's A Whole New Generation Out There. My biggest
mistake in the campaign so far is letting Mondale beat me to 'Where's
the beef?'. It's a real underdog's slogan--hype that pays upon the
consumer's current distrust of hype."
          "I don't understand," confesses a reporter. "How can you expect to
benefit from the New Chrylser when everyone has heard that you voted
against the bail-out."
          "Never mind. That's the past. My image of the new reminds you of
other new images, they remind you of me and that generates the
character of the emerging environment--which wouldn't be complete
without Michael Jackson and the New Chrysler Corporation and AT&T and
Gary Hart. Bunkmates with the future.
          "We intend to make our place among a fast moving and exciting
ensemble of leading-edge imagery," says Dirty Gary through his rugged
good looks. "Many citizens of the electronic village don't want their
lifestyles to get out of phase. We want to be as necessary to their
poise and moods of desire as a Pepsi."
          "Senator, it seems more and more likely that the party's nominee
will not be chosen until this summer's convention. How are you going
to keep track of delegates, particularly the uncommitted?"

          "That's simple enough," answers Dirty Gary. "I'll do what
Eastwood--or, for that matter, what Jack or Buddy Kennedy would
do--break down the delegates' hotel room doors and see if they're
dressed like neo-liberals. If not, I'll open fire. A final
question?"
          "Yes. What happens when the Great Communicator hears about
this?"
          "Reagan puts on his coat and tie just like I do," Dirty Gary
replies, "one shoulder holster at a time. I think it's clear that the
New is not new enough for both of us."
        
        
          Meese and Civil Rights
          By Neas, Ralph G.Ralph G. Neas
          Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, pp. 3-4
          
          We are here this morning to announce that the Leadership Conference
will strongly oppose the confirmation of Edwin Meese to be Attorney
General of the United States.
          In the course of its thirty-four years, the Conference has only
rarely taken a position on a presidential nomination. Indeed, this is
the first time in more than a decade that the Conference has opposed a
Cabinet or Supreme Court level nomination. Only an extraordinary
situation could compel such a decision.
          The Conference position is not based primarily on the considerable
differences that we have had with the substantive policies and
programs initiated and developed by Mr. Meese in his role as
coordinator of deomestic policy for the Reagan Administration. If such
a standard had been applied in the past, we would have opposed more
than a few nominations advanced in the last for administrations.
          Bluntly put, we oppose the nomination because, on the basis of our
observations over the past three years, we do not believe Ed Meese, as
the nation's chief law enforcement officer, would enforce, vigorously
and objectively, our nation's civil rights laws.
          The extreme civil rights positions taken by Mr. Meese and the
Reagan Administration are scandalous. Their efforts to defeat a strong
and effective Voting Rights Act, to oppose the Equal Rights Amendment,
to relax the obligations of school systems for educating handicapped
children, to restrict constitutional remedies that have long been
available, and to generally weaken almost all our civil rights laws,
have demonstrated repeatedly the Administration's insensitivity,
unfairness, and indifference to women, minorities, the disabled and
many other victims of discrimination.
          Regrettably, a brief look at the Administration's decision-making
process on a number of critical rights issues will demonstrate that Ed
Meese lacks the commitment to ensure that the laws are fully enforced
and too often encroaches inappropriately upon the constitutional
responsibilities of the Judicial and Legislative Branches.
          The Bob Jones fiasco is perhaps the best example of what we are
talking about. Since the early 1970's, it has been well established
law that the government could not grant tax exempt status to schools
which discriminate on the basis of race. Apparently, Mr. Meese and
others wanted to change that policy. Rather than ask Congress to enact
new legislation or ask the courts to reverse past rulings, the
Administration announced on January 8, 1982 that it would no longer
deny tax exempt status to schools like Bob Jones and Goldsboro
Christian.
          Because of the political firestorm that erupted, President Reagan,
Mr. Meese, and others began a series of confusing and contradictory
explanations. Eventually they backed off. But not until it became
painfully apparent that Mr. Meese and his allies in the Administration
were more than willing to refuse to enforce a law with which they
disagreed. Subsequently, of course, the Supreme Court repudiated the
Administration's legal position by an eight to one vote.
          Another example is Mr. Meese's involvement in the Legal Services
Corporation. It has long been clear that Mr. Meese has worked hard to
abolish the Legal Service Corporation.
          Furthermore, once Congress overwhelmingly rejected the Reagan
Administration's attempts to kill the Corporation, President Reagan,
through Mr. Meese and his staff, proceeded to do everything possible
to gut it by executive action. Contrary to congressional intent,
attempts were made to control the Legal Services Corporation by
appointing individuals who would dismantle the Corporation from
within.
          Finally, there is the death of the independent U.S. Civil Rights
Commission. For twenty-five years, no President had ever fired a
member of the Commission. But thanks to the leadership role of
Mr. Meese, President Reagan has fired five commissioners who disagreed
with his civil rights policies and replaced them with commissioners
who reflect his views. We now have the Reagan Commission on Civil
Rights.
          The actions and attitudes of Edwin Meese as presidential counselor
are, by themselves, deeply disturbing. But when you combine the
possible confirmation of Ed Meese with the Department of Justice's
current record of non-enforcement with respect to civil rights laws,
you have a Justice 

Department in constant conflict with the
Constitution and the courts, and the rule of law itself is
imperiled.
          While the Justice Department constantly uses the issues of busing
and quotas to deflect attention from its abysmal enforcement record,
its record cannot be hidden from full public scrutiny too much
longer. For example, in the first thirty months of the Reagan
Administration, it had filed one school desegregation suit. And that
suit was pursuant to a court order. In fair housing, it had filed six
cases, compared to forty-six cases filed by the previous
administration in the same amount of time. With respect to all civil
cases filed, the Reagan Administration had filed forty-two, compared
to 124 cases for the Carter Administration, a precipitous decrease of
sixty-six percent.
          It is no wonder that based on the Department's rhetoric and its
record of non-enforcement, minorities, women, the disabled and others
no longer view the Justice Department as the champion for those who
have been the victims of discrimination. Rather they consider the
Department of Justice their adversary.
          The confirmation of Ed Meese, someone who has already demonstrated
that he is not committed to vigorously enforcing our civil rights
laws, would only reinforce that belief. I he Senate must only confirm
an individual who will enforce the law, someone who will be an
Attorney General for all the people, not just for the privileged
few. To do less will compound immeasurably the tragedy of the Reagan
record on civil rights.
          
            An excerpt from the statement of the Leadership
Conference on Civil Rights opposing the nomination of Edwin Meese to
be Attorney General. Ralph G. Neas is executive director of the
Leadership Conference, a coalition of 165 national organizations
representing blacks, Hispanics and Asian Americans, women, labor, the
disabled, the aged, religious groups and minority businesses and
professions.
          
        
        
          Deep South Votes With Feet, Not With Hart
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, pp. 4-5
          
          According to a Southern Regional Council analysis of 106 targeted
voting precincts in Alabama and Georgia, black voters in these two
states turned out in almost unprecedented numbers in the March 13
presidential primary while whites generally stayed away from the
polls.
          The SRC study, the first-detailed examination of actual voting
patterns of the March 13 election in the two states, showed that
almost half of all predominantly black precincts had more than fifty
percent of their registered voters turn out on election day. The
highest turnouts in black precincts were found in places such as
Wilcox County, Alabama; Thomas County, Georgia; and Albany,
Georgia.
          In contrast, almost three out of five of all predominantly white
precincts in the study showed turnout rates below thirty percent. The
turnout in predominantly white precincts was lowest in rural areas
such as Worth County, Georgia and Choctaw County, Alabama.
          "On election day some counties witnessed both the highest and
lowest rates of turnout seen in primary elections in and lowest rates
of turnout seen in primary elections in decades," says Steve Suitts,
SRC director and author of the study. In Greene County, Alabama, for
example, a predominantly white precinct turned out at a rate of only
fifteen percent while a nearby voting precinct with a majority of
black registered voters turned out at a rate of sixty-three
percent. In Albany, Georgia one precinct turned out at a rate of less
than ten percent while two predominantly black precincts voted at a
rate of more than eighty percent.
          While primary elections usually have smaller rates of voter
turnout, a few black precincts showed turnout rates higher in the
primary election than in the 1980 general election. While only
fifty-three percent of the voters in a predominantly black precinct in
Thomas County turned out in 1980 to vote for Jimmy Carter or Ronald
Reagan, sixty-nine percent came out in the March 13th primary.
          The SRC study also found that presidential candidate Gary Hart led
all other candidates on March 13th in attracting white voters. Hart
carried twenty of the fifty-two predominantly white precincts studied
in the report. (John Glenn carried nineteen precincts and Walter
Mondale won eleven precincts targeted for the study).
          Hart attracted support in a variety of white precincts. He carried
the urban, white, liberal precinct of Morningside in Atlanta, a
predominantly white, strongly conservative precinct in Choctaw County,
Alabama, and a white, strongly democratic precinct in Rome,
Georgia. Yet, Hart was also strong in the targeted white precincts in
Georgia which Ronald Reagan carried in 1980.
          "The strength of Gary Hart in white voting districts has Lo be
balanced by the failure of a large percentage of whites to vote in the
primary election," Suitts says. "Most whites--unlike blacks--voted
with their feet by staying home. Apparently, their candidate was not
on the ballot in the Democratic primary."
          The large turnout of black voters evidently was motivated by Jesse
Jackson's candidacy which received the lion's share of the votes in
black precincts. In the SRC study, 

Jackson carried more than four out
of five of all majority black precincts. "And usually by margins of
more than twenty percentage points." While Jackson's largest margins
of victory were in rural precincts, he also did well in urban
areas. In precincts such as Morehouse College in Atlanta where a
larger number of black students vote, Jackson received eighty-nine
percent of the precinct vote.
          Jesse Jackson also carried some predominantly white precincts. In
the SRC study, two of the fifty-two precincts with a majority of white
registered voters were won by Jackson. In a fifty-five percent white
precinct in Camilla, Georgia, Jackson received thirty-five percent of
the vote--more than any of his competitors--and in Waynesboro, Georgia
the precinct where almost two out of three voters are white, Jackson
received the largest vote with thirty-four percent of the total.
          "Given trends elsewhere," Suitts observes, "Jackson's victory in
these white precincts is probably the result of a high black turnout
and a low white turnout within the precinct itself. The result was a
plurality victory in white precincts for Jackson."
          Walter Mondale carried the other remaining black precincts although
only in a few places in Alabama did he receive more than fifty percent
of the vote of the precinct. His strongest showings in black precincts
were in Birmingham where Mayor Richard Arrington, the city's first
black mayor, had endorsed Mondale and in other places such as
Montgomery and Choctaw County, where the Alabama Democratic
Conference--the state's largest black political group--has a strong
presence. "Mondale was able to reverse the tidal wave of Jackson
support in black precincts only when-there were exceptionally
well-organized black groups working for Mondale," Suitts says.
          Gary Hart and John Glenn carried no predominantly black precinct
included in the study.
          While Walter Mondale carried both Georgia and Alabama, the precinct
study shows his support was seldom strong in any one
precinct. Usually, Mondale carried a precinct with less than forty
percent of the vote. At the same time, Mondale was able to receive
some important support in all precincts. In all 106 surveyed
precincts, Mondale always received at least eleven percent of the
vote. "Mondale's strength which gave him enough votes to win the two
states was in its breadth and not its depth of support." Suitts
says.
          For more information on the study, contact the SRC office.
        
        
          LEAF
          By Johnson, TimTim Johnson
          Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, pp. 5-9
          
          Atlanta environmentalist Deborah Sheppard was organizing a state
conference for a coalition of environmental groups in 1982. Among the
offers of volunteer help she received, one stands out.
          "This woman called. She was a mother of two, a former nurse with
the World Health Organization and a law student at the University of
Georgia. She was a ball of fire--talking about all the things she and
her partner were doing. Upon graduation, they planned to open an
Atlanta office of LEAF, the Legal Environmental Assistance
Foundation.
          "She overwhelmed me with her energy and enthusiasm," Sheppard
says. "Then she said that she was the low key partner."
          When Vicki Breman called, very few Georgians knew her or her
partner, Laurie Fowler. But they had been laying groundwork for years,
and eighteen months later, were among the best known and most
effective environmentalists in the state.
          Breman began law school at age thirty-seven. At Athens, she met
Fowler, twenty-five, also specializing in environmental law.
          After hearing Birmingham attorney Suzi Ruhl talk about the LEAF
office in Alabama, Fowler and Breman decided to start their own firm
in Georgia.
          "We weren't sure if we should be a LEAF chapter or merely model
ourselves after what LEAF was doing," Fowler recalls. "We talked with
activists all over Georgia about what the needs were and we decided to
join with LEAF."
          A native of Marietta, Georgia, Fowler had worked with the Sierra
Club Legal Defense Fund in San Francisco, the National Clean Air
Coalition in DC, and environmental attorney Roger Leed in Seattle.
          In its short existence, LEAF has become a remarkably effective tool
for environmentalists in the Deep South. Its offices in Atlanta,
Birmingham, Knoxville and Tallahassee, have opposed strip-mining, the
spraying of paraquat in Georgia's mountains, the construction of a
nuclear power plant, air pollution, and hazardous disposal of toxic
wastes. And, belying the usual sprout-eater image of
lawyer-environmentalist groups, LEAF has targeted its resources to
come to the aid of poor and working-class Southerners, the traditional
victims of industrial toxins and chemical wastes both on the job and
in their neighborhoods.
          Toxic waste dumps, sanitary landfills, notorious polluting
industries and major highways appear with more than coincidental
frequency near poor neighborhoods.
          In Alabama, where LEAF was organized by Birmingham attorney Ruhl in
1979, much of the group's efforts have 

dealt with toxic waste
disposal: currently operating landfills, abandoned dumps that contain
chemical wastes and proposed dumps.
          LEAF'S Jeff Roseman, an Alabama epidemiologist, helped in
investigation of the health of residents of Triana, and black
community whose water was poisoned with DDT by the Tennessee Valley
Authority and the US Army. DDT levels in fish and in Triana residents
were the highest ever recorded in a US population. The government
settled out of court, paying residents more than twenty million
dollars.
          In promoting alternatives to the dumping of toxic wastes in
Alabama, LEAF argues that virtually all toxics now created by industry
can be safely disposed of with current technology. (Radioactive wastes
are a major exception.) It has filed comments with the state of
Alabama in support of applications for alternative disposal
technologies and has drafted model legislation to provide tax
incentatives for the applicants. Alabama's toxic law, which LEAF has
targeted for reform, now automatically grants a permit to dump within
ninety days of application if the state doesn't act on the request.
          "Our goal is to make Alabama's law at least as stringent as the
federal law," says Suzi Ruhl. "If not, then we will move to have the
federal government take over enforcement."
          Currently, underground injection of toxics is prohibited in
Alabama, but Stanley Graves, one of seven commissioners of the state's
Department of Environmental Management, owns a well drilling company
and is pushing for injection. So far, LEAF has successfully opposed
Graves.
          Alabama LEAF is also fighting a DEM effort to allow blanket permits
for emitting pollutants into state waterways. Present law requires a
permit for each water site that a company wants to pollute. LEAF is
opposing a change in the law which would allow one permit to cover all
the discharges of a company. With the law changed, a coal company
would need only a single permit to dump wastes into streams anywhere
in Alabama.
          "If the law gets changed," Ruhl points out, "a coal company could
apply for a discharge permit on June l, then there would be a hearing
on June 15. Then, in December, you might hear that the company was
going to pollute the water in your community, but you would not get a
hearing because the company would already have its permit."
          Citing the legislative history of the Clean Water Act, LEAF has
argued in written comments that the single permit proposal violates
the intent of Congress. "If the change goes through the legislature,"
Ruhl says," we'll sue. They're probably waiting for us to disappear,"
she adds, referring to the Alabama Department of Environmental
Management, "but we won't."
          LEAF is also grappling with air pollution in Alabama. It organized
a state conference and is a cofounder of the Alabama Coalition for
Clean Air. Pointing to deleterious 

health effects. it is opposing
Alabama Power Company's efforts to convert two natural gas fueled
steam generating plants in downtown Birmingham to coal.
          In addition to providing counsel for individual members,
LEAF-Alabama serves as the legal arm for two chapters of the Audubon
Society, the Alabama Conservancy and the Sierra Club.
          Even as attorney Ruhl sets about to organize a LEAF office in
Tallahasse, she continues to coordinate the work on Alabama toxics
issues while attorneys Larry Putt and Sally McConnell carry on other
concerns.
          "We've grown faster than I ever expected," says Suzi Ruhl. LEAF is
currently operating in Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee and Florida. The
goal is to expand into seven more Southern states. All the staffers
are natives, most are women.
          "Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund, Natural Resources Defense Council
and the other national environmental law groups are very active in
other areas of the nation," LEAF boardmember Ogden Doremus notes, "but
they don't have offices down here. So we're doing it ourselves."
Doremus, an attorney from Metter, Georgia, has argued many
environmental cases over the last thirty years.
          
            Stones in Their Pathway
          
          Florida is the nation's fastest growing state and many developers
there see ecological concerns as nothing more than stones in their
pathway to profits. LEAF-Florida, which did not begin operations until
January of this year, is already involved in several efforts to
protect the state's close-to-the-surface groundwater from
contamination and from depletion under the pressures of population
growth and development.
          LEAF-Florida is monitoring a state department of health
epidemiological study of the impacts of the controversial fungicide
ethyl dibromide (EDB).
          Joining with the Romona Civic Association and residents of
Jacksonville, LEAF is involved in a PCB clean-up and public education
project at a chemical storage site which exploded, contaminating the
surrounding community. One of the aims here is to have the site
included on the Superfund list, making it eligible for federal
money.
          
            LEAF-CAO
          
          The LEAF-Central Appalachian Office opened in Knoxville in 1982
with support from the Mary Reynolds Babcock Foundation. Attorney Carol
Davis left her job with the US Department of Interior's Office of
Surface Mining to work on strip-mining issues. Attorney Gary Davis, an
appalachian native and former aide to California Governor Jerry Brown,
is covering toxics. Davis set up California's program for alternatives
to land disposal of toxic wastes, a model. LEAF boardmember Neil
McBride, an attorney with Rural Legal Services in Tennessee, has
worked with Ralph Nader on 

environmental issues, including a
well-known investigation of pollution on the Georgia Coast described
in the book The Water Lords.
          In Tennessee, LEAF has taken on the US nuclear facilities at Oak
Ridge where, from 1950 through 1963, nearly 2l/2 million pounds of
mercury were dumped into the surface and groundwater--threatening the
health of residents along the Clinch River.
          Current standards used at Oak Ridge for toxic waste dumping include
"unlined surface impoundments" (Department of Energy jargon for holes
in the ground) which, says Gary Davis, "don't even meet the standards
of the 60s."
          The DOE, which operates Oak Ridge, says that the toxic waste laws
don't apply. It claims that the Atomic Energy Act exempts facilities
involved in nuclear production from other regulation, a contention
which Davis disputes. LEAF represented SOCM (Save Our Cumberland
Mountains) on the Oak Ridge issue in state administrative proceedings
and, in September of 1983, LEAF and the Natural Resources Defense
Council filed suit in federal district court in Knoxville against the
dumping. If LEAF wins, the case will provide a precedent for other DOE
operations, including the Savannah River Plant.
          In Memphis, LEAF-CAO is assisting the League of Women Voters'
review of the Superfund cleanup of the Hollywood Dump--where Velsicol
Chemical Company dumped toxics.
          "The state people know we're here," says Gary Davis, pointing to
notes of a meeting in which Tennessee regulators said they would have
to comply with "the letter of the law since LEAF will be out there
watching."
          The lack of enforcement of strip mining laws by the Tennessee
Division of Surface Mining led, in the summer of 1983, to LEAF's
serving as legal representative for a coalition which included SOCM,
Tennessee Citizens for Wilderness Planning, the Tennessee League of
Women Voters and the Tennessee Environmental Council. On behalf of the
Sierra Club, LEAF has filed notice with the Division of an intention
to sue unless substantial progress is made in the enforcement of strip
mining law. Barbara Kelly of Chattanooga, active with the Sierra Club
and SOCM, believes that state efforts to control strip mining "have
fallen apart."
          On behalf of SOCM and TCWP, LEAF filed motions to intervene in a
class action suit in Campbell County chancery court. Forty-nine coal
companies were arguing that they should be given more time to comply
with the state strip mining law. The case was removed to US district
court in Knoxville whereupon the companies withdrew.
          As it challenges the state's overall laxity, LEAF is aiding various
citizen groups in efforts to protect particularly fragile locations
from the erosion, flooding and water pollution which accompany surface
mining. It is representing citizens seeking protection for land
adjacent to the Frozen Head Park in Morgan County and for the Douglas
Branch Watershed in Campbell County.
          In an effort at harassment, the M.C. Coal Company of Chattanooga
sued the Sierra Club and Tennessee Friends of the Earth in March 1983,
alleging libel in the groups' request for a hearing concerning M.C.'s
water quality permit and for articles in the Tennes-Sierran (the Club
newsletter) which dealt with violations in the strip mining
law. Following presentation of a brief and an oral argument by Carol
Nickle of LEAF, the case was dimissed.
          
            LEAF-Georgia
          
          LEAF-Georgia opened its offices in Atlanta in July of 1983. Six
months later it had become one of the busiest and most effective
environmental organizations in the state.
          In August of 1983, LEAF-Georgia challenged the federal Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) use of paraquat on marijuana plants
in the North Georgia mountains. Local residents and campers were
outraged as helicopters sprayed the deadly substance (a half-ounce on
the skin can be lethal) onto small patches of marijuana as DEA movie
cameras whirled. The DEA intended to convince the government of
Colombia to adopt spraying, in spite of Colombia's questioning its
safety. Area residents organized Citizens Opposed to Paraquat Spraying
and asked for LEAF's help.
          LEAF worked with private attorneys David Walbert, John Bell and
Paul Hermann who obtained a restraining order in August from federal
court in Georgia's Northern District. Meanwhile, LEAF joined with the
Sierra Club Legal Defense Fund and three other national organizations
in a successful suit in US District Court for the District of Columbia
preventing the spraying of paraquat on all federal 

land unless and
unfit DEA prepares an environmental impact statement.
          Following the DC court's ruling, in a January 1984 hearing in
Atlanta (which DEA called a "scoping session"), DEA officials
suggested that critics of the spraying were smokers and growers who
were hiding behind environmental issues. (The DEA photographed all
oponents at the hearing.) White County Presbyterian preacher Jerry
Brinegar said that the citizens of area would be happy to go in with
the DEA and pull the marijuana plants up by hand. Pointing out that
the headwaters of the Chattahoochee River (which supplies drinking
water for Atlanta, Columbia and towns below) rise on National Forest
land, LEAF attorney Vicki Breman concluded that "Georgia's water
supply and wildlife are seriously threatened by the use of paraquat
and other herbicides."
          The Forest Service's use of the herbicides tordon and velpar are
being challenged by LEAF Georgia on behalf of residents of Rabun
County. These herbicides, explicitly labelled not for use in areas
where water contamination is possible are being applied in the
nation's second-rainiest county. Both of these herbicides have been
linked to health problems. Tordon, called "Agent White" when used in
Vietnam (and chemically close to Agent Orange) is presently being
investigated by the government of Brazil as the suspected cause of
forty-two deaths along the route of a power line where it was
sprayed. LEAF is raising money to test the Rabun County water and to
publish an organizing handbook for residents.
          Acting as legal counsel for the Campaign for a Prosperous Georgia
(see "Money on the Mainline," Southern Changes, March/April; 1983),
LEAF has also prepared a petition for intervention against the Vogtle
Nuclear Power Plant now under construction by the Georgia Power
Company. Plant Vogtle, the most expensive construction project in
state history, is being challenged on environmental, safety and
economic grounds. It is a prime example of economic and environmental
concerns paralleling, not contradicting each other. If completed and
placed in the rate base, Plant Vogtle would cause the largest electric
rate hike in Georgia history. LEAF will provide ongoing assistance to
citizens groups working to stop the plant.
          LEAF-Georgia is working on many other issues: trying to force the
state Department of Transportation to install promised noise barriers
along the interstate highways near Atlanta residences; attempting to
stop construction by Oglethorpe Power of a high-voltage line through a
historic district of White County; presenting comments on the proposed
restart of the L-Reactor at the Savannah River Plant where tritium and
plutonium for nuclear weapons are produced; and providing technical
advice on legal environmental issues to private attorneys around the
state.
          LEAF has financed itself through a variety of means. Most of the
support for the Alabama and Tennessee offices has come from the Mary
Reynolds Babcock Foundation. LEAF-Georgia has gathered money from
individual donations and fundraising events A benefit concert by the
new-wave band REM brought in more than six thousand dollars; an
auction raised another thousand According to Sissy Kegley,
administrative coordinator, LEAF-Georgia already has some 150 members
who pay annual dues or monthly pledges.
          LEAF's rapid emergence and its frequent successes come with the
dedication of its staff, the sophistication of their work and
familiarity with the issues and the region, and--in view of the
traditional tentativeness of established conservation groups in the
region and the single-minded development policies often followed by
Southern governments--from the fact that there is so much to do in the
South.
          
            Legal Environmental Assistance Foundation (LEAF)
          
          Alabama  2330 Highland Avenue, South  Birmingham, Alabama
35205  205-324-0932
          Florida  203 North Gadsden Street  Tallahassee, Florida
32301  904-681 -2591
          Georgia  1102 Healey Building  57 Forsyth Street, NW
Atlanta, Georgia 30303  404-688-3299
          Central Appalachian Office  602 Gay Street, Suite 507
Knoxville, Tennessee 37902  615-637-5172
          
            Tim Johnson is executive director of the Educational
Campaign for a Prosperous Georgia.
          
        
        
          Gloria Naylor, The Women of Brewster Place. New
York: Viking Press, 1982. Penguin, 1983.
          By Harris, TrudierTrudier Harris
          Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, pp. 12-13
          
          Gloria Naylor's The Women of Brewster Place is a
volume destined for long life. A collection of nine sections which
together form a unified whole, the volume is powerful and strikingly
well written. It captures the pain, suffering and futile attempts at
happiness of a group of black women transplanted to a northern city's
deadend street known as Brewster Place.
          Most of the women in Brewster Place have their origins in the
South. Mattie Michael, who is the center of the first section, was
born and raised in Tennessee. Sheltered by a father who witnessed the
birth of his only child late in his life, Mattie is suddenly tumbled
by Butch Fuller, the local dandy, into the mire of humanity. The
pregnancy that results from Mattie's one sexual encounter with Butch
causes her to be thrown out of her father's house. In order to save
her father from the murder she knows he will commit she refuses to
name Butch. Instead, she moves to Asheville, North Carolina to live
with her friend Etta Johnson until the baby is born. Although Etta
moves on rather quickly after the birth, Mattie's "temporary" stay
ends more than thirty years later when her own sheltered son skips
bail instead of facing an assault charge, causing Mattie to lose the
house she has put up to ensure his court appearance.
          Mattie's tale forms the backdrop against which the lives of several
of the women of Brewster Place are to be viewed. She moves into
Brewster Place upon her son's abrupt and permanent departure. Mattie's
loss enables her to listen sympathetically to the tales of despair she
hears and to understand the pain she witnesses. She manages to rein in
her own pain consistently enough to offer guidance and comfort to
others.
          Mattie has an expansiveness of human feeling which allows her to
watch patiently as Etta, also in her fifties, chases the ever
illusionary dream of marriage to a respectable man. Etta has spent her
life in "business opportunities" with men but Mattie knows that she is
fast using up her assets. A minister picked for the husband role
consents only to be her gigolo, forcing Etta to see that the only love
and caring she is likely to experience will come from Mattie.
          Other women on Brewster Place, are not so directly tied to
Mattie. One, Cora Lee, fell in love so desperately with dolls as a
child that she began to produce "real babies" as soon as she
discovered where they came from. Another resident, Kiswana Browne, is
a middle-class militant who has moved across town from "Linden Hills"
to help unfortunate black brothers and sisters on Brewster
Place. Saved from anachronism only by her commitment, Kiswana tries to
form the residents of Brewster Place into a tenants union; they plan
to fight in court for the many improvements the complex needs. In her
commitment, Kiswana is just the opposite of the two young women who
are the focus of "The Two." Lesbian in a place which is hostile to
their relationship, their different coping strategies illustrate how
truly isolated they are; Theresa compensates by pretending not to care
about the opinions of the neighbors, while Lorraine is driven to seek
approval.
          In one of the book's most painful and disturbing scenes, Lorraine
is raped repeatedly by the young black toughs of the neighborhood who
have no place for a "dyke." Pushed into insanity and retaliation by
the rape, Lorraine commits murder.
          Naylor's heart-wrenching account of Lorraine has a counterpart in
the tale of Lucielia Louise Turner, the granddaughter of Etta Johnson,
the woman who had befriended Mattie after birth of her child. Ciel
finds herself on Brewster Place in a common-law marriage with Eugene,
for whom she has an abortion when he asserts that all she is good for
is "babies and bills." Several months later, when Eugene declares that
he is leaving, Ciel's claim that she loves him evokes, "that ain't
good enough." While the two are fighting, their five-year old
firstborn child, playing in 

another room, electrocutes herself by
sticking a fork into an outlet. In the face of the rejection she
believes God has shown her, Ciel determines to starve herself.
          The pain, numbness, and death-in-life that define Ciel after her
child's funeral are relieved only when Mattie takes her into her arms
and rocks the damned-up suffering into expression. That scene is a
combination of conversion, renewal, and rebirth in which Mattie serves
as preacher, guide, and sustainer. Indeed, Naylor's description of
Mattie's role evokes that of Jesus in James Weldon Johnson's
"Go Down, Death: A Funeral Sermon," and it can be
compared to the change Avey Johnson experiences on the Caribbean
island in Paule Marshall's Praisesong for the
Widow. Yet, in the writing and in the power of the passage,
Naylor's voice is distinctively unique.
          
            Ciel moaned. Mattie rocked. Propelled by the sound, Mattie
rocked her out of that bed, out of that room, into a blue vastness
just underneath the sun and above time. She rocked her over Aegean
seas so clean they shone like crystal, so clear the fresh blood of
sacrificed babies torn from their mother's arms and given to Neptune
could be seen like pink froth on the water. She rocked her on and on,
past Dachau, where soul-gutted Jewish mothers swept their children 's
entrails off laboratory floors. They flew past the spilled brains of
Senegales infants whose mothers had dashed them on the wooden sides of
slave ships. And she rocked on.
          
          
            She rocked her into her childhood and let her see murdered
dreams. And she rocked her back, back into the womb, to the nadir of
her hurt, and they found it--a slight silver splinter, enbedded just
below the surface of the skin. And Mattie rocked and pulled--and the
splinter gave way, but its roots were deep, gigantic, ragged, and they
tore up flesh with bits of fat muscle tissue clinging to them. They
left a huge hole, which was already starting to pus over, but Mattie
was satisfied. It would heal.
          
          Naylor's presentations of human emotions ring so true that we sing
our "Amens" from the knots in our stomachs or the tears in our
eyes. There is verisimiltude in characters who are in their twenties
as well as those who are in their fifties and older. In one scene
between Kiswana Browne and her mother, who insists upon calling her
newly remained daughter Melanie, Naylor astutely presents the clash of
generations and the games parents and children knowingly play. In this
instance, neither mother nor daughter win out; instead, both realize
that they can learn from, and must allow respect for, each other.
          Throughout, Naylor maintains a narrative style suffused with images
that cause us to pause. She writes of the boys who attack Lorraine:
"When they stood with their black skin, ninth-grade diplomas, and
fifty-word vocabularies in front of the mirror that the world had
erected and saw nothing, those other pairs of tight jeans, suede
sneakers, and tinted sunglasses imaged nearby proved that they were
alive", and of the possible death of Brewster Place: "No one cries
when a street dies. There's no line of mourners to walk behind the
coffin wheeled on the axis of the earth and ridded by the sky."
          But Brewster Place is not dying. Women like Mattie resist its
demise as spiritedly as the images used to describe it. It is a
testament to Naylor's large talent that, in this her first novel, she
handles the task so well.
          
            Trudier Harris teaches literature and folklore in the
English Department at the University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill.
          
        
        
          Mary, Wayfarer, An Autobiography, by Mary
E. Mebane. New York: Viking Press. 1983.
          By Painter, Nell IrvinNell Irvin Painter
          Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, pp. 13-14
          
          In the second volume of her autobiography, Mary Mebane again talks
of desegregation and takes aim at the black bourgeoisie--or more
exactly, the brown bourgeoisie. Early in Mary,
Wayfarer, she fires a telling shot:
          
            One of the ironies of life in the South is the fact that the
black professional class, thinking that under integration it would
entrench its position vis-a-vis black folk, instead found itself in
many 

cases as discomfited by the changes as the whites
were.
          
          But the people with whom Mebane identifies herself, poor,
dark-skinned blacks, "could not have cared less; any change at all was
a decided improvement for them."
          Perhaps Mebane is too sharp. In Mary, Wayfarer, as
in Mary, she reserves her bitterness for blacks of the
better class, particularly those in her home town of Durham. But for
all her social myopia, she has exposed a little-discussed aspect of
desegregation: a sort of equalizing of educated blacks, regardless of
skin shade or economic background. At the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, where Mebane spent twelve years, she says that some
people "respected my gifts, and that was a first for me"--even though
all her previous schooling and teaching had been in black
institutions.
          Better-class black Durham's presence in Mebane's life is devilish
but significant, if the number of pages she spends denouncing its
prejudices, weaknesses and hypocrisies supplies a fair measure of her
fixation. She teaches a lesson that most sensitive Americans already
know about black life: Light skin carries connotations of beauty and
wealth, and beauty and wealth attract people, especially men. The
revelation is not new, although Mebane delivers it with unusual
intensity.
          New here is her gleeful exposure of what her betters lost through
integration. She tells of a light-skinned woman, a fellow student at
Carolina, who was pained when a white woman confused her with poor
blacks. Mebane also reports hostility from black, better-class
colleagues at North Carolina Central University, when she was well
received at the University of North Carolina.
          Mebane says the cream of the cream of black society at NCCU in the
1960's saw the university as an enemy disturbing their social
order. "By opening its doors to all blacks, and not limiting its
admissions to blacks of a certain class or color," Mebane says the
university inadvertently broke one of black society's unwritten
rules--that only the elite were to garner such rewards.
          As a dark-skinned non-Southerner who was (mercifully) brought up in
the West, I nonetheless felt a certain satisfaction in watching Mebane
prick the bourgeoisie. But the pain in this woman's life diminished my
relish. This is an angry book, although the emotions are muted in
comparison with the first volume, Mary.
          Even so, I found myself drawn into Mebane's autobiography The
material on black Durham is most fascinating But I also learned from
her descriptions of the civil-rights years in Durham and Chapel
Hill. I made a mental note, too, that Mebane is one of a growing list
I am keeping of black women who find that they cannot keep their
sanity and continue to teach in some white, male-dominated
situations. (My list now numbers six women--and I am on it--who left
white departments to preserve their mental health.) Here again, Mary
Mebane's autobiographies are enlightening.
          But Mebane also provokes pity and annoyance. Reading her painful
descriptions of her unloving and drunken family--whom she was not able
to leave until she was in her mid-30's--and of her frustrating
encounters with men, her school-girl ideals about elegance in love
compared with her squalid encounters, I sympathized with this woman
who never felt valuable until she came to Chapel Hill. Her feelings of
worthlessness are raw and exposed, and I wonder to what extent she
succeeds in convincing other readers that her experiences may be taken
as typical. For my part, she represents an unusually sad case, and
this impression carries over from the first volume to the second,
although the second is more smoothly written, its emotions less
aroused.
          Both Mary and Mary, Wayfarer suffer
from the author's lack of distance from her tormentors--her mother,
her family and Durham's black bourgeoisie. Years of therapy have
finally allowed her to see her mother as a victim of poverty and
segregation. But leaving the South--she now teaches at the University
of Wisconsin at Milwaukee--has given her little insight into social
dynamics. She cannot see that the pretensions she deplored in Durham
and the snobbery she attaches to North Carolina Central University
occur elsewhere among other groups of people. Pretension and snobbery
remain the monopoly of better-class black Durham, and Mary Mebane's
anger at them remains unabated.
          While Mary, Wayfarer and Mary lack
the warmth and humane vision of Maya Angelou's I Know Why the
Caged Bird Sings or Pauli Murray's Proud Shoes
(much of the latter set in Durham), the narrowness and bitterness of
the Mebane books point to the anger that those at the very bottom of
the black hierarchy can harbor against other blacks. Mary Mebane tells
awkward truths about class, color pnd sex, but her truths are true
anyway.
          
            Nell Irvin Painter teaches history at the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill. She grew up in northern California and
is the author of The Narrative of Hosea Hudson: His Life as a
Negro Communist in the South. This review first appeared in
the North Carolina Independent.
          
        
        
          Steven Hahn, The Roots of Southern Populism: Yeomen
Farmers and the Transformation of the Georgia Upcountry,
1850-1890 New York: Oxford University Press, 1983.
          By Beatty, BessBess Beatty
          Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, pp. 14-16
          
          When Frank Owsley completed his study, The Plain Folk of the
Old South, in 1949, he considered the title "The Forgotten Man
of the Old South," but rejected it as too flamboyant. Three decades
later this rejected title, enlarged to include the Forgotten Woman,
would still be appropriate for a work on the white yeomen farm
families who made up the majority of nineteenth-century
Southerners. Southern image makers have generally continued to
relegate the Southern common folk "either to obscurity or to oblivion"
while they focus on the white elite, on blacks, and even on the bottom
rail of white society, "the poor white trash." As a result, Southern
history remains distorted, and a large number of Southern people
remain estranged from their past. Although most historians accept
Owsley's contention that "the core of the [Southern] social structure
was a massive body of plain folk who were neither rich nor very poor,"
they have rarely given this group in depth attention. There are
hopeful signs, however, that the forgotten people of Southern history
are beginning to find their historians. Steven Hahn's The Roots
of Southern Populism: Yeomen Farmers and the Transformation of theGeorgia Upcountry, 1850-1890 joins a small but significant
list of Southern studies that focus on the region's plain folk.
          Historians of Populism have given considerable attention to the
issues yeomen farmers confronted and to the leaders who mobilized
their protest. For the most part, however, the many good studies of
Southern Populism have paid little attention to the activities and
reponses of the average members of this group. When "we turn to the
thousands of Southern rural folks," Hahn explains, "the shadows
rapidly steal forth." Lifting the shadows in fraught with enormous
difficulty. Yet, as Hahn notes, more written sources exist for the
yeomanry than is usually acknowledged or consulted by
historians. Hahn's extensive and skillful use of a wide variety of
available sources--including newspapers, letters, census returns, tax
reports and various other government records--enables him to to
substantiate abundantly the general story he tells. Despite Hahn's
efforts in the libraries and archives, much of the feel and sense of
the yeoman culture still comes up missing in The Roots of
Southern Populism. A couple of months spend living in or
travelling through Georgia's Upper Piedmont, talking with descendants
of the late nineteenth century farmer folk, listening to their stories
and music, looking at their family photographs and heirlooms, might
have enriched and deepened Hahn's work. Faulkner's Flem Snopes is not
enough of a substitute for the Georgia yeomanry. Neither are the
written views of Floyd County planter John Dent, who appears under
several guises, a large enough representation of the typical planter
assessment of the times. Yet in fairness, The Roots of Southern
Populism, is not intended as a study of folk culture.
          Although his subjects are agrarian rather than industrial workers,
Hahn's story is strikingly similar to the recent work in American "new
labor history" which has been so influenced by Edward P. Thompson's
The Making of the English Working Class. Hahn does, in
fact, challenge the common view that agrarian rebellion is of a nature
fundamentally different from industrial. Hahn's Georgia yeomen, like
their industrial counterparts, tried to retain autonomy and to resist
the encroachments of capitalism--in their case commercial
agriculture--by clinging to precapitalistic norms and prerogatives.
          Establishing the cultural and economic roots of Populism over a
forty year period forces Hahn to confront one of the most perplexing
questions of Southern historiography: If, according to conventional
wisdom, "Southern yeomen were touchy and isolated individualists," how
could they have been lured by the Populist vision of a cooperative
common" wealth? In his penetrating analysis of the multi-faceted
nature of yeomen independence, Hahn offers a significant new
perspective on the question. Although he agrees with the traditional
contention that yeomen economic organization based on the household
and fee-simple landownership "fostered the bourgeois traits of
individualism, acquisitiveness and deep adherence to private
property"--traits that meshed well with the emerging ethic of
laissez-faire economics--he also argues that "strong countervailing
tendencies" existed. In direct contrast to the laissez-faire ethic, a
"preindustrial republicanism" convinced many of the Upcountry ;yeomen
that the state should control productive resources and actively defend
petty producers. Further more, Hahn contends, yeomen independence also
"hinged on social ties, on 'habits of mutuality' among producers, that
impart to their culture a communal, prebourgeois quality whose
equalitarian proclivities sharply distinguished it from that of the
planters." As a result of his careful analysis of the meaning and
limits of independence in the economic and social lives of the Georgia
yeomen, Hahn concludes that Populism was not an aberration in Southern
Upcountry life but a product of a deeply embedded world view.
          Before the war, class conflict resulting from distinctive planter
and yeomen world views was latent, muted by planter efforts to unite
their region in the growing struggle with the rest of the country. The
yeomen enjoyed a large measure of autonomy; popular laws and customs,
such as the homestead exemption and access to common lands, were
protected. But the social fabric which sustained yeomen autonomy began
to unravel under the strains of war. War-time privations combined with
Confederate taxation and impressment policy made the yeomen
increasingly resentful and generated "growing class antagonisms,"
which were further exacerbated by severe economic dislocations in the
wake of Confederate defeat. Hahn rightly argues that transformations
in the lives of the Upcountry yeomen "during this period elucidate the
larger meaning of the Civil War itself."
          Central to the economic change which these people confronted was
the transformation of the Georgia Up-

country from an area of
subsistence agriculture on the periphery of the cotton economy to the
mainstream of commercial agriculture. In a period of such widespread
destruction and rapid change, these farmers could no longer opt for
the "safety of diversification." They rapidly lost their
self-sufficiency as they were forced to plant cotton, the only crop on
which they could receive credit. As a result, the Upcountry,
previously "the domain of yeomen freeholders," fast became " a
territory of the disposed." Merchants, protected by lien laws,
replaced the communal prebourgeois network of exchange characteristic
of antebellum Upcountry society. "By the 1880s," Hahn finds, "an elite
deriving surpluses from both land and commerce held the economic reins
in the upcountry." Increasingly the "republicanism of petty producers"
was arrayed against "the values of the free market."
          The inevitable postbellum class conflict took on a uniquely
Southern tone because of simultaneous racial conflict. Hahn offer
important, but sometimes contradictory, analysis of the old question
concerning how much coming together there actually was between the
South's poor black and poor white farmers. Georgia Republicans, he
asserts, had a chance after the war to build a biracial coalition, but
they failed to do so. However, Hahn presents so much evidence of
deep-seated yeomen racism that he undermines his own argument. He is
more persuasive in claiming that the Southern yeomen viewed blacks,
both in slavery and freedom, "as symbols of a condition they most
feared--abject and perpetual dependence--and as a group whose strict
subordination provided essential safeguards for their way of life."
          But racism was not sufficient to keep the yeomen loyal to elitist
Democracy. By the 1870s election returns revealed "emerging divisions
between town and countryside and between rich and poor farmers." The
issue that most polarized Upcountry white society was the question of
grazing rights which, Hahn claims, "revealed the cultural, as well as
economic, dimensions of political struggles, and . . . paved the road
to Populism." Since colonial days both law and custom had required
that crops be fenced so that farmers could allow their animals to
graze on open lands. To small landholding farmers as well as to
tenants, the right was an essential prerequisite for
self-sufficiency. In the post-war world, when a new elite pushed for
laws requiring the fencing of stock, the yeomen, still informed by a
preindustrial ideology of republicanism, fought, not only for "local
custom," but also for what they perceived as their "natural right." It
was the struggle over grazing rights, Hahn contends, that first
aroused the upcountry yeomen; "the appearance of the Southern Farmers
Alliance and then the People's party promised to transform
defensiveness into a humane and progressive force."
          Hahn successfully challenges most historians of Southern Populism
with his compelling argument that the appeal of Populism to Upcountry
Georgia yeomen farmers was more than a factor of their increasing
impoverishment; the movement also offered a vehicle to restore "a
producers commonwealth" which had been overwhelmed by the
encroachments of the free market. To the yeomen who joined the
Populist revolt, the party's goals were "a vision informed by
historical experience."
          For myriad reasons Populism quickly failed. One important reason,
according to Hahn, was the two-sided nature of the yeomen sense of
mutuality which made this cooperation possible. He argues that the
"very networks and norms of the household economy partially disguised
class distinctions and probably discouraged reliance or. supralocal,
unfamiliar, and more formalized organizational' structures." This
meant that, art least in the Georgia Upcountry, Populism rested on "a
tenuous foundation." But to Hahn, as to Lawrence Goodwyn, author of
Democratic Promise, the most important book on American
Populism, the rapid failure of Populism should not be construed to
minimize its historical importance and ideological legacy. What
Goodwyn describes as "the largest democratic mass movement in American
history" is to Hahn "a watershed in the history of industrializing
America."
          Steven Hahn's book is excellent history, but it is more than that;
it is also an excellent study of the interaction of the powerful and
the powerless. The descendants of these Upcountry yeomen know little
of their ancestral legacy of cooperative republican and
rebellion. Goodwyn has written that "more often than not, the triumph
of the received culture is so subtle it is not apparent to its
victims. Content with what they can see, they have lost the capacity
to imagine what they can no longer see. Ideas about freedom get
obscured in this way." The importance of Hahn's book is as current as
it is historical.
          
            Bess Beatty is assistant professor of history at Shorter
College in Rome, Georgia.
          
        
        
          The 39th Year Report of the Southern Regional Council,
1983
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, pp. 16-20, 22-24
          
          The Southern Regional Council, the South's oldest biracial
organization, consists of 120 Council Members in eleven Southern
states. The work of the Council is supported by foundations, labor
unions and corporations and by the contributions of individuals and
institutions as Council Associate Members. The Council maintains a
small staff in Atlanta where it carries out research, provides
technical assistance and offers educational programs which address
primarily the issues of poverty, racism and ignorance in the American
South. Through its work, the Council also attemps to develop regional
leadership concerned about these enduring problems.
          While the Council's membership is limited to 120, any number of
people may become associate members, participate in the functions of
the Council and receive its bimonthly magazine, Southern
Changes.
          During 1983, the Southern Regional Council has continued to work
for a better South through a number of projects.
          
            Voting Rights
          
          Not since the passage of the original Voting Rights Act in 1965 has
political participation been at so critical a stage in the South as in
the last few years. The passage of the Act was endangered for almost a
year, and while the Act has 

been renewed once more for a temporary
extension, this renewal will probably be the last; moreover, critical
changes have been made in some of the legislation's provisions, and
these as well as the unchanged sections must be interpreted and
applied rigorously by the US Justice Department and the federal courts
if the Act is to sustain its major force for equal suffrage. In
addition, most legislative bodies, including state legislatures, have
been reapportioning their districts which will set in stone the
structures of government in the region for the next ten years.
          To meet the critical needs relating to voting rights, the Southern
Regional Council has carried out a program of reserach and technical
assistance for the enforcement of the preclearance provision of
Section 5, the review of reapportionment plans for local and state
legislative bodies in the South, and the assessment of the past level
of enforcement and influence of the Voting Rights Act.
          For the last four years the Council has maintained the only
organization that systematically monitors Section 5 compliance in the
Southeast. The project's work is designed to examine changes submitted
to the Justice Department that affect voting in Virginia, North
Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, and
Louisiana. When potentially discriminatory changes are identified by
the project, contacts are made with local community groups and copies
of the full proposals presented to Justice are obtained. Working with
local leaders, the Council then carries out an analysis of the effects
of the proposed change on the local system of elections and
voting. When the analysis shows racial discrimination in effect to
purpose, the Council assists the local group in requesting the Justice
Department to object to the changes. At times, the Council itself
files such a document on behalf of the local group.
          In 1983, the Project reviewed over 175 Section 5 submissions. This
was done by contacting community leaders in affected jurisdictions and
seeking their impressions of proposed voting changes. The bulk of our
monitoring involved redistricting because of the amount of local
redistricting which occured in Louisiana and Mississippi.
          We were involved in twenty-six Section 5 cases either by assisting
community groups in contesting discriminatory changes or representing
them directly in the administrative process.
          Representation of client groups meant doing extensive research and
community analysis and preparing detailed comment letters to Justice
Department officials. The project prepared twelve comment letters in
1983. On the basis of these letters, the Justice Department imposed
objections in eight localities.
          We have been called on by community groups throughout the South to
supply model redistricting plans for city and county governing
bodies--plans which would increase the potential for blacks to elect
candidates of their choice. We drafted seventy-eight plans in 1983 and
had requests for at least twenty-five more. (See "Drawing the Lines"
in Southern Changes (October/November, 1983) for a
discussion of the process of drawing reapportionment plans.)
          In 1983 the Voting Rights Project continued to provide information
on voting and election issues to requesting parties throughout the
nation. Inquiries ranged from wanting to know the number of black
elected officials in a particular area to developing a list of people
to testify at public hearings during the national PUSH
convention. Requests were received from attorneys, members of Congress
and the press.
          The work of the Project has taken its staff into many towns
throughout the South, contacting voters leagues, NMCP groups,
concerned citizens' organizations and individuals.
          In the last year in North Carolina, the SRC has continued
activities in and out of the courtroom to develop a redistricting plan
for the state legislature which protects minority voting strength.
          All in all, there may be as many as a hundred new black elected
officials and an even larger number of new, more responsive white
officials by 1985 as a result of the Council's reapportionment
work.
          
            Southern Legislative Research Council
          
          A continuing concern of the Southern Regional Council since its
founding in 1944 has been the removal of restrictions against the
right to vote and to hold public office. Beginning with its first
published research on the all-white primary and literacy tests in the
South, the Council has documented the barring of black citizens'
participation in both elected and appointed positions. The Council has
also provided technical assistance to community groups and to minority
elected officials over the years on a wide range of problems and
issues including education, employment, health care and housing.
          Despite these efforts and the work of others, the impact of blacks,
women and other elected officials representing poor and minority
constituents remains too limited; often their first problem is the
reality of small numbers. For example, blacks comprise less than ten
percent of the Georgia General Assembly in a state that is
twenty-seven percent black. In Alabama, blacks represent less than
fifteen percent of the state legislature, while comprising twenty-five
percent of the state's population. In Mississippi, 

almost forty
percent of the state's population is black, but less than ten percent
of the state legislators are minorities.
          Although limited by numbers, the impact of these legislators is
further reduced by the lack of support available to them for the
performance of their duties. In more than half of the legislatures
outside the South, staff and office space are provided to both house
and senate members; but in most Southern states resources are severely
limited. In Alabama, the access to research and secretarial staff is
directly controlled by the house leadership. In the senate, only
committee chairs have access to even secretarial staff, and this is
generally limited to the session. Any research needed on a specific
piece of legislation or the budget must be done through the individual
members' own resources, or by staff directly controlled by the house
and the senate leadership. In the Georgia Senate, each senator shares
a secretary, and a year-round research staff is available to that
body. However, the research staff is directly answerable to the
president of the senate and the staff to legislator ratio is one staff
person per twelve senators. Some Southern states have intern programs,
but these are often limited to assistance during the session only, and
directly controlled by the governor and legislative leadership.
          The decade of the 1980s has brought a substantial increase in
demands on legislators representing poor and black constitutents in
the South. To meet the challenges, these legislators must develop
their own expertise on issues and lead the way for changes. They must
comprehend the issues and the legislative process itself, and
understand how to use the process to benefit their constituents.
          In 1980, the Southern Regional Council began the Southern
Legislative Research Council (SLRC) as a special project to provide
research, analysis and technical assistance to state legislators who
represent the interests of black and poor citizens in Alabama and
Georgia. Upon requests, the SLRC assists both black and white
legislators, effectively increasing their capability to use
information and analysis in state government.
          The strength of the SLRC has come from its ability to combine four
components--a reference service, an intern program, an expert network
and an information exchange--to aid "client" legislators and, at
times, community groups. The project has gained recognition for its
accurate and thorough analysis and dependable and reliable
research. Without advocating positions on legislative proposals, the
project's staff works only to respond to requests for hard data and
objective comparisons that are not often available from advocates or
other legislative services.
          During the first three years of the SLRC, legislators in Alabama
and Georgia have shown remarkable growth in their knowledge of issues
and effective representation of the interests of the poor and
blacks. As these legislators have begun to establish increased
expertise on issues, their credibility among colleagues and the
legislative leadership has increased. Just as important, there has
been a growing awareness between black and white legislators who
represent poor and black citizens that they share the same
constitutents and, therefore, must address the same concerns.
          In 1983, the work of the SLRC paralleled the concern of the Georgia
and Alabama legislatures with the state budget and the loss of
government money for social, educational and health care programs. In
both states, the SLRC staff introduced new legislators to the
budgetary process and carried out analyses of state
appropriations. Among the successful proposals for which the project
provided research assistance was Alabama's approval of funds for
kindergarten. In Georgia the legislature underwrote a sickle-cell
program and supported the operations of the Federation of Southern
Cooperatives. The SLRC also monitored the progress of a federal court
desegregation order under which the Georgia state university system is
currently operating.
          Additional work involved developing research papers and model
legislation on employment discrimination. In Georgia, the legislature
did pass a comprehensive act covering this subject. The Alabama staff
of the SLRC compiled a report on the impact of hiring practices in the
governmental departments of that state. Staff assistance in Alabama in
1983 also went into the analysis of options for the final state
legislative reapportionment plan. The plan result in the election of
twenty-four blacks, including five senators (the largest number of
blacks serving in the Alabama legislature in modern history).
          The Southern Legislative Research Council also assisted the
Legislative Black Caucuses of Georgia and Alabama in developing formal
structures. During 1983, both caucuses have incorporated. In Georgia,
a caucus clearinghouse network and a committee structure have been
organized as well as a yearly legislative weekend to meet with
community groups and state department heads. In early October, with
the SLRC's assistance, the Georgia Caucus held its first major
fundraising event, netting over $25,000 to be used to 

hire a full-time
legislative staff within the next calendar year.
          The SLRC is also developing ways that will allow its research,
analysis and technical assistance to be used beyond Georgia and
Alabama. We have a list prepared of the most helpful documents
produced by the project and will distribute this list to legislative
bodies in other Southern states, and to individual legislators or
community groups, upon request. In addition, the SLRC is developing a
list of experts within our legislative network who can provide
assistance to legislators representing poor or black constituents
throughout the South. The project is also attempting to identify
persons who can provide long distance written research, expertise and
analysis on a timely basis on a specific issue that is widely viewed
as important.
          At the request of client legislators, the SLRC is planning a series
of Southern conferences of legislators. These meetings will bring
together legislators, experts, and community groups from throughout
the South to discuss issues as well as the legislative process. The
initial conference will focus on the ways that legislators can be more
effective in the legislative process, especially the budget
process. The second conference, planned for the late summer or fall of
1984, will focus primarily on such issues as taxation, education, and
economic development.
          The initial conference probably will be limited to black
legislators, and will attempt to identify general goals and objectives
of black legislators throughout the South. The second conference,
focusing on prevailing legislative issues will include other
legislators and community groups representing poor black
constituents.
          
            Coop democracy
          
          The SRC's Cooperative Democracy and Development Project is designed
to work with community-based organizations in the rural South that are
attempting to develop and execute strategies of legal activities,
technical assistance and organizing to achieve democratic control of
utility cooperatives. Rural electric and telephone cooperatives in the
South probably have six billion dollars in assets, own forty percent
of the distribution system for electricity, maintain twenty percent of
the phone systems and serve most rural counties. Few private or
governmental institutions play a more important role than electric
coops in the lives of the poor. These coops constitute the largest,
corporate citizens in the rural South and are the largest
non-governmental employers in the area. Coops not only provide
electricity, they also have an important role for developing new
models for conservation and job-creation. Unlike investor-owned
utilities which have huge, standing plants, electric coops are largely
distributors of electricity and have a self-interest in finding ways
of conserving energy and creating jobs.
          Perhaps the most non-traditional role of a utility coop offers the
most sweeping promise for the Black Belt and similar areas. Coops have
the capacity to act as prime financing agents for local economic and
social development.
          During the last twelve months the Coop Democracy Project has worked
with coalitions of leaders in more than twenty different areas of the
rural South in their efforts to make cooperatives lower the cost of
electricity to low-income consumers; to redirect financial resources
to provide for local job-creating industries; to finance low-cost,
energy efficient housing in poor areas; and to undertake similar
developments with the coops' own resources. Primarily, the Project is
aimed at accomplishing these efforts through supporting local groups
who wish to elect alternative members to the boards of directors of
the coops.
          As a result of Project activities over thirteen hundred
consumer-members were for the first time directly involved in
community-based efforts to elect minority representatives to six coop
governing boards in North Carolina, Mississippi, Virginia, Louisiana,
and Georgia. Community leaders received training and information on
the electric coops and their potential in these states and in
Arkansas, South Carolina, and Alabama.
          The process of bringing about democracy in electric coops has been
both difficult and, at times, dangerous. Earlier this year in
Mecklenberg, Virginia one of the local black leaders who supported a
challenge to the local coop spent much of her evening at the coop's
offices observing the election and returned home to find her house
broken into and flammable liquids poured around several rooms. The
intruder had departed hastily.
          The activities of the Coop Project have not yet succeeded in
changing the control of very many coops. The Project however, has made
some important progress. It has informed a number of consumers for the
first time about their rights as members of the coop and of the
potential of the coop to deal with their problems. In a few instances
the coops have made some changes as a direct response to
challenges. In Mississippi, a black staff member is finally inside the
Greenwood office of the Delta Electric Power Association because of
activities and allegations against the coop. In North Carolina,
information presented to community leaders is now being used in
negotiations with the coop to garner support for a financial
investment to save black land loss. In other instances the Project has
been partially responsible for the election of alternative boards of
directors such as in Louisiana with the Dixie Electric 

Membership
Cooperative. We have established a sizable body of legal research
which will be helpful to the Project and others in protecting and
exploring the rights of coop members. And, the Project has documented
the widespread patterns and practices of coops in the Deep South
through extensive research at the Rural Electrification Administration
offices, the supervising federal agency for electric coops, and
through monitoring of coop meetings. All of this effort has
established an important base of information and interest for ongoing
activities.
          The last year has also evidenced a wide range of primary techniques
and maneuvers available to coop management to manipulate and frustrate
the efforts of challengers. These techniques include the denial of
access to vital information such as membership lists, financial data,
and bylaws; the changing of by-laws and procedures to fit the
management's immediate needs; and the use of coop
resources telephones, personnel, trucks, and mailing facilities
to recruit support for the incumbent management. All of these
maneuvers rest on the coop management's control of information and
resources.
          The Project's experience has also revealed the most vivid examples
of bedrock racial hatred which still persists in this area. In places
suc!1 as Mississippi, coops have gone to extraordinary trouble and
expense to bar any possibility of even one or two black board members
on a coop. Of the more than 750 coop board members in Mississippi,
none is black, even today. In Mecklenberg, Virginia, the mere
possibility that three of twelve black board members would be elected
prompted more than two thousand whites to turn out at an annual
meeting where fewer than seventy people had attended over the past
fifteen years. In every place, "race-baiting" has been used as a
primary tool by which coop management spurs white support when faced
with challenges.
          The Project and local community leaders have also faced resignation
and hopelessness among poor black coop members. Although concerned
with increasingly high utility bills and the need for jobs, many
members feel little urge to attend annual coop meetings. Nonetheless,
the first year o. full activity for the Coop Democracy and Development
Project has seen the beginnings of a base of strength and
experience.
          
            Lillian Smith Book Awards
          
          Lillian Smith, Georgia thinker, activist, author and Southern
Regional Council Life Member, died September 28, 1966. The SRC created
the Lillian Smith Book Awards to honor her life, her work,: and her
commitment, and to recognize in her name those who have contributed to
our understanding of the South, its people, its strengths, problems
and weaknesses. The Smith Awards are given each year to fiction and
non-fiction works which best carry on Lillian Smith's vision of the
South.
          
            Civil Rights History for Radio
          
          Moving toward a final stage of production is a series of
twenty-eight radio broadcasts documenting recent civil rights history
in five Southern state capitals. A phase of this project, completed in
January of 1984, involved the preparation of scripts and/or in-depth
treatments for five programs in each of the following cities: Jackson,
Little Rock, Columbia, Montgomery and Atlanta. This first phase also
called for three scripts or treatments for the region as a whole.
          The Project's inital efforts focused on staff organization and
administration, and included the organization of five person advisory
committee, and several part-time re-

searchers and consultants; review
with radio consultants of recording procedures and standards for
broadcast; acquisition and testing of sound equipment suitable for
broadcast quality tape recordings; development of a plan for field
interviews, office procedures and transcriptions; and planning
execution of two meetings with advisory committee scholars for
reviewing the progress and focus of the project.
          The balance of the Project's work has been in four major areas:
interviewing, transcribing tapes, researching, and writing, and
writing.
          The Project staff has recorded more than forty field interviews in
Jackson, Columbia and Montgomery. Preliminary interviews have been
conducted by phone in Little Rock and Atlanta.
          The interviews have included participants at all levels of the
movement, from those who marched in the bus boycott to those who
sought early admission to segregated schools, from picketers to
policemen who arrested picketers, from ministers to lawyers, from
teachers to insurance salesmen. (For examples of these interviews see
Southern Changes for October/November and December,
1983.)
          In order that the approach to and understanding of change could be
more readily compared from place to place, the interviews have been
structured so that each interviewee would be asked a consistent set of
questions. To be sure that the spontaneous responses which make good
radio were brought forth, the interviewees were also asked appropriate
background questions that allow them to place their personal histories
and experiences in the context of the civil rights movement.
          About one-third of the interviews have been fully transcribed and
extensive notes have been taken on the rest. All tapes were reviewed
several times in preparation for scripting. This process has been
tedious and time-consuming, but the range and volume of material and
volume of material covered by the project demands that the tapes be
transcribed to allow for careful scripting. Transcription has also
proved necessary because of the historical value of the recorded
interviews to other researchers, writers, and producers. On going
field and library research during the Project has been necessary to
verify and amplify the outlines of the planning phase. Project workers
have conducted an extensive review of documentary materials and
scholarly research related to the civil rights movement so that the
interviewers could ask better questions, and so the writers of the
scripts and treatments would be better able to know when the oral
histories given by the interviewees needed support or when other
sources should be sought for clarification.
          The Civil Rights History Project expects to finish production in
1985 and to distribute the programs around the region by 1986.
          
            Southern Changes
          
          Southern Changes is the bi-monthly magazine of the
Southern Regional Council. It is one of the nation's few publications
which provides reporting and analysis with a regional perspective.
          One issue of Southern Changes in 1983 prompted
author Kurt Vonnegut to write: "When I was a boy, my father promised
me that if this became a better country, it would have to do so
without the help of Southerners or Catholics. That was a long time
ago. How wrong he was."
          
            Regional radio
          
          The Council is exploring the creation of a regional radio network
that will offer programming including news, analysis, public affairs,
documentaries, musical entertainment, and coverage of special events
through contracts with existing commercial broadcast stations. A
marketing survey and demonstration tapes have been completed and in
the next year the Council will seek financing and contractual
commitments from radio stations throughout the South.
          
            The Atlanta Media Project, Inc.
          
          The Atlanta Media Project, Inc. (AMP), was established in 1980 to
find new ways to address the major problems of access, employment, and
the effective use of the electronic media by blacks, the poor, and
others. In partnership with predominantly black Clark College's school
of communications, the project was created by the work of the NAACP of
Atlanta and the ACLU of Georgia, represented by the SRC in
negotiations with national broadcasters. Responsible for securing more
than one million dollars in commitments for the construction of
Clark's new school and its own future operations, AMP began operations
in late 1981 when the Council housed its temporary offices.
          Historically, the absence of blacks, women, and Hispanics from the
airways in the South has been paralleled only by the paucity of
programming about the primary concerns of these groups. During much of
the last two decades, the principal efforts by civil rights advocates
to remedy these 

problems were aimed at regulating the conduct of
broadcasters and cable companies. With breakthroughs in communications
technology and increasing deregulation. AMP represents a unique
enterprise which will help capture the opportunities to develop new
ways to redress the historical exclusions from the airways.
          AMP was a co-sponsor with the Southern Regional Council in
producing the Southern Network. Other projects in last year including
the production of professional quality public service announcements
for the Voter Education Project, Inc.
          
            Southern Network
          
          In a unique experiment in cable television and public affairs
programming, the Southern Regional Council and the Atlanta Media
Project coordinated the coverage of the presidential primary election
campaigns in Florida, Georgia and Alabama for cable television systems
through a temporary Southern Network. Some ten hours of coverage per
week began in late January, 1984 and ran for two months. Each
participating cable system set aside time for the Southern Network
programming on one of the system's local origination channels. More
than forty cable systems in the three states carried the programming
of Southern Net--a potential audience of one million
households. Southern Network programs featured gavel-to-gavel speeches
by each candidate, discussion programs with news reporters covering
the campaigns, debates by candidates' representatives and in-depth
examination of candidates' positions on issues.
          Surveys by the Southern Network showed that at least one in four
households watched some of its programming. In late 1984 the Network
may provide coverage of the general election. Other experiments in
cable may be initiated in 1985.
          
            Southern Rural Alliance
          
          The Southern Rural Alliance was created to pool together the
planning, strategies, and resources of its members--the Federation of
Southern Cooperatives, the Emergency Land Fund, the ACLU Foundation
Southern Office, the Voter Education Project, and the Southern
Regional Council--to enable more rapid political and economic change
in the rural South.
          In 1983, the Alliance's efforts were focused on three counties in
Alabama--Choctaw, Greene, and Sumter. While this limited and targeted
effort represented a major revision in our original scope of work, the
Alliance's efforts in one, limited location was designed to
demonstrate the impact and viability of the organization's cooperative
approach to political participation.
          The first task of the Alliance was to obtain a complete and
accurate picture of black voter participation for Greene, Sumter, and
Choctaw counties. The results of the analysis were at times revealing
to both the Alliance members and to local leaders:
          * While there is room for improvement, voter registration in the
three-county district is not the major problem. Indeed, over 75
percent of persons 18 and over are registered to vote. The difference
between blacks and whites is small.
          * The larger problem for this district is the level of voter
turnout. Voter participation levels among blacks for the three-county
area is somewhere around 60 percent In Greene County, the level is
somewhere around 49 percent.
          * In several boxes and beats, past elections show significant
support for white incumbent candidates who were in races against
well-respected black candidates.
          Using the results as a guide, the Alliance began its work. The
Alliance was somewhat successful in developing a comprehensive list of
precinct leaders for the target counties. It was this list that was
used in putting together a people's nomination convention. A number of
workshops were also conducted with the precinct leaders from the
three-county area. The thrust of these workshops has sought to
identify strategies for getting out the vote. Demonstrating the past
election results, participants were asked to analyze the causes for
such poor turnouts and to explore methods for increasing the
turnout. While registration was not the largest problem, efforts were
aimed to improve the level of registered voters in some low beats. The
recent appointment of two blacks to the local board of registrars in
Greene County has permitted the Alliance to 

counsel those officials
about methods to increase voter registration.
          The primary election analysis shows that voter registration and
voter turnout did increase in the November election probably as a
partial result of the Alliance's work.
          
            Maps of the South
          
          Using data from the 1980 census, the Council worked in 1983 to
prepare multi-colored maps of the South, showing--county by
county--the distribution of poor and black population. The maps are
accompanied by state reports on changes in population and poverty
since 1970. Both maps and reports are scheduled for release in late
April 1984 and are available to the public.
          
            Agricultural Marketing Project of Georgia
          
          The Agricultural Marketing Project of Georgia provides a means by
which small, marginal farmers can develop and maintain markets for
their produce and low-income consumers can have fresh food at low
costs. Since its inception in 1979, AMP-G has operated
under the the administrative and financial controls of the Council.
          In 1983, Project activities reflected a changed emphasis of work,
away from food fairs and toward consumer work in the Atlanta area,
associated with the Atlanta Produce Exchange. Because the various farm
groups which the Project has established was running food fairs around
the state smoothly on their own, primary assistance was no longer
needed.
          Most staff time was devoted to the development and the operation of
the Altanta Produce Exchange which is now independently incorporated,
with its own board, whose members include two farmers and three
consumer group representatives. The Exchange is designed to operate as
a broker between small farmers and buying clubs and other bulk
purchasers of fresh produce. It is set up to function entirely in the
future on revenues generated by the sale of produce.
          
            Southern Roundtable
          
          Each month representatives of regional groups and state coalitions
meet in Atlanta for the Southern Roundtable, an opportunity to
discuss, question and explore common or emerging issues, problems and
concerns in the South. More than fifty groups receive the Roundtable
mailings and attend meetings in Atlanta. The Council hosts the
Southern Roundtable.
        
        
          "Winners of Lillian Smith Award"
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, p. 21
          
          1968 George B. Tindall, The Emergence of the New
South
          1968 Dan T. Carter, Scottsboro
          1970 Paul M. Gaston, The New South Creed
          1971
Tony Dunbar, Our Land, Too
          1972 Robert Coles,
Children of Crisis, Vols. II and III
          1973 Harold
Martin, Ralph McGill, Reporter Alice Walker, Revolutionary
Petunias and other Poems
          1974 C. Vann Woodward,
The Strange Career of Jim Crow, 3d rev'd ed.
Albert Murray, Train Whistle Guitar
          1976
James Loewen and Charles Sallis, Mississippi: Conflict and
ChangeReynolds Price, The Surface of
Earth
          1977 Richard Kluger, Simple
JusticeAlex Haley, Roots
          1978 Will
Campbell, Brother to a DragonflyGarrett Epps,
The Shad Treatment
          1979 Marion Wright,
Human Rights OdysseyErnest J. Gaines, In My
Father's House
          1980 Jacquelyn Dowd Hall, Revolt
Against ChivalryCormac McCarthy,
Suttree
          1981 John Gaventa, Power and
Powerlessness; Quiescence and Rebellion in an Appalachian
ValleyPat Conroy, The Lords of
Discipline
          1982 Harry Ashmore, Hearts and Minds:
A History of Racism from Roosevelt to Reagan
          1983 John
Ehle, The Winter PeopleFred Hobson,
South-Watching: Selected Essays by Gerald W. Johnson
Roy Hoffman, Almost Family
          
            Critical Attitudes
          
          If the work of building the new South is to go forward to best
advantage, the South must develop its own critics. They can criticize
most effectively, in the first place because they have the Southern
viewpoint, and can therefore be understood, and in the second place
because they have the most reliable information, and therefore can
most frequently spot the joints in Southern armor. For the same
reasons they can best interpret the South to the rest of the
nation.
          But if they are to affect either the South or the outside world,
they must be critics, not press-agents Too much has been said of the
South's need for "sympathetic" criticism. This demand has resulted in
some so-called criticism that is sympathetic, not with the South, but
with the South's least admirable traits, with bigotry, intolerance,
superstition and prejudice. What the South needs is criticism that is
ruthless toward those things--bitter towards them, furiously against
them--and sympathetic only with its idealism, with its loyalty, with
its courage and its inflexible determination. Such criticism will not
be popular, for it is not in human nature to hold in warm affection
the stern idealist who relentlessly exposes one's follies and
frailties and continually appeals to one's better nature. But it will
be respected and in the end admired. And above all, it will be
effective.
Gerald W. Johnson, 1924.
        
      
    
  
