
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 6, Number 5,
	       1984
        
          The Present Danger
          By Willingham, AlexAlex Willingham
          Vol. 6, No. 5, 1984, pp. 1-3
          
          In the current presidential campaign, the forces of reaction have
sought to win by controlling the tone of public discussion. By
portraying Reagan's superficiality as innocent pleasantry, any real
concern with issues can be put down as nuisance. If the Republicans
succeed it will merely postpone candid discussion of the national
condition and obscure the present danger.
          For years Reagan has engineered a reputation as essentially
harmless, good natured and tolerant. Now, the forces he has asembled,
and who have assembled him, pose a real danger to the ideals of open
and egalitarian society and to the gains we have made in recent
years. Unless the Reagan Administration is defeated in
November, popularly elected leaders will constitute the main threat to
established freedoms.
          The present danger arises out of this president's rhetorical stance
for "less government" and the reality of an increasingly invasive new
statism of the right wing. As federal domestic policy, "Reaganomics"
is deceptively dressed as a comprehensive alternative to the social
welfare state. In practice it has come to represent a marginal attack
directed not against manifest shortcomings of welfarism, but against a
few redistributive reforms developed since the presidency of Lyndon
Johnson.
          These programs applied innovative strategies to improve the lives
of blacks and the poor. They were "re-distributive" because they
promoted the "transfer" of money to the disadvantaged and mandated
"maximum" participation by recipients. These programs covered the
concerns of much of the progressive thought of the times: 1) an alarm
that large sections of the nation continued to live in material
poverty and 2) the belief that the ability of people to conquer
misfortune would be enhanced by their participation in the policy
making process.
          These concerns dovetailed with the activism of the Civil Rights
Movement and became interwoven with the fight to ban racism and all
other forms of discrimination from our society.
          In its heroic moments the Great Society tried to be affirmative. It
sought to move away from safety net policies and to move toward
strategies for empowerment. It realized that 

government's innovations
of the past--for example Social Security or the G I bill--offered
models which suggested how to adress current problems. It realized
that piecemeal legislation would not overcome stiff resistance to an
open political process. Bold action was needed: We got the War on
Poverty (1963) and the Voting Rights Act (1964).
          Innovative federal policies were enacted even in succeeding
Republican administrations. In certain cases--Head Start, the Voting
Righs Act, Legal Services--there have been powerful, positive
results. The success of the effort--both in getting the attention of
government and in realizing some of the intended goals--promoted an
optimism about some federal programs.
          But the Great Society was hardly an unqualified success. By the
Carter years, with an array of social programs in place, and a
Democratic administration in power, mounting doubt grew about the
actual function of welfare policy. Improvement--although present--was
incremental at best. A full-scale debate was about to start. It would
have focused on the large residual population still untouched by the
programs. Any number of possible reforms would have been debated
including administrative streamlining, changes in funding levels, or
decentralization. There would have been concern about the
"professionalization" of the delivery system. The question would have
been raised: after all, can the goals we seek be accomplished within
the American two-party system?
          An unheralded achievement of the Reagan Administration has been to
coopt that debate. Reaganite hostility to Great Society goals and
programs took the ground out from under the looming critique and
transformed would-be critics of the troubled sub-system into defenders
of the status que ante.
          The Reagan forces tapped a preexisting
skepticism. "Neo"-conservatives, some of whom were former advocated of
reform, were the idealogical point-men for the Administration. Black
neoconservatives--typified by Thomas Sowell--gave racial legitimacy to
the view. The argument took the form of a general attack on government
activity. In common, "neo"--liberals and "supply-siders" used the
documentation of continuing misery to argue that positive government
was bad and, in any case, could not deliver on the crucial matter of
anti-poverty reform. At one point Sowell, who has never been accused
of understatement, claimed that Brown v. the Board of
Education, the 1954 Supreme Court decision against school
segregation, was undue government interference. No sacred cows here:
positive government was necessarily evil and especially so in trying
to implement lofty intentions. Reaganites went to Washington
determined to cripple its governing institutions.
          What is revealing, however, is the limited nature of the
cutback. The basic welfare structure remains in place even after a
full Reagan term. There have been program cutbacks, to be sure, and
they have had disastrous effects on the recipient population. Yet the
troubled structure is still in place. No doubt much of this comes from
congressional resistance.
          It is possible to interpret these developments as a defeat for
Ronald Reagan. In fact however, they seem to represent changing
priorities of conservative forces operating at the helm of a powerful
state apparatus. Now, in domestic affairs, the threat of the Reagan
regime comes less from a frontal attack on government than in the way
it would prune its operations to make this a more paternal, as opposed
to participatory, bureaucracy. The positive state would become a tool
for on-going administration of a permanent underclass rather than a
means of its transformation.
          The new statism of the Reaganites is the basis for alarm. It comes
at a time when the Republicans have nearly completely capitulated to
right wing extremist groups. The spiritual fervor of these groups is
sustained by anticipation or expanding their influence through the
exercise of official authority.

          Boring within the Republican party represents something of a
turnabout for these groups. The fundamentalist network had been part
of the base used by Jimmy Carter to gain national prominence. Yet
Carter, whose personal religious expression fit the mode, disappointed
many of the born-again--especialy in his formal allegiance to
separation of state and church. This congregation has gone over to
Ronald Reagan who is much less religious but who has been willing to
support government-enforced prayer, segregated religious schools, and
the like--and who is willing to individualize responsibility for
whatever plight grows out of oppressive social conditions.
          Reagan's posture encourages resistance among those who use race,
sex or religious beliefs to protect their advantages.
          When Reagan went to Washington, it first appeared that our greatest
domestic threat would come through efforts to abolish social welfare
programs that help the poor or, in attempts to frustrate the
enforcement of hard-won civil rights gains. And, indeed, his
Administration has cut federal support of basic human needs and has
subverted the enforcement of justice. Yet, today the danger is not
that the Reaganites will cut back on government power, but that they
will use it to actively promote conformity. Insofar as Reagan, his New
Right or business allies are perceived as merely racist or excessively
frugal, we obscure the real threat his reelection will mean to the
poor, to women, to minorities--and to our hope for democratic
society.
          
            Alex Willingham lives in Shreveport, Louisiana. He is
editor of the Voting Rights Review.
          
        
        
          Wolves in Robes
          By Crowther, HalHal Crowther
          Vol. 6, No. 5, 1984, pp. 3-4
          
          To people outside North Carolina, it may sound like a parochial,
partisan quarrel between courtroom personalities who rub each other
the wrong way. But the decision by Judge James H. Pou Bailey of Wake
County Superior Court to publicly oppose the nomination of Samuel
T. Currin for a federal judgeship is one of the state's most
significant political stories, and one that deserves national
attention.
          Bailey, the Superior Court's senior resident judge, is a
conservative Democrat and a personal friend of Sen. Jesse Helms, who
recommended Currin for the nomination. It isn't his habit or his style
to become involved in political controversies. His decision was
obviously a matter of personal conscience, and it was crucial because
he's one of the few public officials in Eastern North Carolina whose
personal reputation and lack of further political ambition make him
immune to the kind of tactics the Currin crowd seems to employ against
its enemies. His statement was neither mild nor diplomatic.
          "I personally believe Sam Currin would use any method for any
purpose he thought was right," Bailey said. "I can conceive of no more
dangerous person than a fanatic with power. If he is appointed a
judge, that's what we would have."
          This is, on a small scale, the same kind of "enough is enough" that
secure, older conservatives were finally forced to declare to call a
halt to the reckless rise of Sen. Joseph McCarthy. They ,were the only
ones who could. McCarthy's critics on the left and even in the center
had been neutralized by fear and public ignorance.
          Currin, age thirty-five, a former aide to Sen. Helms, is a
right-wing zealot who has been clawing his way to power in the office
of US Attorney for North Carolina's Eastern District. The Colcor
investigation, of which Currin was partial architect, was the code
name for a much-publicized probe of official corruption in Columbus
County, North Carolina. There were impressive indictments, but no
major convictions after it became apparent that most of the federal
cases were based on the agent-invented crimes that are currently so
fashionable in law enforcement circles. When it became more than a
rumor that assistant US attorneys had tried to sucker several of the
defendants' lawyers into embarrassing situations, Colcor was generally
discredited.
          Colcor finally soured with both judges and juries, but not before
it ended the careers (perhaps mercifully) of a lieutenant governor and
a state senator, among others. More damning evidence against young
Currin is the current testimony by one of his former assistants that
he lied under oath to justify the firing of an employee, Nancy
Jones. Worse yet, the sexual insinuation of the story that he
apparently concocted shows a brutal kind of disregard for her career
and reputation.
          There are those who feel that a forced resignation and even
disbarment would be a more fitting reward for Samuel T. Currin than
the federal bench. But more important than Currin's personal
shortcomings, which seem to be legion, is the symbolic split between
conservatives like Judge Bailey and conservatives like Currin. I
suggest that even Sen. Helms is unaware of the alarming emptiness of
some of these fierce young men that he sees as his political heirs.
          A conservative is profoundly distrustful of major changes in the
way people speak, dress, build their houses, arrange their families,
use their land, direct their energies and have sex with each
other. I'm afflicted with this distrust as much as anyone I know, and
I'm sure I share it with Sen. Helms. It's a mixture of secure values
and sick nostalgia. The Senator's wisdom, like his ignorance, is a
product of his own time, a time that is, in a sense, time past. The
test of 

character for a conservative, which I feel the Senator fails,
is whether he can exert his influence without attempting to condemn or
coerce the people who don't share his background and can't share his
views.
          Conservatism with or without character is proper to people
approaching middle life, at the, earliest. There's something unnatural
about a youthful reactionary. He isn't trying to preserve anything, in
a responsible way, because he hasn't been around long enough to
examine things properly, to determine what's worth preserving. He's
merely giving up that time in his life when he might have the energy
and idealism to make some improvements. Young conservative movements
attract gullible, spiritless kids, joiners and conformists. And,
unfortunately, fanatics. Young men and women who love to accept and
impose authority, capable of passionate commitment of obsolete and
oversimplified ideologies. It's not surprising that Currin and some of
the Congressional Club's other iron babies are referred to in private
as "the Hitler Youth." And it's natural, in a political movement that
attracts a lot of sheep, that wolves rise rapidly.
          As Judge Bailey pointed out, there could be nothing much worse than
making judges of them, even at the traffic-court level. Inevitably
many of our cases would be decided not on their legal merits but on
what we seemed to represent to the judge--whether he sees you as one
of his own or one of the others. In matters of pure law, of precedent
and constitutionality, it would be impossible to exaggerate the
destructive potential of men who had been such unscrupulous
prosecutors, let alone their ideology.
          This case is North Carolina's, but it epitomizes a national
crisis. Never in fifty years, not since the first election of Franklin
D. Roosevelt, has the power of the federal courts been open to such
harsh and narrow-minded men. To me the most critical issue in the 1984
presidential election is the advanced age of the current Supreme
Court, and the likelihood that Ronald Reagan, reelected, will appoint
(on the reccommendations of key advisors like Jesse Helms) four or
five new justices in his second term. They'll be relatively young
justices, and it means that our children and even our grandchildren
will grow up in a country far more repressive and intolerant, more
cramped and rigid and uncharitable, than the one we grew up in. With
Ed Meese as Attorney General, Sam Currin on the federal bench and his
slightly older counterparts on the Supreme Court, there's going to be
very lisle in this country that we oldtimers are going to recognize as
justice.
          (Currin's nomination, along with those of other controversial
judicial candidates, has been put on ice to be revived after the
November election.)
          But I understand that seventy-five percent of the electorate isn't
interested in that issue. They aren't interested in the environment or
in the world population explosion, which our government is currently
addressing with the most shortsighted and reactionary policy any
American government has presented on any crucial issue in the
twentieth century. They aren't interested in what happens to old
people, minorities, unprotected women, disabled veterans or any groups
they don't belong to. They aren't seriously worried about the arms
race or about a President (what an intergalactic fathead he really is,
that senile soap salesman we send around the world on Air Force One)
who drives the Russians crazy by making jokes about blowing them to
pieces. The voters aren't especially offended by an administration
that is creating a republic of, by and for affluent white men.
          All they're interested in, according to the polls, is the
economy. Like pigs at the trough, they signal their preference turning
their snouts toward whichever candidate seems to have the most swill
in his bucket. And snout voting, as I call it, is most predictable
among the fattest pigs. Gluttony fires a hunger that starvation can't
touch.
          Snout voters are going to look up from the trough some day and find
their lives in the hands of men who make Samuel T. Currin look like a
shy legal scholar. Men whose idea of criminal justice is to pick out
types that look suspicious and tempt them and hound them until they
commit crimes. Men who would take you, your pregnant 14-year-old
daughter and the doctor who has the reckless courage to give her an
abortion and put all three of you behind bars. They've as much as
promised. You may or may not have a full belly, but that's going to be
expensive swill.
          
            Hal Crowther, principal columnist for Spectator
Magazine in Raleigh, North Carolina, formerly covered law and
education for Time, and media for
Newsweek. More recently a film and television
scriptwriter, he lives in Pittsboro (NC) and teaches courses at Duke
University.
          
        
        
          Changing Decades
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 6, No. 5, 1984, pp. 4-8
          
          This year, Southern Regional Council marks the fortieth anniversary
of its founding. Today, as in the past, the Council's vision of the
South's future radiates from a belief in democratic principles. From
its beginning, the Council has affirmed the nation's democratic values
while at the same time holding them up as a standard by which to
measure and change Southern realities. Thus it has analyzed, exposed,
and helped to remove many of the cruel ways in which democracy has
been thwarted by segregation, disfranchisement, and the denial of hope
and opportunity to the region's people.
          As the South's olderst biracial organization, the Council's
uniqueness lies in its ability to help others turn knowledge and
vision into tools for constructive change. Over the past four decades
it has played a major role in reconstructing the South. It challenged
the all-white primary system and then helped to lead the way to
enfranchising and registering formerly powerless blacks. In recent
years it has helped to increase the effectiveness of legislators who
represent blacks and the poor. It has persistently analyzed, exposed,
and found means of opposing racial violence. It has helped to free
many of the South's workplaces of low wages and discrimination. It has
helped to integrate the federal courts. Thirty years ago, when the
Brown decision was handed down, the Council was already in the
forefront of the attack on segregated schools and it has remained a
watchful advocate of equal educational opportunity. Perhaps most
important of all, the Southern Regional Council has cast a vision of
what a humane and democratic South might look like.

          Many of the Council's objectives have been achieved, but its work
continues to be vital to the South. Indeed, the very achievement of
many goals has had the ironic effect of disguising new ways in which
opportunities are blunted, the disadvantaged abused, and democracy
denied.
          Now, as in the past, the Council's task is to provide research,
information, and technical assistance to individuals and groups who
are able to bring change and to provide forums for Southerners of good
will to think and act together. In a new era aptly called the "Age of
Information," the Council is uniquely suited to use its skills and
"data bases" to shape the region's future for the better.
          No facet of Southern life ought to escape the Council's ,attention,
but the agenda for the future has been drawn up around the following
broad concerns where democratic principles must be affirmed and
extended: (1) the ballot box, (2) the workplace, (3) the schoolhouse,
(4) the courthouse, (5) the marketplace of ideas and information, and
(6) the uses of technology and information.
          
            The Ballot Box: More Democratic Governments in the
South
          
          No more important task lies ahead for the region and the Council
than assuring that government in the South at all levels becomes truly
democratic. Almost twenty years after the passage of the Voting Rights
Act the promise of democratic government remains elusive, often
obstructed by the way political power is allocated through the drawing
of district lines for Congress, state legislatures, county
commmisions, city councils, and school boards. As the US Supreme Court
has said, redistricting is a primary means by which "racial and
political groups have been fenced out of the political process and
their voting strength invidiously minimized..."
          For almost four years the Council has been drawing model
redistricting plans designed to promote democratic government and to
prevent the dilution of minority voting strength. It has drawn more
than three hundred model plans, for jurisdictions at every level,
which have been used by lawyers, government officials, and community
leaders. But much more remains to be done. There are more than a
hundred congressional districts, eighteen hundred state legislative
districts, and almost ten thousand local government districts in the
region for which political boundaries must be redrawn after every
census. Since 1980, community groups and citizens' organizations too
often have been unable or unprepared to critique, adequately, proposed
redistricting. While progress is being made and plans continue to be
challenged and redrawn, redistricting in this decade is already a
missed opportunity because so few historically disfranchised groups
were prepared to participate effectively in drafting, assessing, and
proposing fair redistricting plans.
          To make matters more complex, local and state govern" meets have
begun to employ sophisticated means of drawing plans using modern
computers and other related technology. Because of a lack of access to
data and expertise in computers, community goups have been and will
increasingly be at a disadvantage.
          The Council proposes to help here by continuing to assist local
groups to draft model reapportionment plans and to begin to prepare
for the reapportionment of the 1990s. Our continued work will require
the development of sophisticated bases of data, improved uses of
computers and computer programming, and strategic technical assistance
to local groups and organizations in the use of data and
computers. Already the Council has prepared perhaps the only computer
programming for micro computers that will develop adequately fair
reapportionment plans of local governments. This work and the
increased the use of accessible computer technology in this field must
continue.
          The Council will also extend its research and technical assistance
to assure that the Voting Rights Act is fully enforced. By helping
local groups participate in the administrative review of voting
changes in the South and by monitoring the enforcement of the Voting
Rights Act, the Council can help to assure that all stand equally at
the ballot box.
          The work in both redistricting and enforcing the Voting Rights Act
can be effective only if there is a systematic collection and analysis
of the major indicators of political participation and political
effectiveness. In the South today, there is a dearth of reliable,
timely information on the level of voter registration, voter turnout,
voting trends, voting records, and other demographic changes in
government jurisdictions. Historically, Southern segregated
governments have had considerable self-interest in refusing to collect
such information and in denying it to others. In this way, they could
evade detailed evaluations of the full level of political
participation which they were impeding. Today, much of this
information remains uncollected by the states and scattered in many
different places. Without hard, reliable data collected and easily
available, the tests of how political participation can be increased
for all are almost impossible.
          The information that is available is usually collected today at the
county level--making it woefully inadequate in judging accurately the
current levels of political participation and the effective methods of
increasing it. Data on the major indicators of political participation
must be collected and analyzed on the precinct level; this level of
information can enable real assessments of the problems and
barriers. Without this information there simply cannot be a
systematicc analysis which indicates where scarce resources and
activities should be placed.
          The final focus of our work in this area will be our continued
research and technical assistance, by request, to 

State legislators on
issues relating to the poor and blacks. In the last several years,
state governments have become increasingly important in deciding the
fate of both state and federal programs that aid the disadvantaged. At
the same time, the opportunity for state officials in the South to
address, on their own, the problems of poverty and discrimination has
noticeably widened.
          Since 1979, the Council has provided state legislators in the Deep
South with research, analysis, model legislation, and current
information about issues relating to blacks and the poor. This work
has remarkably improved the ability of state officials to address the
historic needs in the region and it is setting a standard by which
state governments can become more effective and more representative by
their improved use of information and research. It must continue if
democratic governments are to serve all Southerners.
          The South is now moving into its second generation of democratic
government unbridled by segregation. If the region is to travel from
the end of segregation to the presence of full democracy, a journey
that can benefit both the region and the nation, the Council's efforts
to assure the democratic promise of the ballot box will be
essential.
          
            More Democracy in the Workplace
          
          Attracted to the South's low-wage, non-union labor--lower wages
than anywhere else in the country--and its cheapened land, both
resident and newcomer companies created an unparalleled number of jobs
during the last decade and, with the aid of the climate, earned the
area the name of the Sunbelt. The sun by no means shines in all
Southern backyards however, and in fact a storm of clouds appears on
the horizon. Almost forty percent of the growth in jobs and personal
income for the South in the last ten years has been concentrated in
parts of Florida, Texas, and Virginia. Three Southern states lost as
many jobs in the last five years as they had gained in the first five
years of the 1970s. Unemployment in the region as a whole remains
above the national average.
          The Sunbelt fascination may turn into an extended disaster. The
economy of the nation and the region is increasingly becoming
international and this trend surely limits the future prospects for
jobs in the South so long a' low wages and cheap land are its major
attractions Corporations already threaten Southern workers and
communities with relocation to Central America, Africa or Indochina
where wage scales are abysmally low. In the absence of workplaces in
which meeting the needs of the region's people is as important as
maximizing profits, the South's hopes and the Sunbelt's glitter soon
will be eclipsed.
          The Council hopes to address many of these issues with its recently
created Southern Labor Institute. The Institute will bring together
representatives of labor unions, business civil rights organizations,
environmental groups, govern meet, education, and other interests to
help create common agendas for the region's economic development. It
will also carry out research to monitor and assesses the South's
development of industrial relations and policies that promote the
welfare of workers.
          In the next few years the Institute will develop a sound,
alternative economic development strategy for Southern states and
local governments--a strategy that avoids the heavy reliance upon
cheap land and cheap labor. At the same time, the Council will
recognize the problems of capital formation and need for marketing
expertise by small, minority-owned, worker owned, and local businesses
in the South's increasing service-oriented economy. Work in this area
will include: (1) monitoring and encouraging governmental and private
practices of equitable, accessible capital formation, especially among
religious groups, churches, and labor unions, and, (2) establishing a
network in which marketing expertise and product development can
become available to a larger number of minority, worker-owned small
businesses.
          Also, today, more than seventy percent of the land of the South is
served by ostensibly democratic, economic institutions--the electric
utility cooperatives which by law are controlled by their
customers. Through years of neglect and a history of segregation,
these economic institutions with six billion dollars of assets in the
South, have become unresponsive to needs for job creation, a balanced
ecology, and prudent use of energy in their own communities. This
essential industry in the South will continue to be a central concern
of the Council's research and technical assistance in an effort to
improve democratic decision-making, promote jobs and protect the
environment.
          
            The Schoolhouse: Equal Opportunity to an Excellent Integrated
Education
          
          The goal of excellence in education has little, if any, opposition
in the South or the nation. But controversies do arise over how to
define excellence and how to make certain that no students are denied
a full opportunity to achieve it. Following its long-held views, the
Council will increase its work in this area in the years ahead in
order to assure that citizens of all races and incomes have an
opportunity to find the agreeable means by which everyone has the
opportunity for an excellent education.
          The involvement of local community groups and parents in the
decision-making in schools was instrumental in the resolution of many
problems encountered in dismantling the legally segregated school
systems of the South and that involvement is essential for any
equitable agreement on the 

means to achieve improved education for
all. The Council will encourage local and state groups to develop
agendas and define ways of improving the administration and quality of
educaion, regardless of race or income.
          The Council will also continue its research and analysis of trends
in the South relating to equal opportunity in education and its
assessment of the effects of different means which federal, state, and
local governments can choose to accomplish this goal.
          Of particular importance, especially in the rural South, is the
continued existence of tax-exempt, segregation academies. These
private discriminatory schools have an influence not only in keeping
white children away from public schools but also in influencing local
and state public policies concerning school administration and school
finance in both urban and rural areas. The Council will examine this
area of education and especially the effects of segregation academies
on education in the region.
          
            The Courthouse: Just Men and Women in the Institutions Of
Justice
          
          Few institutuions have been as important in shaping the future of
the South as its institutions of justice. The federal courts have had
a central role in shaping the region's future and while that role has
diminished in recent years, the courts remain a strategic influence
upon the course of the South.
          For much of its history, the Council has been concerned about who
are the men and women who occupy important positions in the
institutions of justice. That concern will continue in the future. It
was not until 1979, after the release of an SRC report, that the
federal courts adopted an equal opportunity plan for employment. It
has also been only: recently that civil rights lawyers, blacks, and
women have had an opportunity to be appointed to the federal bench. At
the state level, surveys by the Council in the late 1970's showed that
most judicial and quasi-judicial administrative agencies remained
predominantly white and too often entirely segregated.
          Through research and technical assistance, the Council will
continue to monitor, study, and prod the courts to be fully integrated
and fair institutions.
          
            More Democracy in the Marketplace of Ideas and
Information
          
          As it continues to help shape public policy options, the Southern
Regional Council will also continue trying to reach the hearts and
minds of Southerners, to make human relations and government more
democratic. Its public education work has involved assistance to the
news media, conferences, the publication of magazines and special
reports, and, most recently, radio and television production. In the
future, the Council will increase its efforts to reach a larger number
of Southerners who in the decades ahead can share a vision of the
region.
          The use of mass media by the Council will continue to branch into
new areas as we try to diversify the marketplace of information and
ideas. Already, the Council is preparing radio programming for
distribution to public and commercial radio stations across the region
and exploring ways of establishing syndicated programming to different
stations throughout the area. This programming will provide
information, education, and a sense of history about the region in
lively and entertaining formats.
          In television, the Council also has begun efforts to reach a larger
audience. With the Atlanta Media Project, the Council recently
established the Southern Network, where it produced each weekday two
hours of non-partisan programming for nine weeks about the
presidential candidates in the South. This programming was distributed
by cable systems to more than one million households in Alabama,
Florida, and Georgia. The Council's first venture into production of
programming will be followed by a cooperative venture of groups across
the region, and perhaps the country, to provide by cable a link among
people and organizations of good will.
          As it has for more than forty years, the Council will continue to
provide information, consultations, and advice on regional isues to
the regional, national and international news media. This informal
service helps to illuminate problems and opportunities and to guide
the coverage of issues by the mass media. A formal part of this
assistance to news media may be a yearly press institute where bureau
chiefs, editors, and reporters meet and discuss the major regional
issues.
          The Council also hopes to improve its services to the news media by
providing a subscription service of microfilmed newspaper
clippings. This collection covers more than thirty years and contains
more than 1.3 million newspaper clippings about people, places, and
events of the South's recent history. For subscribing news media, this
microfilm service would be available in order to provide background on
issues, place, or people through computer retrieval. This service will
also be used to improve the Council's general use of an increased
"data base" in research and technical assistance in other areas.
          Although the Southern Regional Council intends to move further in
reaching a larger audience through mass communications, it also
intends to maintain its own modest journal of opinion which is a
tradition as old as the organization and as important as free
thought. Now named Southern Changes, the Council's 
magazine provides a

means for covering emerging issues and helping Southerners to think
critically about the region as a whole. In the days ahead, the Council
hopes to begin to syndicate some articles in Southern Changes to daily
and weekly newspapers around the country in order to enlarge its
readership and to provide a regional perspective on current events
which is seldom available elsewhere.
          As the Council reaches out to new eyes and ears it will also need
to understand better the currents of opinions in the
region. Complementing other aspects of its work, the organization will
begin periodic surveying of the opinions of the public (and different
segments of the public) in the South. Private and public leadership
will also be surveyed on major issues and concerns from time to
time. This polling should permit the Council to perceive better the
public understanding of issues and its own need for additional public
education and research. Surveying will also be used as a tool in other
areas of the Council's work for assessing opinions on education,
understanding patterns of political participation, and aiding in
testing marketing concepts for emerging worker-owned and minority
businesses.
          
            More Democratic Use of Technology and Information
          
          In this age of information, new and alternative technologies--some
very simple and others very complicated--are shifting radically the
manner in which services are provided and decisions are made. In this
dramatic shift, no sector of society appears less equipped to master
the changes than the long-standing comunity groups who represent the
historically disfranchised of the South. Computers,
telecommunications, health care technology, solar technics--these and
other developments of recent years must be understood and mastered by
community leaders in the days ahead if their constitutencies are to be
represented adequately.
          In the future, the Council will explore ways to help community
groups and non-profit organizations in the South find useful
applications for new technologies. This area of work will be done in
very practical ways and as an extension of SRC's ongoing work.
          By increasing its own capacity to use new technologies, the Council
will share its technical knowledge, computer programming, and
practical applications with others across the region so that there can
be more democratic access and use of the technology and information on
which the region's future will be built.
          
            "A Bunch of Renegades"
          
          In dealing with the old or the new, no region of the country has
experienced greater and more rapid change than the South. In that fact
lies the promise of even greater change for the region and the
nation. It is the promise of democracy: that people can change
themselves, their institutions and their government for the better. To
that simple notion, so precious and fragile today as in the past, the
Southern Regional Council has devoted its energies. With increased
capacities the Council will continue, as one of its founders, Ralph
McGill, said, "to be a bunch of renegades who insist upon telling the
truth."
          
            Steve Suitts is the executive director of the Southern
Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Time and Time Again: The Women, the Union and the Vanity
Factory
          By Mclendon, PaulaPaula Mclendon
          Vol. 6, No. 5, 1984, pp. 8-17
          
          Sarah Boykin: Mr. Hundley was the plant manager when we first
started organizing. They told us that he had found a better job. But I
don't believe that because he had twenty years in with Vanity
Fair. And he went to that cabinet shop right up the road. I don't
believe he would have thrown away that many years.
          I think they got rid of Mr. Hundley because he didn't have t in his
heart to do the things that Vanity Fair likes done to their
employees. He was a Christian man. He was a good man too. When we
started organizing, everything changed. They had to get rid of him
because he was too easy, too soft. They had to get rid of him. They
gave us Larry Windham. That was the meanest man that ever walked in
Vanity Fair.
          Emily Woodyard: Mr. Hundley respected the women. He wanted to get
the work out, but he wouldn't ride you like you were a machine or
something. The rest of them did. It didn't matter to them as long as
they got their quota out and they looked good on that little piece of
paper that came out.
          
            In 1976, Sarah Boykin, Emily Woodyard, Wilda Blackmon and
Rebecca Blackmon led a successful union campaign in Jackson, Alabama,
at Clarke Mills, a division of Vanity Fair Mills, manufacturers of
women's apparel. Local 118 of the International Ladies Garment Workers
Union (ILGWU) came into being by the narrow margin of sixteen votes
out of over five hundred cast. The union was bitterly resisted by the
Clarke Mills' management and by the parent VF Corporation, a non-union
multi-plant operation that employed approximately eight thousand women
in south Alabama and the Florida panhandle.
          
          
            In 1979, these four women, textile workers each with over a
decade of experience, sat down to talk with me about how and why they
came to form a union. 
          
          
            In 1982, after a company counter-campaign in which Vanity
Fair employed a considerable array of intimidators against union
supporters, Local 118 was decertified. 
          
          
            In 1984, I asked Sarah, Emily, Wilda and Rebecca for another
interview together. They talked about the circumstances which led to
the loss of their union. They considered the various wiles and
coercions of Southern manufacturers like Vanity Fair. They also talked
about themselves and their co-workers--what they had learned, and what
they had gained from all they had given to the union
campaign. 
            
          
          
            The Setting
          
          
            Jackson, a town of six thousand people' sits along Alabama's
Tombighee River in Clarke County, about sixty miles north of
Mobile. Clarke was a cotton plantation county in the antebellum
South. Fifty percent of its 1850 population of 9,800 consisted of
slaves. Today, blacks comprise forty- tree percent of the county's
total population of 28,000. 
          
          
            Nearly half of Clarke County's black citizens live in
poverty. 
          
          
            During the twentieth century, Clarke County's agricultural
production has undergone a long and steady decline. In the decades
since World War 11, commercial pulpwood and timber interests, together
with Clarke Mills, have dominated the local economy. Ninety percent of
the county's land is forested; only eight percent is devoted to
farming. As in many coastal plains counties of the South, a few
individuals and companies have assembled large landholdings into pine
plantations ranging from ten-thousand to seventy-thousand acres
each. Clarke leads Alabama's counties in the yearly cutting of pine
lumber and is near the top in pulpwood production.
          
          
            Scotch Lumber, Allied Paper Company and Clarke Mills together
account for more than three-fourths of the county's three-thousand
manufacturing jobs. 
          
          
            Since its beginnning in 1939, Vanity Fair's Clarke Mills has
drawn its workforce from local women. Today it is the largest employer
of women in a county where only sixty-three percent of adult whites
and twenty-six percent of black adults have high school
diplomas. Residents are quick to acknowledge Vanity Fair's significant
role in the local economy, yet the low-wage, labor-intensive industry
has hardly brought prosperity. 
          
          
            The decision to try to organize a union at Clarke Mills arose
not out of any one disagreement with Vanity Fair but came as a result
of accumulated frustrations. Women found it increasingly difficult to
support families on wages of $2.65 an hour. Retirement and health
benefits were inadequate. "Used to be," recalls an elderly former
employee, "your retirement check would just about pay your light
bill."
          
          
            Workers expressed dissatisfaction with workplace policies
such as the longstanding practice of mandatory overtime and the
partiality shown by supervisors in determining work assignments and in
selecting those workers who went home during lay-offs. Workers could
not make complaints without fear of reprisal. The company, it was
said, maintained an "open door policy": the door was open and you went
out of the plant if you disagreed with management. 
          
          
            Except for my narrative background and occasional bridging of
time and topics, the women's words and their perspectives fill the
following pages. Their voices are joined occasionally by that of
Richard Boykin (Sarah's husband) and Eileen Brown, the ILGWU organizer
who worked in the Clarke Mills effort. 
          
          Sarah Boykin: The company had been in Jackson thirtysomething
years. They had all the time they needed to prove themselves and they
didn't. There would never have been changes without our local . You
would either have done what they said or you would have been at
home.
          
          I never had any trouble with Vanity Fair. They had never done
anything to me that I didn't let them know how I felt about it. But
there were so many people there that I would see crying--just crying
to no end. They were so upset they'd just lose all control. That would
upset me. I don't know; I have a very tender heart for other people. I
don't like to see people mistreated. And there are those--somebody
could be standing over them with a gun and they're not going to try
and defend themselves.
          I would come home and tell my husband about it. I would just cry
and he would ask me, "Why are you crying?"
          I said, "Because if you had seen it then you would cry."
          He said, "Well don't cry. What you need to do is get a union." So
that's how we started.
          I was the one who first contacted the union. This was around March,
1976. I spoke with my husband's union representative, Herbert
Belt. [Sarah's husband, Richard, worked for the United Parcel Service,
represented by the Teamsters.] Mr. Belt told me his union did not
handle garment workers. He let the ILGWU know I wanted to talk with
them. I guess it must have been probably a couple of weeks after the
first mention of the union a Mr. Ashley was supposed to have met
us. He didn't show. A couple of us carried the meeting on.
          The first time we met it was just a few of us. We didn't sign
anything, but we wanted to have phone numbers so we could keep in
touch. At the fourth meeting we had thirty-five to show. Sometimes it
would be less members, sometimes more.
          Wilda Blackmon: But this too. The people wouldn't come out. They
were still afraid to say "union" in the plant.
          Sarah: If you said "union" to one lady she would say, "Oh don't
talk to me about that. " She said, "They don't even allow you to say
union in this plant."
          Emily Woodyard: They tried to have a working condition where you
were scared to talk to your neighbor.
          Rebecca Blackmon: That was supposed to have been mandatory at one
time--that you could not talk during work hours.
          You sit there for twenty years doing everthing the company says
without questioning, you're not going to change overnight. You have to
be shown that even though you are standing up and saying, "Hey, look,
you didn't treat me right," that the company can't eat you. You're
going to have to be shown time and time again.
          Emily: I had been working at Vanity Fair since I was eighteen. It
was 1974. I was running late as usual. I had my card, trying to clock
it. It was one minute till. We had a three minute whistle and a seven
o'clock whistle. And there was a man who said, "You're not clocking
that card." The man grabbed me and would not let me clock in.
          That never left me. I made the statement if I ever found a way to
do anything to make it better at Vanity Fair I'd do it.
          Wilda: I went to work there twenty-three years ago. The day I
really made up my mind to look into the union was when one of the
engineers came out--I was doing a most difficult job. I mean it was
almost impossible to do and I had found a better way to do it. He came
out and found out the way I was sewing it and asked me, "Who do you
think you are to change my method?" I had to go back to his way, a
harder way. That's the day I started looking at the union.
          Rebecca: What motivated me was the income. I didn't think I'd get
rich working under a union but I thought we could get a better
wage.
          
            The Company
          
          
            The VF Corporation designs, manufactures and markets apparel
through three wholly-owned subsidiari--in addition to Vanity Fair
Mills--H.D. Lee, Inc. and Kay Windsor, Inc. Vanity Fair Mills posted
profits of $15.5 million on sales of $184 million in 1982. H.D. Lee's
eight production sites in north Alabama, combined with Vanity Fair's
eleven plants in south Alabama, make the VF Corporation one of the
state's largest private employers--with some 8,500 workers.
          
          
            Vanity Fair Mills originated in Reading, Pennsylvania in 1899
as Reading Glove and Mitten Manufacturing Company. After several
changes of names and production lines, Vanity Fair began shifting its
manufacturing to the non-union South in 1937 by opening plant in
Monroeville, Alabama--thirty-five miles east of Jackson. By the late
1950s, the company had ceased all its Pennsylvania
production.
          
          
            The opening of a textile plant in 1939 in Jackson, then a
town of three thousand, offered many white women their first
opportunity to work for non-farm wages. Vanity Fair's Clarke Mills
began by producing silk stockings, but soon converted to rayon and
nylon lingerie. The plant is still known to older citizens of the area
as the "silk mill. " With the construction of a new sewing facility in
Jackson in 1975, the original factory became the site of knitting
operations, producing Vanity Fair fabric.
          
          
            One long-time resident recalled the subsistence farming that
was still familiar when Vanity Fair arrived. "Folks didn't have
nothing to do with. You couldn't make a penny. Just what little if you
hoed or picked cotton. That's all there was. The silk mill took a lot
of folks out of the field."
          
          
            The company played upon this historical sense of gratitude
and dependence among older white women workers when organizing efforts
began in 1976.
          
          
            Following the Monroeville and Jackson plants, Vanity Fair
built factories in several similar south Alabama towns: Atmore, Bayou
La Batre, Butler, Demopolis, Luverne and Robertsdale. So hospitable
was Alabama for Vanit Fair that the company now runs only two
out-of-state plants, both in the Florida panhandle. At every location,
their workforce is overwhelmingly female. 
            
          
          
            In the mid-1970s, Vanity Fair expanded operations in both
Monroeville and Jackson. A cutting plant opened in Monroeville in
1973. This meant that Vanity Fair could dye, finish and cut the fabric
manufactured in nearby Jackson. The finished and cut fabric could then
be distributed to the various sewing plants, which by l 975, included
Clarke Mills. It was at the sewing facility that organizing efforts
were initiated in 1976.
          
          
            Clarke Mills' sewing plant--a one-story, windowless,
slab--sits on what was once a farm just outside the Jackson city
limits. In 1976 the sewing plant employed over five hundred
workers. Nearly all were women. There were four hundred sewing machine
operators, fifty-three examiners who checked finished garments for
mistakes, thirty-six packers, and seven mechanics (all
male).
          
          
            The plant's work was divided among eleven operation or
production lines, each of which had its own supervisor and one
"service girl " who made sure that sewing machine operators always had
the materials they needed to work without interruption.
          
          
            To earn more than minimum wage, the women had to meet a
"production" quota, a quantity of work calculated by time-motion stud
ies and set to a torturous pace.
          
          Sarah: When you have to sit there and do so many garments in so
many minutes--and this is an eight hour job--it's not easy. It's not
easy. A lot of times I psyched myself out, you know, "I can do it."
But you don't always do the same job. Styles change, jobs change, you
change machines.
          I think that the people that pack are very skilled, more so than a
machine operator. But they can't run a machine. Then, on the other
hand, I can't pack either.
          You have to be skilled, in my sight, to be able to pack those
garments as fast as they do. When you have a job where "production" is
the main word, you are forever busy. And you would be surprised one
minute will cost you a dollar.
          
            The Women
          
          
            Sarah McDonald Boykin grew up in nearby McIntosh where her
mother worked for a local restaurant and the family farmed. Like her
thirteen brothers and sisters, she left home after high school
graduation, eventually living in California for several years. She
returned to Jackson in the 1 960s to be near her family. She met and
married Richard Boykin, a native of Clarke County and an active civil
rights worker.
          
          
            Sarah began work at Vanity Fair in 1966 at the age of
twenty-two. She was among the first black women trained as sewing
machine operators. Sarah was elected president of Local 118 in
1976.
          
          Sarah: I had heard Vanity Fair didn't hire black people. This was
in 1965. I went up and put in an application. The first thing they
told me was I didn't pass the test and that I needed to pass the test
in order to be hired. So I forgot about it. And one day they called
me. It was in April 1966, I believe.
          
            Wilda Blackmon has always lived in Jackson, Alabama. One of
eleven children, married since she was fifteen, Wilda first began at
Vanity Fair over twenty years ago as a sewing machine operator. She
continued to work there on and off through the birth of her three
children.
          
          "This last time," Wilda recalls, "I had been back working for ten
years. Up until we got the union, you couldn't take time off to have a
baby. You had to quit and come back in. Now you can have maternity
leave and your time continues with the company."
          
            As the shop steward, Wilda was responsible for handling
worker grievances. She also served as president of the local after the
departure of Sarah Boykin in 1980.
          
          
            Rebecca Blackmon was unique among the union supporters in
that she had held supervisory positions with Vanity Fair on several
occasions. In 1976she was employed as a machine operator.
          
          Rebecca: I went to work at sixteen. I worked on and off for about
thirteen years. I was skilled at sewing on nearly every machine. I
worked in the press and pack department.
          I very much surprised people by being for the union. I had several
of them tell me that they were shocked because I had been a supervisor
and to be a supervisor is the ultimate in the company.
          
            Emily Woodyard, like Rebecca Blackmon and Wilda Blackmon, is
white. She was one of fifty examiners who worked at Vanity Fair in
1976. Both Emily and Rebecca were members of the shop committee that
negotiated the local's first contract. Neither she nor Rebecca had
completed high school when they went to work at Vanity
Fair. 
          
          Emily: One thing they used against us, Becky and myself, was that
we had not finished high school. They'd say, "Look at the people
that's your leaders." So we went back and took our GED tests. Now
we've got a high school diploma.
          
            In 1976 the ILGWU sent organizer Eileen Brown to Clarke
Mills. An organizer for the past ten years, Eileen travels throughout
the Southeast for the ILG but still lives in her hometown of
Talladega, Alabama. For over fifteen years, Eileen, a mother of three
children, worked as a sewing machine operator. 
          
          Emily: Eileen was a key factor. I do not think just any organizer
could have carried it off. She had what it took to go out and meet the
people. She could go in their homes.

          Rebecca: She was just basically a decent person.
          Emily: And that came across with people who would not let an
organizer in their home. Even they had to admit she was a good
person.
          
            The Union
          
          
            Soon after the union drive began, rumors began to circulate
that Clarke Mills would close if the campaign were
successful. 
          
          Eileen Brown: If you can just imagine you're working in the
plant. You feel a lot of these people accusing you of taking their
jobs away, causing work to be short, causing the plant to close. It's
not easy at all.
          Emily: Say two supervisors would get behind one operator while she
was sewing and talk about--well, say our work turning up in another
plant, machines being moved.
          Rebecca: Things that were not supposed to have been happening. Yet
they were making sure that the people that would be the most scared of
it knew what was happening.
          Sarah: I reported rumors to the union. The main one was about a
supervisor who said Vanity Fair was the first one that hired black
women out of the cotton patch and that if the union were voted in we
would be back in the cotton patch.
          
            This rumor contradicted the actual experience of black
women. Excluded from jobs in Clarke Mills until the mid-1960s, these
women did not come to Vanity Fair from the fields. The fields, by
then, had been planted in pines. The rumor revealed more about the
attitudes and perceptions of whites than about black women
workers. But it did touch on the crucial issue of available wage
work. 
          
          
            Vanity Fair held a virtual monopoly on jobs for black women
in the town of Jackson where today ninety percept of all managerial,
administrative, sales, clerical, technical and professional work (with
the exception of teaching) continues to be held by whites. 
          
          Eileen: Work slow-down times were different when the campaign was
going on. I'm sure what they did was step up the change of
styles. You'd go in and this girl was laid off for so many days and
that girl was laid off for so many days.
          And you'd go visit them in the evening and she'd say, "Lord, no, I
can't sign a card because if I do and they get word of it, they'll
fire me."
          Nobody had ever told her point blank, "I'll fire you if you sign a
union card." But the implications were there. The little strategic
lay-offs. If they felt we were beginning to get a little deeper in,
there would be lay-offs in that section.
          Rebecca: Even though the supervisors or management could not come
out directly and say, "You will be fired if you go through with this,"
they could tell you the same thing in so many ways. And you'd know
what they were saying.
          Emily: The supervisors would come out of meetings every
morning--they'd spread rumors. They would harass the people on their
line and when we'd take it to the company, "We didn't know they were
doing it." "They're not doing it because we told them to." And of
course the supervisors would keep their mouths shut.
          But the company was putting them up to it. The company was
schooling them on what to do. They'd pick out people that they knew
they could...
          Rebecca:...buffalo. That they knew they could scare to death and
just ride them. Stand over their shoulder and pick on everything they
did. Or stand there and just talk.
          
            Prejudices, not only of race but of sex and class, were
exploited in an attempt to divide workers at Clarke Mills: white
workers against black workers; sewing machine mechanics (all male)
against sewing machine operators (all female); and sewing line
supervisors against operators. 
          
          
            The male sewing machine mechanics actively opposed
unionization even though--because wage increases were based on current
pay and they were the highest paid workers--they would receive the
greatest gain from the 19771LG contract. According to March, 1979,
payroll records, sewing machine mechanic Paul Pan en, who would lead
the later decertification effort, averaged $6.37 per hour during a
two-week pay period. During the same time period a sewing machine
operator with thirty years experience averaged $3.38 per
hour.
          
          
            While organizers drew little or no support from men in the
workplace, one man who did offer moral and practical support during
the organizing campaign was Sarah Boykins's husband, Richard. He made
after-hour visits to workers' homes, attended meetings, and enlisted
support among members of the black community. 
            
          
          Eileen: Sarah's husband, Richard, would do his job and then if
there were people way back in the hills--see he knew everybody because
he's the UPS (United Parcel Service) man--he would go with us. He
would go wherever he was needed.
          Richard: I think the company didn't fight the union as hard as they
would have if it had been men. They didn't think that the women were
going to be successful. It surprised the devil out of them when they
won.
          Wilda: It was nerve wracking. But in the end the tears were worth
it all. One person asked me, they said, "Well, if you do go union who
will go to negotiate the contract? You know nothing about it."
          I said, "Well, we've learned this far. Why can't we continue to
learn?"
          They said, "You mean you're going to get on the road?" And there
wasn't a trip we took that I wasn't there.
          Richard: A lot of times I would come home in the evenings and get
in my car and drive around through the county--Barlow Bend, Whatley,
Grove Hill--to get cards signed.
          Eileen: Home contacts are the mainstay. That's what you do from day
one until day zero because you have to have a contact with the
people. Where the company can have a command audience, we can't. We
have to do ours while they're off, while they're home.
          Richard: Some of the people, especially the older people, they
would say, "Vanity Fair has been putting bread on my table for twenty
years. Why should I turn against them?"
          I would tell them, "If Vanity Fair is putting bread on your table
they'd send you a check at the end of the week. You wouldn't have to
get up and go out there each morning at seven o'clock."
          Wilda: And so many of them came back with, "If you start this union
Vanity Fair will close their doors."
          Emily: They did move our work out of the Jackson plant. We had
shevelva [trade name for brushed nylon fabric used in manufacture of
women's lounge wear]. I was on shevelva. And the shevelva line turned
up in Butler. We would go to meetings in Butler and the girls would
say, "Well, we're doing shevelva. It's your work. They will shut the
plant down."
          And they would take my card--your cards have four different places
you could cut it and put your clock number on it and put it with
different work if you split your bundle. And my work was being split
up back then. If they found bad work on other people what they were
doing was taking their numbers out of the pockets of shevelva robes
and putting my number in it. I got to where I marked my numbers with a
certain kind of mark, a different one every day or cut the corner
off. I fixed the card where they could not use it but one time.
          I had a big mouth. And I wasn't afraid to stand up and tell Larry
Windham in the meeting what I thought of him. I even put George Heard
[director of industrial relations] on the spot. I came right out and
asked him if we were going to be fired for our union activities
whether or not it went in. "Say for instance it wasn't voted in," I
said. "Are we going to be fired?"
          He didn't answer.
          So I spoke up even louder and asked him again. He didn't have any
choice but to answer, "No, the company cannot fire you for your union
activities." I feel like putting him on the spot had a lot to do with
me being put on the spot.
          Sarah: I think I'd be right in saying they laid off the majority
that were very outspoken and that supported the union.
          Richard: But they made it a point not to mess with the committee
members. They didn't push them around because they were scared they'd
get kickback from the Labor Relations Board.
          Wilda: But even during the campaign we did not get easy jobs. We
were in the plant. We took the worst. When we would leave at 3:30 in
the afternoon our machines would be sewing fine. Go back at seven in
the morning with trouble.
          
            Sex, Race and Class
          
          
            Wives and/or mothers first, the women who organized Local 118
felt strong obligations to their families. They experienced varying
degrees of conflict as the result of their activities depending on the
amount
            
            of support they received at home. The decision to organize
Clarke Mills, in the face of traditional demands of work and family,
was a major act of assertion. 
          
          Emily: Women are at a disadvantage. They put in their eight hours a
day--or ten--whatever is required of them. They go home; they cook
supper; they tend to the kids. And they get ready for another day at
the plant.
          Rebecca: There are unions in this town--granted, they are the men's
jobs. And that's one thing l cannot understand because a lot of the
women working at Vanity Fair had husbands who worked on union
jobs. And yet they didn't want Vanity Fair organized. I really do not
understand it. The men worked at union jobs and made good money. They
paid union dues. The women had grown up with it.
          Emily: It's got something to do with the men saying, "Hey, I want
her home to cook cornbread."
          Wilda: I don't think any of them liked to see us away from home but
it was something that we believed so strongly nobody would say, "Don't
do it."
          Sarah: We had to go out. Leave home at six o'clock in the
morning--I'd have to make a few stops on the way to work--and get back
at midnight.
          You would just work your heart out trying to see some sign of
improvement and people would just be so ugly to you. You'd let all
your work get behind at home. You'd go home and work real hard and go
to bed. You couldn't sleep. You lay there thinking, "What have I said
or what have I done to cause these people to feel like this?"
          
            Potentially divisive racial issues were a constant concern
during the months before the election and afterwards during contract
negotiations. The biracial shop committee tried to overcome workers'
racial prejudice and build unity. On the overnight trips to
out-of-town negotiation meetings, black and white committee members
shared hotel rooms. 
          
          Sarah: The first time I shared a room with Wilda Blackmon. After
that we decided everybody would share rooms, with one white and one
black to the room. Wilda wore the name of "rigger lover" and they call
me a "honky." You had to not hear that and keep on pushing.
          
            As the sir-month campaign drew to a close, the pressure at
the workplace increased but so did the determination of the
women. 
          
          Sarah: I never thought about what it would be like if we lost until
after the election. It never crossed my mind until the evening before
the election. This girl was riding home with me. We were coming along
Forest Avenue and I stopped at the IGA. I said, "Well, tomorrow is the
big day."
          She said, "You know we're going to lose."
          And I stopped in the middle of the street and said, "Don't say
that. Don't say that." I said, "If that's the way you talk get out of
my car." And I was going to put her right out in the street.
          And she said, "Well, we ought to think about that. It's going to be
hard if you lose." But I never really thought about it. It never even
crossed my mind.
          
            Of the approximately 530 workers eligible to vote on October
29, 1976, 509 cast their votes: 260 in favor of union representation
and 244 against the union. (Five votes were challenged and not
included in the final tally.)
          
          Eileen: The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) conducts the
election. You go into booths. You mark your ballot. You put nothing
else on it--"yes" or "no." And you bring it out and drop it into the
box.
          There are usually two observers from the company and two from the
union and they stay with those ballots from the beginning until the
count. When the ballots are counted, they are read "yes" and "no" and
"yes" and "no." And you die a little bit every time you hear a
"no."
          
            During meetings held in Atlanta in 1977 plant committee
members Wilda Blackmon, Sarah Boykin, Rebecca Blackmon, Vevelyn
Gilchrist and Eleanor Shaw, together with James Goldberg, legal
counsel for the ILG, pursued contract negotiations with
representatives of Vanity Fair. In their first contract, negotiated in
October of 1977, plant committee members won wage increases, an
additional holiday, improved health and welfare benefits and job
seniority. The contract also provided for a grievance procedure with
arbitration, the first step in providing a more equitable balance of
power between employer and employee.
          
          Sarah: Used to be if you didn't come in on Saturday when they'd
want you to work overtime, Monday morning you were in the office. And
you possibly wouldn't have a job. After the contract, it was
different. Overtime wasn't mandatory. You could say no.
          
            As the first and only union in the Vanity Fair chain, Clarke
Mills' Local 118 continued to face opposition from a management who
sought to stop union activity from spreading to the remaining Vanity
Fair sites. Company representatives filed objections with the National
Labor Relations Board following the October, 1976, election. These
objections were resolved in favor of the local.
          
          
            When contract negotiations were completed in 1977, Vanity
Fair granted gains won by the union to its nonunion
employees. 
            
          
          Wilda: In negotiations they'd say, "We can't do this because we've
got so many workers. If we do it for you we're going to have to do it
for them." So we knew from the beginning that we were really
negotiating for every plant Vanity Fair owned.
          
            In 1979 workers indicated that the local brought immediate,
if modest, improvement to Clarke Mills. But at the same time they
expressed the belief that Local 118's presence brought no fundamental
change of attitude on the part of Vanity Fair and, in fact,
exacerbated management attitudes and working conditions. 
          
          Sarah: At first, when we went in, you could just feel the
resentment.
          Emily: They're still punishing the people for voting the union
in. In the past you could run a high unit hour over there. You'd work
yourself to death but you'd have a fair paycheck. But they messed our
work up.
          They don't bring in good styles. They bring in the short running
styles where in the past the Jackson plant had a slip style that ran
for years. Now they're putting in the six weeks runners. It takes six
weeks to work the bugs out of it.
          In Vanity Fair's case if they would quit spending all that money
trying to fight it and put a little bit of it back into people's
pockets they would have much happier employees. You have a lot of
women there that's supporting their families.
          Rebecca: The women are what made Vanity Fair the company it is. Not
only the women doing the work--the actual work--but the women buying
the products. And the company still will not recognize the fact that
to keep the women working like they are they need to treat them
better. They just have not accepted that.
          
            By the end of 1980, as Local 118's first contract neared
expiration, several of the union's most experienced members no longer
worked at Clarke Mills. Some had leg because of personal and family
demands, a few had located better jobs in the Jackson area. The loss
of these women made the local more vulnerable when a petition for
decertification was filed. 
          
          Wilda: Every time a good strong union member would leave you would
get a little bit of hack. "She couldn't take it no more. She had to
go."
          
            Emily Woodyard left because of the birth of her third child
in 1978. 
          
          Emily: I certainly had not planned on leaving. I had planned to
stay there. It's a daily struggle with myself because I'm not over
there actively involved.
          Rebecca: My husband's health was not good. He became totally
disabled. And there's no way one person working at this plant could
support a family. So I knew I had to do something.
          I left Vanity Fair voluntarily in 1979.1 really hated to leave the
plant because of the people, leaving the people. I went to work at a
chemical plant making two-and-a-half times the salary that I had made,
with a union, better working conditions, retirement, the whole
works. I was there until 1983 when the plant cut production, leaving a
lot of people out of work.
          Sarah: I had an allergy problem. I was allergic to the fabric and
dust at work. I was spending more than I made on medicine. I went back
on two separate occasions. The last time I told them I would not be
back.
          
            Sarah Boykin subsequently took a position as a paralegal. She
resigned as president of the local in the fall of 1980 and was
succeeded by Wilda Blackmon. 
          
          Sarah: A lot of times I've thought about it. I really hated I
resigned. It was a hard thing to do. I felt sad. It came down to my
health or the job and I chose my health.
          On September 17, 1980, Local 118 and Vanity Fair entered came into
a memorandum of agreement extending their contract, with
modifications, through 1983. On that same date Paul Parden, sewing
machine mechanic and an employee for over twelve years, petitioned the
NLRB seeking a decertification election.
          Parden obtained legal representation from The Center on National
Labor Policy,; an organization that describes itself as "a non-profit,
non-partisan charitable legal foundation that works through the courts
to restore individual rights lost through abuse of union power."
Headquartered in northern Virginia, the Center's list of clients has
included the Stevens People and Friends for Freedom, a group of
J.P. Stevens employees supportive of the company in its battle against
the Amalgamated Clothing and Textile Workers.
          Parden, who is white, continued to act as the leader of those
workers who opposed the union. He argued that the union was not strong
enough to do its members any good, although he and other mechanics
benefited the most as the result of the local's first contract. There
was no apparent advantage for Parden if the local was
decertified. Rumors persist that mechanics and supervisors were
promised 

raises and/or bonuses in return for their opposition to the
union.
          Rebecca: The mechanics are a small group but at some time or
another they talked to almost every sewing machine operator in that
plant. They have access to every examiner. There's no person in that
plant that a mechanic cannot go talk to.
          Wilda: I went to the first open meeting they had. Paul Parden and
Benny Harrison were there. The lawyer said he was free. It didn't cost
Paul Parden anything to bring him down here. The lawyer said he was
interested in getting the company out from under the union. He
explained how to get the union out. To the best of my knowledge the
only black women that went in were with me.
          Emily: Benny Harrison was a preacher. A lot of women would just
flock in behind him because he was.
          
            A decertification election was held in July of 1981. While
initially impounded, the ballots were later counted and revealed that
a majority were cast against the UH ion by a vote of 199 to 11 7. This
election was set aside in April, 1982,followingan NLRB administrative
hearing. 
          
          
            Testimony at the hearing called into question Vanity Fair's
neutral position in the election campaign. The company first posted
its "no solicitation, no distribution" notice in 1978. According to
the new policy, employees were forbidden to solicit or distribute
material on company time or company property. 
          
          
            Numerous breaches of the policy took place when collections
were made for retirement, baby and birthday gifts. Moreover,
Tupperware and Avon products were sold during work time with the
knowledge of supervisors. In contrast, a sewing machine operator who
passed out union buttons in the workplace in 1981 received an
immediate reprimand from Joe Nichols, personnel supervisor. 
          
          
            Administrative Law Judge Huffon S. Brandon found that Vanity
Fair applied its no solicitation policy to prohibit all union activity
while taking no action to prohibit non-union solicitation. He ordered
a new election for September 1982. 
          
          
            Time and Time Again
          
          
            Although the union prevailed in the 1982administrative
hearing it was not to be taken as encouraging sign. The local's
ability to counter fears and to generate support had declined between
1976and 1982. Union membership dropped to forty-five by the time of
the NLRB-ordered election. 
          
          
            On September 24, 1982, the vote went against the union 188 to
134. 
          
          Wilda: I don't know what the members expected. I think they wanted
a miracle--for the union to go in, all their jobs to get easier and
their pay to get better. We never promised anything like that.
          We had gained a contract that the company had to go by. We had
several grievances that we went through satisfactorily. In fact we got
back pay for some of the girls. We got standards lowered on some of
them. But three-fourths of them would not even file a grievance on
their standard when they couldn't reach it. And I couldn't go in the
office and file a grievance for them.
          
            Workers' fears were reflected in the fact that in all three
elections there were many more union votes than union members. The
company's campaign of intimidation never lost its effectiveness. A
union dues checkoff provision in the local's contract meant that the
identity of union supporters was readily known.
          
          
            The fears that Vanity Fair would close its doors rather than
accept a union were intensified by the decline (from five-hundred to
350) in the number of jobs at the plant. That many of these lost jobs
had been held by black women, the local 's strongest supporters, also
hurt the union. Compounding the situation was the loss of experienced
and committed leaders like Rebecca, Emily and Sarah who had devoted so
much time and energy to the campaign. Their influence extended beyond
the work place and into the community. Their absence was felt deeply
by the union women who remained at Clarke Mills. 
          
          
            In addition, the ILG's attempts to broaden their base of
support by organizing Vanity Fair plants in surrounding counties were
unsuccessful. 
          
          Emily: If we could have gotten the cutting plant in Monroeville we
would have been on a roll. But when we lost the cutting plant it was
downhill. We hung on but all those plants were watching us to see if
we were going to survive.
          
            Wilda Blackmon was the last to leave Clarke Mills. She
continued to work for a year following the 1982 decertification
election. 
          
          Wilda: I left last year the week before Easter, 1983. I came home
that afternoon--I can't remember if it was Monday or Tuesday--with
chest pains that lasted through the night. I got up the next morning
and went to the doctor. They sent me to Mobile and the hospital that
day. I stayed in the hospital the rest of the week under heart
monitor.
          When I went back to work Joe Nichols put me in a training room on a
mirror hemmer. That is the most difficult, nerve-wracking job there is
to learn. It's finish hemming a garment. You have to hold the same
width of fabric in the machine all the way around. That was the most
difficult job in the plant for an old operator to learn. Now for a new
operator coming in off the street who has never worked on the machines
before, it's easy to pick up. I worked on it one day. I went back to
talk to Joe. I told him that no way could I take it right then. I got
another doctor's leave and stayed off a couple of weeks.
          When my leave was up I went in and said, "Joe, if you have
something in this plant that I'm capable of doing that I've already
been trained on I'll be glad to come back to work." He said there was
nothing else in that plant to be done except mirror hemming and I
could "take it or leave it."
          
            Sarah Boykin, still employed as a paralegal, adopted a
daughter in 1981 and is in the process of adopting a son. Emily
Woodyard, now the mother of four, works for a grocery store
chain. Rebecca Blackmon recently began a job as an office
worker. Neither woman plans to return to Vanity Fair. 
          
          Rebecca: I don't think I could sit there all day again-

hour after hour--just sit there.
          Emily: After being on the job I'm on now, I can say the same
thing. I don't see any future at Vanity Fair.
          Wilda: To me the job wasn't the most important part of my life. But
to a lot of them it was. It was their life. They will admit that real
quick. I can't see them enjoying the work, but some say they
do. Needing the money is more.
          Sarah: I get angry. All the days and nights I left my family and
this is where it ended. What did I really gain? I think about
that. Did I help or hurt others? I don't know.
          Rebecca: I have mixed feelings. Sometimes I have trouble dealing
with some aspects of it. I really do. Because we really gave a lot of
ourselves. From leaving the kids at home and all of that.
          We really believed a union would help Vanity Fair. I never thought
much about what the consequences would be. I never thought I was
wrong. I still don't think I was wrong.
          If you don't take care of yourself nobody else will do it for
you. And that's a hard lesson to learn the way we did.
          Emily: I believed once we got a union in it would stay.
          Rebecca: I did too,
          Emily: I did not know the committee was going to go in different
directions.
          Rebecca: I don't think anybody did.
          Wilda: I don't regret any of the things I've done. I'm happy with
my life as it is now. That's all behind me. It was an experience for
me to go through--a learning experience. It taught me self
confidence. That I was capable of being an equal to any of the people
in the plant. The supervisors were not above me--not even the plant
manager or personnel manager. I'm not saying our education was the
same, but education doesn't always make a smart person.
          Emily: You can get a union voted in. Just because you get the
contract signed, it does not stop there. You've got to educate
people. Whether it's to get them to a union meeting, which is
practically impossible, or whether it's waiting 'til their feathers
lay down and you can talk to them. It won't happen overnight. It won't
happen in six months. It won't happen in a year. All the company had
to do was wait long enough.
          Sarah: It happened once. Even though it's no longer there, it
happened after all. That's why I know it can happen again.
          
            Paula Mclendon is a native of Jackson, Alabama who now
lives in Birmingham.
          
        
        
          The Union Comes to Dooly County
          By Ransom, DaveDave Ransom
          Vol. 6, No. 5, 1984, pp. 17-18
          
          "We made history!" rejoiced Bettie Lloyd, after she and the
forty-seven other workers at Rosewood Nursing Home in Byromville,
Georgia--predominantly black, mostly women--voted this summer
two-to-one to unionize.
          She was right. By voting to become a chapter in SEIU Local 579,
they were leading the way in rural south Georgia, where employers have
made it clear that their distaste for unions is as strong as their
appetite for low wages.
          Byromville is a small town in Dooly County, a farm county of some
eleven thousand people. The town's main industries are a cotton gin, a
fertilizer plant, a packing house--and the nursing home.
          When local 579 staff members from Atlanta leafletted workers at the
nursing home last February, they got a flurry of interested phone
calls.
          The Rosewood workers described arbitrary firings, low staffing,
lack of respect, and incredibly low wages, remembers Peter French, the
staff member who helped them organize.
          The pay at Rosewood is the lowest of the three homes operated by
Beverly Enterprises that Local 579 has organized in Georgia. Workers
with ten or fifteen years at the home are making less than $3.65 an
hour, says French. "We're talking long-term poverty."
          Since many of the women have children to feed, and are sometimes
alone in doing so, they often must hold second jobs. Some families
pick fruit or work in the packing sheds during peach season "to make
ends meet."
          A particularly difficult supervisor made things worse. "We figured
we had to get something in to help us out," says Jessie Bell Spivey,
now chief union steward at the home.
          But home workers were equally concerned about the patients. There
wasn't enough linen, they told French. Not enough clothing. Not enough
food--breakfasts without eggs, dinners without meat.
          "I enjoy working with old people--they really need us," says
Mrs. Spivey, a fourteen-year veteran at the home who began working the
night shift years ago so she could get her children off to school in
the mornings.
          But the home's administration, she said, stood between the workers
and doing a good job.
          The patients at Rosewood come from all across Georgia. But many are
from the small towns in Dooly County, and some have been members of
the congregations of the churches that home workers attend. Beverly
gets the lion's share of its income from federal Medicaid payments for
these people's care, including high ax-executive salaries and a good
profit.
          In effect, the good people of Dooly County are paying federal
income taxes to support their old folks--only to 

have Beverly skim off
their profits, leaving the old folks with meatless dinners and paying
poverty wages to the people who take care of them.
          When Rosewood workers began looking at the union as an answer to
their problems, the home's management didn't take kindly to it. Twice
administrators drove slowly by union meetings--held at one worker's
house trailer on a dead-end road. And they began giving supporters a
hard time on the job.
          When the workers' organizing committee began handing out leaflets,
Jessie Bell Spivey was one of the first to stand by the door with
them. Two days later the home found a pretext to fire her. She thinks
they believed she was the "main, head leader" and that getting rid of
her would throw fear into other supporters and weaken the the
drive.
          "But they didn't give up," she says, proudly, "They got stronger."
The firing just strengthened their conviction that management was
going to keep messing with them until they stood up against them,
united.
          Spivey is active in her church and the local women's club as well
as the Dooly County chapter of the NAACP. Her husband is Byromville's
only black city council member. She is known to be a good,
conscientious worker. So her firing also strengthened community
support for the Rosewood workers, from whites as well as blacks.
          Support for the workers' drive to organize was shown at a meeting
they held at a local church. With hymns and prayers they sought the
path to justice, rising to recount their mistreatment and their
grievances.
          George Winters, the principal of the local grade school, who
remembered working as an orderly at the home, was there to give his
support. The Rev. James Orange of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference(SCLC) reminded them that south Georgia workers need to
stick together more than anywhere else because of the animosity
towards blacks getting organized.
          The ministers of two local Baptist churches and Roscoe Keaton, head
of the county NAACP chapter, also pledged their support.
          Casting their ballots secretly in an election supervised by federal
authorities, the Rosewood workers--nurse's aides, orderlies, dietary,
laundry, and maintenance workers--voted to join the union thirty-one
to fifteen. Then they held a joyous victory celebration.
          Additionally, Beverly investigated and reinstated Jessie Bell
Spivey, with back pay. Despite their vote, many workers didn't believe
it would actually happen. "When I went back, people acted like they
were crazy," says Mrs. Spivey. That's when she said to herself,
"There's something to it, I know there's something to it."
          For Rosewood workers, voting for the union is only the first step
towards achieving that "something." Next--and perhaps even more
difficult--is winning a legal contract with Beverly that outlines
wages, benefits, working conditions.
          But Local 579 President Herman Lewis, who credits a "very strong"
organizing committee with the election win, thinks that their strength
can also win a contract.
          Tell Beverly one thing, says Mrs. Spivey: "Do unto others as you
wish them to do unto you." If management can live by that rule, she
says, they will earn the goodwill of their workers and all--including
patients--will benefit.
          
            Dave Ransom is editor of Service
Employee.
            Editor's note: The two-year long campaign of the Service Employees
International Union (SEIU) and the United Food and Commercial Workers
(UFCW) against the nation's largest nursing-home chain, Beverly
Enterprises, came to an end in March of this year with the signing of
a precedent-setting agreement. Beverly, a company that disdained
collective bargaining and had attempted to break SEIU unions wherever
possible, has been brought to the bargaining table. The agreement ends
Beverly's strong antiunion campaign and pledges it to negotiate
contracts in nursing homes where the union has won an election. As the
nation's largest union of health care workers, SEIU is getting on with
the task of organizing the tens of thousands of low-paid Beverly
workers who need a union contract. The March, 1984 agreement has
bolstered efforts in the North and West where the SEIU already had
many strong locals. In addition, an organizing campaign is underway in
the South, where Beverly Enterprises has dozens of nursing
homes.
          
        
        
          Tending Our Gardens
          By Hatley, TomTom Hatley
          Vol. 6, No. 5, 1984, pp. 18-24
          
          I.
          My grandparents grew two kinds of sweet potatoes in
back of their farmhouse in central North Carolina. The main staple was
the orange-skinned type, so much like the color of the soil that you
had to look carefully not to miss them in the field after plowing them
out for harvest. These were the potatoes that the neighbors would
store over the winter in small mounds built on the edge of their
garden out of insulating layers of leaves and clay. This backyard
technology dated from the days when the potato was a folk remedy for
hunger, with the prescription, "take an old cold tater and wait."
Today the Big Star advertises them every day of the year. The other
potato variety was narrower and whiter, more root-like than the
orange-skin. This root was tended and planted for the sole purpose of
making smooth and reliable potato pies. The orange-skinned was
properly a sweet potato, with its roots in the indigenous agriculture
of South America; the second variety was a yam, first domesticated a
world apart in West Africa or Asia. Both had come to North America a
bit earlier than the time that my Pennsylvania Dutch forbearers,
pushed out of the Rhineland valleys, were moving onto the promising
new ground of Pennsylvania and later North Carolina.
          Large scale agribusiness today offers a simpler vision of
agriculture in the South. The fields that grow soybeans, cotton and
corn are as wide as the genetic base of commercial crop seedstocks is
narrow. Yet back of many farmhouses 

and even alongside suburban ranch
houses are gardens that still buck the trend toward uniformity. These
gardens often exhibit diverse horticultural and ethnic traditions in
Southern gardening. One of the most persistent as well as the most
hidden of these historical connections has to do with the
Afro-Americans and their gardens in the colonial Caribbean and
Southeast.
          The obscurity of this tradition which is renewed with every spring
planting of okra, milo, eggplant, peanuts or yams is partly due to the
fact that its earliest practitioners were Caribbean black slaves and
native Americans of the same region. The colonial Caribbean was a
cultural middleground, and Afro-Americans were among the importers,
brokers, and popularizers of new crops from their homelands. Yams and
okra as well as other plants with strange-sounding names--tanniers,
long collards, benne--all grew on small "provision gardens" which were
alternately ignored and encouraged by slave owners. Some plants were
carried northward into the fields of the Cherokees and other native
American groups as early as the seventeenth century, and were later
adopted into the kitchen gardens of German immigrants who had strayed
into the South. The openness of colonial farmers to all new crops
probably made some of the strange "provision garden" plants seem less
unusual than they appear to be today, when matched against the
cool-weather- and basic-soil-loving favorites of organic gardening
manuals such as Crockett's Victory Garden.
          However, these migrants were also able to move north and become
assimilated into the diet and gardens of the English and German
settlers of the Southern backcountry because of an ecological
compatibility between Africa and the warmer and wetter parts of the
American South. The native ground of yams, okra, and the like, is the
old and acid-weathered clay of the hotter latitudes. The red clays
breaking the surface and raising clouds of dust in schoolyard playing
fields are close kin, in soil family relations, to those soils of West
Africa and South America. The same closeness extends to plants, and
every summer these tropical crops, whether African or new-world
analogues of African plants, break through the soil in the American
South, retelling in many small harvests the achievements of the
AfroAmerican style of gardening.
          When the African plants first appeared in the new world, their
importers were Afro-American slaves, interested in the reform of
plantation agriculture on their own terms. When tall grass with tight
clusters of glossy black seeds called "guinea corn" first came to the
Caribbean, in the eighteenth century, it quickly became a preferred
grain raised in African new world gardens. The species was brought to
American ground by African hands, as an early botanist of the region
notes: "[the plant] is rarely seen but in the plantations of Negroes
who bought it from Guinea, their native country, and are therefore
fond of having it." When, as was more often the case, African plant
stocks could not be transported, new world plants cultivated by native
Caribbean peoples were at hand. Where enough latitude was allowed
them, free blacks and slaves traded back and forth with Amerindians,
and experimented with new-world substitutes for the crops left
behind. This was only a temporary transaction, however, as even
earlier than the advent of the slave trade, native Americans of this
region had been disappearing, pushed off their islands forever by
enslavement, disease, and psychological shock and depression. African
blacks, first transported as replacements, laborers substituted for
this dying people, thus became the ironic sharers in a new world
planting tradition.
          More often, blacks in the Caribbean or the American Southeast were
left on their own in finding their way with the plants and animals
upon which they were partly forced to rely. Sometimes a kind of
botanical dead reckoning guided them, with identifications made on the
basis of similarities of leaf shape and flower color. The names of
some plants growing in the Southeast today are reminders of their

accomplishment. The small tree called the paw paw (best known in the
refrain, "What are you doing? Picking up paw paws") gained its name in
this fashion. In Amerindian language of the Caribbean, paw-paw
specified the papaya, a native tree of the region. The same name was
stencilled onto another tree of a different region, apparently because
of basic botanical logic: the yellow oval of the ripe papaya fruit
corresponded in color and shape with the fall leaves of the paw paw. A
colonial botanist recorded the salient facts about the plant in an
aside: "All parts of the tree have a rank if not fetid smell; nor is
the fruit relished but by a very few, except negroes." This interest
was more than a matter of taste, since the African kin of the paw-paw
had important medical uses in the homeland of blacks transported to
the new world.
          Identifications were not always on first sight, and an older
African botanical vocabulary often enabled Africans to read their new
world better and thus to estimate the help it would give them in their
radically changed lives. Part of this ability to translate between
these two worlds, as in the case of soils, stems from the underlying
environmental kinship of the Caribbean and the Southeastern Coastal
Plain and Piedmont. There are ancestral ties between tropical and
subtropical plants which, though distributed from continent to
continent, are all similar in appearance. The paw paw patches growing
along the rich bottomland of muddy Piedmont creeks are members of the
custard apple family which has outliers across the tropics, in Asia as
well as in Africa.
          Another set of plants provides a silent commentary on this
exchange. "Elephant ears" are familiar today as plants lined up along
the edge of main street porches along with pots of ferns, their
utility as a food crop long forgotten. The term "elephant ears"
encompasses, however, several distinct plants, all with starchy,
edible roots and all with an origin in tropical America, Africa, or
Asia. One of these plants is taro, a crop which came out of southeast
Asia, and then made its way under the African alias 'dasheen.' Once
across the Atlantic, dasheen was probably grown interchangeably with
South American root crops such as manioc or cassava, and tanniers. In
fact, all of these plants were aroids, resembling each other in flower
shape and growth form, even though originating in widely separate but
often tropical regions.
          The white yam grown in my grandparents' garden, much like the
dasheen, arrived by an earlier and equally confused route from Asia to
Africa and, eventually, to America. By the time that this yam variety
had been successfully naturalized in Africa and had taken its place as
a staple of the peoples who lived in the region bordering the Gulf of
Guinea in West Africa, the slave trade was already concentrating in
the same area. In the drier savannah lands bordering the north of this
region, grains like the millets--guinea corn--mentioned above already
had a long history by this time. But in the southern yam zone root
crops propagated by rooting cuttings instead of by planting seeds were
of preeminent importance. Among the Yoruba, and Fon, "new yam"
festivals were key ritual events, and this celebration even marked the
beginnning of the calendar year for the Ibo. The spiritual centrality
and meaning of the yam and its relatives in Africa must have been
remembered by men and women after their enslavement in the new
world. In this way, the millets and yams that were carried to the new
world and traded within it by Africans were more than a dietary
supplement. These crops allowed AfroAmericans to reject their temporal
white master's bread, to grow their own food, in what must have seemed
symbolic "victory gardens."
          II
          Not only the plants that grew there, but also the manner of tending
the new-world AfroAmerican garden set it apart. To the eye of the
former master, the garden of "Daddy Jupiter," his former slave on the
nineteenth-century Sea Island coast of Georgia, looked unruly and
unfamiliar. Daddy Jupiter cultivated "...on his own accord a small
patch where arrowroot, long collards, sugar cane, tanniers,
groundnuts, beene, gourds, and watermelons grew in comingled
luxuriance." This 'comingled' style had distinct antecedents in West
African gardens, and must have made the 'middle passage' as a mental
image of how a garden should look and function, no matter where it was
rooted. Plots resembling Daddy Jupiter's nineteenth-century garden,
still grow in the American Southeast (although the tradition' is
fading) and flourish farther south, particularly in the Caribbean.

          Anthropologists working on intensive gardening practices today have
abstracted the technical reasons for the common success and widespread
occurrence of this style of cultivation. The "comingled luxuriance" of
Daddy Jupiter's garden partly owed its productivity to the way in
which his selection of crops mimicked both the structure of a natural
plant community and its characteristic closely-packed assortment of
plant species. Given the mixture of plants in his garden, Daddy
Jupiter may have employed a two- or three-tier layering of the plants,
as is often practiced today in the Caribbean, where tall crops such as
corn, cassava, or sugar cane are commonly grown together with
ground-hugging yams. In this way a local, 'garden climate' can be
fostered to reduce insect populations and shade out weeds. Soil
nutrients and water also are conserved and sometimes increased
relative to row crop gardening. The intensive garden style thus blends
agricultural and ecological logic to achieve its high yield. And the
logic of this pattern of food growing is not confined to the garden
plot, but will also work on a larger scale. Whether in gardens or in
farm fields, tightening the land's hold on potassium, phosphorus, or
nitrogen provides a kind of inexpensive crop insurance for succeeding
harvests.
          Very often American scientists have probed nutrient and other
efficiencies of small-scale agriculture in order to seek food-growing
alternatives for supporting the increasing populations of the
"developing world." Ironically, the impetus for their work has often
been the failure of the agricultural technology supplied by the
"developed world" to provide nations with a dependable food
sufficiency. Yet Americans are slow to apply this lesson at home or to
direct the same kind of attention to our self-development that we are
willing to offer abroad to a "developing world" that always seems
outside our borders. An effective effort at agricultural change at
home will, however, require remembering the lessons and traditions of
the past and applying them to our future.
          Just to the south, in the Caribbean, a historical crisis in
agriculture occurred many years ago which prefigures some of the
change Southern agriculture has faced and may face again. The sugar
plantations in the Caribbean pioneered an industrial style of farm
management that was modernized and adapted to the north, in our own
region. Like many modern farming operations today, the plantation was
from the beginning in chronically poor ecological health. Erosion,
insect and plant diseases, and soil infertility, once they had taken
hold, worked together to cause a constant drain against the land. In
later years the economic vigor of these operations lagged as well, in
spite of the involuntary subsidy drawn from the labor and farming
skills of black slaves.
          When the system faltered for the final time, blacks were left to
apply their horticultural skills to their own ground, and the
intensively cultivated garden plots that resulted became a lasting and
reliable survival tool amid the poverty of postcolonial times.
          The end of the plantation system in the American South was not
succeeded by the integrated world of small farmers that some reformers
had envisioned or, as happened in the Caribbean, by a peasant society
granted autonomy by poverty, isolation, and resistance. Instead, the
scale and manner of cultivation that marked pre-war times in the South
carried over into the postwar period, bringing with it many of the
problems that still shadow Southern agriculture today.
          The major theme of the region's agriculture continued to be a
simple one of dependence on a handful of major cash crops. The amount
of land turned over, fresh and damp, for planting each spring in the
South, thus depended and has continued to depend on off-farm factors
such as export demand end shifting government policies. Over the past
150 years, corn, then cotton, and most recently, soybeans, have played
leapfrog for first place in the market. A kind of boom-and-bust cycle
has resulted and has left its mark on the Southern countryside. In the
down times of the thirties, when small farmers facing price declines,
pest losses, and the cost of mechanization, walked away from their
land, millions of acres in the South, abandoned and reclaimed by old
field-grown pines, slowly pinched down the horizon with green. The
remarkable scale of abandonment is reflected by the ninety percent
share held by harvested "old field" pine in the Southern softwood
market today.
          During the boom times that followed World War 11, the cycle
reversed itself temporarily, and in order to accommodate a ten-fold
increase in Southern soybean acreage by the mid-seventies, new fields
were opened in the former 

prairies on the region's western edge. In
other areas, such as the Piedmont, the fast growth of soybeans allowed
double cropping, in effect double timing the land to produce two crops
per year. Yet there is trouble on the horizon. Already the world
markets fueling demand for soybeans are spurring competition for
exports. Argentina is planting nearly six million acres of former
pampa rangeland in soybeans, today, and is rapidly increasing the
acreage devoted to this crop. Other potential commodity competitors,
such as Brazilian-produced palm oil, have appeared on the horizon as
an effective substitute for soybean oil as well, and the future for
the latest Southern staple crop is less than bright.
          Whether in Argentina or Missouri, the land itself always pays part
of the cost of one- or two-crop dependency in agriculture. The most
important damage comes from simple physical phenomena such as
erosion. Today forty percent of Southern cropland is undergoing a rate
of erosion that federal agencies concerned with the problem consider
excessive. The process of erosion is elemental: rainfall on bare,
plowed ground, as well as the steady scraping of the wind, removes the
best part of the soil, the top soil that is alive with the soil
organisms which are the essential agents of soil fertility. In older
agricultural areas of the South, generations of erosion have clotted
rivers and built deltas out of the subtracted fertility of farmers'
fields. In these sections successive new technologies--the iron and
then the steel plow, chemical fertilizers, and herbicides--have masked
the loss of soil fertility by raising average yields through the
region. Yet lately, small signs are appearing that indicate a limit to
the ability of new technologies to make up a cumulative deficit in the
land. An indication of things to come may lie in the recently reported
decline of Southern soybean yields--sometimes as much as ten bushels
per acre--over the past few years. This sudden, small reversal in the
upward trend of harvest yields can be explained in more than one
way. Weed and nematode problems dampen harvest yields by competing
with the growth of soybeans. And in areas of marginal fertility,
erosion may be exerting a downward pull on production that will become
stronger as soil depth and structure is further damaged. Yet these
explanations could be read alternately as symptoms of the same
underlying problem, of a Southern agriculture showing signs of nearing
the limits of its productivity.
          The newest strategy in Southern farming, called no-till or
conservation tillage, is working only to hold onto the yield advances
in Southern agriculture, instead of dramatically forcing up the yield
of crops. Under "no till" a crop is planted in a field in which winter
wheat or another crop has just been harvested, and in which weed
problems (and a share of erosion damage) have been controlled by
herbicides. The adoption of "no till" has been closely linked to the
increase in Southern soybean acreage, in part because the method
reduces the cost of double cropping, or taking two crops per year off
the same piece of land. As we have seen, soybeans are naturally
adapted by their fast growth and maturation to this agricultural
strategy.
          Although "no till" and soybeans (and corn) are natural partners,
the "no till" system has also been aggressively marketed from two very
different quarters. On the one hand, chemical companies have been in
the fore. The "Southeastern No-Tillage Conferences" have been partly
funded by chemical companies such as Chevron, which holds the US
license to manufacture paraquat, a herbicide applied on approximately
five million Southern acres this year. (Chevron has also been in the
news recently to insulate itself from personal injury lawsuits
stemming from the accidents with its very toxic product.) The second,
and more objective voice proposing the expanded use of this new method
has come from agronomists and soil scientists, who because of their
intense concern about soil erosion put the stress on the term
"conservation tillage" rather than "no till."
          In the final analysis, however, "no till" and the pattern of
conventional tillage practiced over the past two decades in the South
are surprisingly similar: both make use of nearly equivalent amounts
of chemical herbicides and fertilizers to sustain high yields, and
both are adapted closely to an export-based staple crop style of
farming to which small and large producers are increasingly tied.

          The pattern of consolidation and increase in the scale of
agriculture today is accompanied by a technology powerful enough to
temporarily screen out small but real difficulties that may make the
future of agriculture in the South more uncertain than it promises to
be today. In Southern agriculture, like Southern forestry, uncertainty
will be compounded by a lack of fundamental knowledge about the land
and the impact of its cultivation. Some problems are as simple as
teaching farmers to prevent spills, runoff from fields and
misapplications of agricultural chemicals which can trigger kills of
aquatic life in farm ponds and streams. Others promise to be more
complex, as in the rapid establishment of weed strains genetically
resistant to the chemicals designed to control them (as has happened
in Virginia recently, with a paraquat-resistant strain of pigweed). Of
course, fine tuning crop and herbicide rotations, responses to weed
outbreaks and soil conservation in a well-managed farm is not
impossible. But new and more powerful agricultural technologies as
well as market demands for farm products will mean that good
management will become increasingly difficult, with shorter response
times and greater possibility of damage. Both new technologies and new
farm programs are tools that foster a kind of optimism that problems
can be calculated and managed away. Yet if the agricultural past and
present of the South are any guide, the future will be accompanied by
a high level of economic and environmental uncertainty.
          One trend that adds appreciably to this trend toward instability is
the increasing scale and corporate sponsorship of Southern
farming. The capitalization of Southern agriculture by banks,
insurance companies, and individual investors increases the problem of
oversight. This is especially true in light of the willingness of
corporations, buoyed by a managerial optimism distant from the
traditions of farms and a set of government subsidies, to expand into
lands formerly regarded as marginal. The superfarms purchased by
Prudential Insurance Company subsidiaries in the sandhills of Nebraska
and the peatlands of the North Carolina coast are one of many good
examples. I he North Carolina operation, for instance, is centered on
the production of staples such as corn and soybeans which are made
profitable because of government price supports. This "subsidised"
profitability then often depends on a margin of yield that can be
achieved by large-scale farmers only through using new mechanical and
chemical farming methods such as "no till" cultivation. In this way
much of the intensification that is pushing the capacity of the
Southern soil to a kind of natural limit may, in fact, be a surplus
product.
          Southern agriculture today is a game of limits, of shrinking
margins of investment and crop yield, of the health of the land and
with it the long-term security of food production. The problem down
the line is more than one of credit and chemicals. Food crops must be
grown in areas like the South, where food can be grown for regions
where it cannot, and agricultural chemicals are one of many valuable
instruments of cultivation. The problem is therefore one of social
goals, of, in Wendell Berry's phrase, a "culture and agriculture"
challenged to break out of a dependent past in order to create a
farming economy that can be stable over generations rather than riding
the old roller coaster of uncertainty and jeopardy.
          III
          Among the lessons that the Southern past offers is that there is
time enough for change. The Southern land, which has shown resilience
in the face of centuries of damage, allows this time, and remembering
the diverse cultural terrain of the South can open up new and needed
possibilities for the future. European, Amerindian, and African
approaches to growing food in gardens and fields are among the
Southern traditions of ethnic cultivation that can teach their own
lessons. The Afro-American way of gardening in particular seems to
have a special message concerning the value of caution in
agriculture.
          In contrast to Southern agriculture today, the Afro-American logic
of cultivation has been deeply conservative. In the coastal South and
Caribbean, long after the business of the plantation was defunct,
blacks tilled their gardens and survived. And in this sense the
Afro-American gardening style deserves to be called a tradition,
since, like all 

traditions, it has an active meaning and application
for the present.
          The Afro-American cultivation tradition offers a way toward
changing Southern agriculture in a practical as well as a
philosophical sense. Its ecological logic, tested and sound, can be
applied to planting crops in fields as well as gardens. Stressing
diversity and sustainablility, both key aspects of the tradition, may
open up some acreage now growing soybeans at a loss to crop mixtures
designed to allow both farmers and fields to benefit. And though not
incompatible with chemicals, machines, and technology, its
conservative nature can discipline change in farming in order to avoid
stumbling into costly agricultural blind alleys.
          Yet the overriding importance of this among other farming
traditions in the South is that it was largely built out of a
combination of desperately held tradition and improvisation as
AfroAmerican slaves faced a new world forced upon them. Thus, it can
provide a precedent to guide the personal experiments that many
farmers, faced with difficulties, are already making on their own in
intercropping crop varieties in a single field, in switching away from
dead-end crops such as tobacco, in using new biological techniques to
control harmful insects, or in adopting more efficient cultivation and
irrigation techniques. Advocates of small farm diversification such as
Booker T. Whatley in his Small Farm Technical Newsletter, build on the
same tradition in arguing that farms can be managed as profitable
market gardens, rather than simply as staple crop productions
sites. Tending to the full agricultural past of the region will
increase the ability of Southern agriculture to face the coming of a
new and restrictive world, something like that encountered by Africans
in the Americas. This world will be created partly out of three
hundred years of damage to the land, and partly by the jostlings of
the world markets for food and wood fiber in which the region
continues to play a dependent role. Yet a groundwork for meeting this
challenging new world flexibly and positively is already in
place. Like the Afro-Americans on Jamaica who "took care to preserve
and propagate such vegetables as grew in their own country, to use
them as they saw occasion," we should' not forget to tend our own past
in looking toward our region's agricultural future.
          
            Tom Hatley lives in Durham, North Carolina. His article
"Forestry and Equity" appeared in Southern Changes for
July/August, 1983.
          
        
      
    
  