
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 6, Number 6,
	       1984
        
          It's Jesse Again
          By Gaillard, FryeFrye Gaillard
          Vol. 6, No. 6, 1984, pp. 1-3
          
          Relying on $14 million worth of accusation, racial invective and
unrepentant lying, Sen. Jesse Helms has been reelected.
          He defeated North Carolina's popular governor, Jim Hunt, by
fifty-one percent to forty-nine percent of the vote. Thus, a state
once considered the South's most progressive has offered--once
again--a solid vote of confidence to one of the most radical spokesmen
for the American rightwing.
          For a time, it appeared the result would be different. Just over a
year ago; Helms was trailing badly in most opinion polls. But like
many a Southern politician with his back to the wall, he knew where to
turn. Even in a state where the two largest cities have elected black
mayors, and where one of them, Charlotte, has become a national model
for successful school integration, the issue of race still cuts to the
bone. So Helms seized upon the national debate over a holiday honoring
Dr. Martin Luther King, and he began to sound the themes of thirty
years ago.
          "I think," he declared on the floor of the Senate, "most Americans
would feel that the participation of Marxists in the planning and
direction of any movement taints that movement at the outset . . .
          "The fact is that Dr. King's program at least in part was conceived
and aided by men and women who were not loyal to the United States. I
refer specifically to members of the Communist Party of the United
States, a revolutionary action organization funded and directed from
Moscow. Although there is no record that Dr. King himself ever joined
the Communist Party, he kept around him as his principal advisers and
associates certain individuals who were taking their orders from a
foreign power . . .
          "King's patterns of associations show that, at the least, he had no
strong objection to communism, that he appears to have welcomed
collaboration with Communists, and that 

he and his principal vehicle,
the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, were subject to
manipulation by Communists. The conclusion must be that Martin Luther
King Jr. was either an irresponsible individual, careless of his own
reputation . . ., or that he knowingly cooperated and sympathized with
subversive and totalitarian elements under the control of a hostile
foreign power."
          Those kinds of guilt by association echoes of the late Joe McCarthy
are vintage Jesse Helms. With heavy racial overtones, they have been
his style since his days as a radio commentator in the 1950's; and
unlike Strom Thurmond, George Wallace and others in the South who have
toned down their rhetoric in response to what they perceived as
changing realities, Helms is convinced that the old ways work.
          He may be right. Following his posthumous assault on King, Helms
rushed from nearly twenty percentage points behind, to a point or two
ahead, in the public opinion polls. And from then until the voting on
November 6, the issue of race remained a conspicuous theme in his
campaign literature and fund-raising appeals.
          One letter sent out by Helm's National Congressional Club contained
the message: "Black Power Means Black Rule and Violent Social
Revolution. VOTE HELMS." And on the front page of a newsletter paid
for by the Helms for Senate Committee, there was a photo of Jim Hunt
and Jesse Jackson with a headline reading: "Hunt Urges More Minority
Registration."
          All of that is part of a remarkably consistent ideology that has
made Helms, in the words of one Republican strategist in North
Carolina, the "ideological point man" of the American right.
          Helms's position on the arms race is that America should win it. He
opposes any form of arms control negotiations, l and his rhetoric
concerning the Soviet Union makes Ronald Reagan's seem mild. When the
Soviets shot down Korean Airlines Flight 007, Helms declared, "If that
is not an act of war, it will do until another comes along."
          He criticized the State Department and the Reagan Administration
for their support of El Salvador's President Duarte, charging that
Duarte is a "Socialist." He compares Roberto D'Aubisson's ARENA party
to local Chambers of Commerce in North Carolina, and he declared at a
June press conference in Charlotte:
          "I met D'Aubisson down in Hot Springs, Virginia, last September,
and he didn't strike me as the kind of fella who would be connected
with death squads. So I went to all the intelligence agencies in town
and said, 'Tell me about the death squads.' They don't have any
evidence. There is no evidence. If the ARENA party were in North
Carolina, it would include most, if not all, of the free enterprise
folks in the city of Charlotte . . ."
          The thing that sets Jesse Helms apart, however, is not only his
willingness to say such things, but the way he delivers his lines. He
has that impressive gift of timing, that rare politician's ability to
size up an audience, to tap into the darker moods of alienation and
anger through a single word or phrase, delivered in most cases with a
derisive little smile: "Ted Kennedy . . ." He will say. Or "Jesse
Jackson . . ." That's all it takes, and the sudden rumbles of laughter
quickly grow into cheers, as Helms launches his assault on the
standard set of enemies: big-spending liberals, domestic radicals,
communist expansionists in every part of the world.
          There is a sarcasm and pugnacity that plays well in the South, that
appeals to bitter stirrings from thirty years ago, when the region
began to bear the frontal assaults of change.
          Kathryn Fulton, editor of the North Carolina
Inde-pendent, argues that among the complicated
ingredients in Jesse Helms's appeal are his small town origins-a
conception of himself and America shaped by his growing up in the town
of Monroe, segregated, poor and pious, with the Depression and the
triumph of World War II defining people's thoughts on the way things
should be. In that idealized world, which seems so threatened by the
cataclysmic events of the last thirty years, there is no room for
ambiguity or doubt, for troubling complexity or disturbing shades of
gray.
          Helms stands, in effect, as a beacon of certainty and a symbol of
rage--lashing out at all the demons, the liberals, socialists,
communists, feminists, atheists and integrationists, who have made our
society such a disconcerting place.
          And if on some level his supporters are troubled by the meanness
and the Iying that are Helm's standard fare, they are seduced
nevertheless by the promise of victory: Total Victory over adversaries
unambiguously threatening.
          It is a powerful appeal.
          Arrayed against it, however, was very potent candidacy of Governor
Jim Hunt, who comes from the other side of Southern politics, from
another whole strain in the psyche of his state.  The strain is
enbodied in a sporadic history of progressive politicians, of whom
Frank Porter Graham in the 1940s and Terry Sanford in the 1960s were
perhaps the most important. Both insisted on the moral necessity of
change, and both appealed to the basic decency of North
Carolinians.
          Jim Hunt is a product of that tradition. He was raised on a farm in
the eastern part of the state--109 acres of tobacco fields and rolling
pastureland dotted with milk cows. His mother and father were ardent
admirers of Franklin D. Roosevelt, as they battled their way through
the vagaries of the Depression and learned to appreciate the helping
hand of government. A federal conservation grant paid for the pond on
their farm; their pine seedlings came from a federal project to combat
soil erosion; and Rock Ridge High School, where Mrs. Hunt was a
teacher, was rebuilt by the WPA after it burned to the ground.
          The Hunts were staunch believers in the racial moderation of Frank
Porter Graham, and they wept in 1950 when he lost a Senate
race--defeated by the racist demagoguery of a Jesse Helms mentor,
Willis Smith. Jim Hunt has never rebelled against the political legacy
of his parents.
          He is a politician who believes in the goodness of government, and
he proved to be an effective and very popular governor.
          He pushed for better roads and schools, the allocation of more
money for social programs; and his most recent achievement was a
$300-million educational package, including a fifteen percent pay
raise for every teacher in North Carolina.
          The difficulty for Governor Hunt (as for any North Carolinian of
good conscience), lay in the degree to which Jesse Helms has been able
to push the state's politics to the right--setting the agenda and
defining the issues. Add to this the fact that Jim Hunt has always
been a cautious politician, sometimes cautious to excess.
          For the last two years of his governorship Hunt became extremely
protective of his right flank. He failed to speak and act as
unequivocally as many of his supporters would have liked on social
issues. He presided over two executions. And, as he began to address
issues in the senate race, Hunt positioned himself as far to the right
as he could--basically endorsing the Reagan Administration's support
for the contras in Nicaragua, and Administration's plans to build the
MX missile and the B-1 bomber.
          Each of these moves by Hunt, while perhaps stategically defensible
in terms of appealing to the broadest spectrum of North Carolina
voters, helped to undermine the energy and enthusiasm of some of his
once-ardent supporters. Many other voters began to lose their clear
sense of just what Jim Hunt--and the best of the state's historical
Democratic legacy--stood for. With tragic irony, it was Hunt, not
Helms, who began to appear as the less-principled politician.
          All the caution worked to Hunt's disadvantage. As things turned
out, it hardly mattered what the Governor's publicly stated advocacies
were. Helms had $14 million to buy TV time to distort them.
          Through an assault of television commercials, Helms managed to
convince a majority of North Carolinians of something demonstrably
untrue: that Hunt was a big-spending liberal--a Mondale clone who, if
elected would raise their federal taxes by the remarkably specific sum
of $157 a month.
          In many of his commercials, Helms simply lied, putting a dollar
figure that he knew was midleading on tax proposals that were not even
Hunt's. He also lied, flatly and with no hint of shame, about the
details of his own record. "I haven't proposed to do away with social
security," the senator said, though in fact, he had proposed replacing
Social Security with a privately managed system. In a television
debate, he accused Hunt of favoring elimination of tax deductions on
home mortgage loans, which turned out to be a compound lie. Not only
had Hunt never advocated such a plan, Helms had.
          Later, Helms denied introducing anti-abortion legislation that
would also have precluded certain forms of contraception, when in
fact, that was precisely what he had done.
          Astonishly enough, the lying prevailed and Helms was elected.
          
            Frye Gaillard is an editorial page writer for the
Charlotte Observer.
          
        
        
          Plantation Portraits: Women of the Louisiana Cane Fields
          By Laudin, TikaTika Laudin
          Vol. 6, No. 6, 1984, pp. 4-6
          
          
            HELEN CASSIMERE
          
          
            Jeanerette, formerly Kilgro and Hope Plantations.
          
          I plant cane, cut grass, cut cane, hoe cane, pull grass out of
cane, fertilize cane, spray cane, pull dirt to the cane for harvest
for the following year. And I load cane onto the tractor and drive it
out of the field. Anything the man can do, I do it.
          I love the part where you just go 'round the rows, nobody lookin'
over your shoulder, out in the wide open fields, fresh air, doing your
own work and seeing that it done right. After harvest is over, I enjoy
looking forward to next year when it's time to plant again.
          I been working in the cane since I was sixteen years old. I'm
forty-three now. I lived on Kilgro Plantation 'til '59. It was way
back in the country, out in the woods. Only thing I didn't like, it
was hard to get backwards and forwards to the nearest town. It was
five miles away and we had to walk. (We didn't have phones to call a
taxi or anything.) Finally we made enough money that we could move to
town.
          My daddy likeded the cane work 'cause that's all he knew. My mother
likeded it 'cause it's all she knew. They had twelve kids. When we got
old enough, we persuaded them to better their situation in town.
          Now I work at Hope plantation. They are very nice people to work
for. Don't give us any trouble. During grinding, that's harvest time,
they come to each person home, pick up their dinner, bring it out to
the field.
          I take work at 5:30 until 5:30 or six at night. Time pass by so
fast. Seem like you hardly started and when you look up, the man on
the headland be blinkin' his light twice to let you know the tractors
can stop.
          I love field work. I really do. I rather field work than any other
kind of work. It's sloppy. It's out in the weather. But I don't mind
getting dirty. I just love it. It's all I know. It's my way of
workin'. I worked on other jobs--housekeeping, a cafe job, factory
work. But the field is it.
          I drive the tractor with three other ladies during spraying time,
or by myself at other times. Cutting grass, cutting the headlands,
it's just me and the tractor. Drivin' a tractor's like driving a car
or anything else with four wheels. Once you learn, it come
natural. 'Course its dangerous sometime. Sometime you give it too much
gas, it'll rear up on two wheels. It's a matter of knowing when to
give it gas, when to slow up, how to turn wide with the trailer part
hauling two wagons.
          When I first started, people, mostly mens, would say, that woman
trying to take over a man's world. When they first started putting
women on tractors, most mens was dead set against it. But farmers
would rather have women because they're more confident, have more
responsibility, handle equipment more carefully. I think womens are
more dependable. When it's cold and rainy and sloppy, mens would go
back to bed, where a woman will get up and prepare herself and say,
Lord, I got to work.
          And I think womens really love having money. They really greedy,
you know. Like to see big, writing on her paycheck. She'll try if
there's any way in her power not to miss a day. She don't 

want nobody
to get a day ahead of her on the payroll.
          I rather be workin' any day than to be at home or any other
place. Even on vacation.
          It's from small. It's how my grandfather and greatgrandfather
was. They used to say, nothin' like workin'. They used to take us in
the fields in a buggy drawn by mules, and we'd dig potatoes, break
corn--that's how we learned to work in the field. Papu say, we see
which one gone be the best worker. He say to me, you'll love the field
work. And I did.
          Specially when I'm by myself in the tractor, I think about how he'd
talk.
          I just like workin' in the clay, in the dirt. It's a beautiful
thing to me. They brought me up that way. To me, I feel like a free
spirit. It doesn't make me feel tied down. Just free. Out in the open,
in the fresh air. Just going along, doing my work.
          I look back and see, here's what these hands did, what I done all
by myself.
          
            LOUISE BUTLER
          
          
            Jeanerette, formerly
Yokely Plantation.
          
          Now tell me this. Why they don't try to help an old person like me
who been scrappin' cane all my life on a farm?
          I lost my husband before Christmas last year. I get a little social
security check, $347.80 a month, a widow's check, that's all. At that
amount, payin' my house note, utility bills, insurance bills, doctor
bills, where my grocery money comin' out? I don't get food stamps. I
still got his medical bills to pay. I went back to Yokely plantation
where I used to live, over there in Franklin. I asked the bossman,
would he allow me to plant cane enough to pay my bills. Bossman, he
say, No, I done got too old.

          I guess he figured at my age I'd not be that healthy. I guess he
didn't want me to go out there and fall out, and they'd have to pay
for me. 'Cause the sun been real hot. It hurted me when he told me,
'cause I felt like, we stayed on his farm thirty some years. But the
bossman don't want me hangin' 'round there.
          I been workin' in the cane fields since I was twelve years old. I
cut standing up cane. After they started cutting with machines, I'd
scrap cane. Now you leave the shucks on and they burn it. Them days,
say this table leg is the cane, you cut high top, low bottom. That
make clean cane. You had to cut the butt part down in the ground. No
stubbles. Bossman would walk on your row to see if he found
stubble. Might would fire you if you didn't cut like he want it.
          We used to windrow cane. That mean, you cut the cane, throw it in
the middle of the row, . cover it with dirt. When they get ready to
plant in the summer, they'd pull that windrowed cane out of the
ground. The mule would pull it up and then we'd plant it.
          June, July, we'd hoe cane, get the grass out of it. That was before
they got all the tractors and sprays. They had more work for people
and they get a better crop. They had one cane called 290, it was real
good. And they had another big ole cane, big around as this glass, and
striped like a candy cane.
          Now they plant with a cane machine. It pile cane in one spot on the
row. So you got to tow that cane and put it in the skip, the part of
the ground that was skipped.
          I used to plant cane from a wagon, that was fun. I could kick up my
heels on the wagon. You did three rows at a time, one person on each
row. You put three stalks of cane to each plant. You put it flat in
the ground, and it has an eye at every joint. Like my finger, jointed
here. All the way along, the canes got an eye. The plant grows out
that eye.
          Now what two mens used to do, they got one man. when I started,
they was workin' mules.
          That's why I don't see why they don't help old people, 'cause they
done worked and they have come from a long way.
          Bein' on the farm was alright to me. I had me a gun-shoot house, a
little long house just straight as a gun shoot. Only had two bedrooms
and a kitchen, nothin' else. I mean nothin' else. No living room,
bathroom. And I raised six children in that house, and three more
before. It was a struggle, but we made it.
          I liked it there. That's why I went bouncin' back to get some
work.
          
            Plantation Portraits is the name of an
exhibit and a booklet which presents voices and photographs of black
culture in plantation Louisiana. Conceived by Lorna Bourg of the
Southern Mutual Help Association of Jeanerette, Louisiana,
Plantation Portraits offers glimpses into the lives of
seventeen women who work in the sugar cane industry of southern
Louisiana. Interviewer Judith A. Gaines and photographer Tika Laudin
gathered the stories and images which make up Plantation
Portraits.
            Residential, working plantations still survive in Louisiana's sugar
cane belt. The Southern Mutual Help Association is devoted to
improving the li2.~e.s and conditions of cane workers and their
families. Plantation Portraits suggests the strength,
the oppression, the exuberance and the anger of plantation
residents.
            Below, Southern Changes offers two excerpts from
Plantation Portraits. The complete booklet is available
for five dollars from the Southern Mutual Help Association, P. O. Box
850, Jeanerette, Louisiana 70544.
          
        
        
          Southern Hunger in the Eighties: Win this one for the
Reaper
          By Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 6, No. 6, 1984, pp. 6-11, 13-16
          
          
            "There's no basis for this demagoguery that somehow we
have punished, and are picking on, or trying to get our recovery on
the backs of the needy. . . there is not one single fact or
figure. "--President Reagan.
            "It must be recognized that the needy are and always have been
consumers, and they would have purchased cheese had it not been given
to them."--Robert F. Anderson, executive director of the National
Cheese Institute.
          
          Back in February of this weary year, after fifteen months, of field
investigation, public hearings and data confirmed a fact of living in
the Reagan Era. Hunger and malnutrition, 

on the decline in the United
States since the early 1970s, were again on the rise. "We are
shocked," said Dr. Larry Brown, chair of the Commission, "at how
widespread hunger and malnutrition are in New England. I think the
thing that worries us most is the degree to which hunger is a
relatively better economy and fairly extensive health care system,
particularly in a state like Massachusetts."
          The Citizens' Commission, composed of health and social service
professionals, was called into being by the Harvard School of Public
Health at the request of religious groups and emergency food providers
in the six New England states. Food kitchens have strained (some have
collapsed) in the effort of the last few years to provide for larger
and larger numbers of people in need. The question was put: Why the
increase in hunger?
          "Perhaps the most shocking thing we have found," the Commission
members answered in their report, American Hunger
Crisis, is that the return of hunger to America is the result
of conscious policies of our federal government . . . Hunger returned
as a result of governmental will and the weakening of the programs
that once worked so well."
          For its part, the Reagan Administration has not only denied the
existence of a hunger problem, it has initiated a war against the
poor. "We've had considerable information," said presidential
counselor and attorney-general nominee Edwin Meese at the height of
the recent recession, "that people go to soup kitchens because the
food is free and that's easier than paying for it."
          During its first four years, the Administration and its allies in
Congress (including a critical number of Southerners) cut more than
4.6 million low-income Americans from federal food-assistance and
dropped 3.2 million needy children from school lunch programs. During
these same years the percentage of Americans living in poverty has
grown to the highest level in twenty years and the number of poor
people has increased by more than six million. About 35 million people
are now officially poor ($10,178 annual income for a family of
four). Another twelve million Americans live near enough to the
poverty line to be eligible for food stamps. As Reagan's second season
begins, Meese, White House chief of staff James A. Baker, budget
director David Stockman and a group of domestic advisors have prepared
plans for another assault on food and nutrition assistance, health
care services and the benefit levels of federal payment programs.
          In a lapse into social Darwinism, poverty and hunger have once
again become fashionable tools used by government and business to
engineer conformity, resignation and despair. Instead of enforcing a
commitment to all citizens' right to a just and decent life, we see
the executive power of the federal government employed to starve and
strong-arm the poor.
          "I think we don't pay enough attention to the fact that when we're
talking about poor people in this country, we're taking about
children," says Dr. C. Arden Miller, chairman of the University of
North Carolina's department of maternal and child health. "Children
make up about fifty-one percent of the US poor. The public image is of
the shiftless, lazy, able-bodied male who could be working if he was
enterprising enough. That's not the problem. Since the mid1970's, an
increased proportion of children live in poverty."
          In addition to children, many of the poor are elderly. Others are
people in chronic bad health. May live in the rural South where there
are few jobs to be had. Over thirty" six percent of female-headed
households live in poverty. Among non-white, female-headed
households, the rate is higher than seventy percent.
          Many of the poor hold steady jobs and remain poor the "new poor,"
the working poor in fast food restaurants, in janitorial, maintenance
and service work, in non-union factories. The punitive nature of
current federal policy toward the poor combined with the everyday
workings of capitalist economics result in young black women locking
their hungry children in unheated apartments while they piece together
a schedule of part-time work that best suits the needs of the burger
masters at the Golden Arches.
          Among the poorest forty-percent of the US population, purchasing
power has declined every year since 1980. At the other end of the
spending and accumulation ladder, we see 

the rewards--as well as the
widening gap between rich and poor. This spring's Congressional Budget
Office report shows that the Reagan budget cuts and tax-law changes
which have been enacted so far have resulted in an annual loss of $390
for households with incomes of less than $10,000 a year, an annual
gain of a thousand dollars for households making between $20,000 and
$40,000, and an extra helping of $8,300 a year for households with
annual incomes of $80,000.
          Among the affluent and the pretenders to affluence (for consumer
debt, like the Reagan budget, stands at record levels), the pursuit of
private interest now justifies our detachment from the demands of a
just society.
          The current chasing after the signs and sighs of success is
capitalized upon by merchandisers in roadside billboards that pitch
such goods as "the most expensive beer around." Media ads foreground
particular items even as they pique desire for an ensemble of
convivial accessories. "So worldly, so welcome!" "A man with a good
car needs no justification." As a critic notes about the current crop
of favorite television shows, "On TV, everyone is rich." In reality,
unlike primetime, forty-three percent of the nation's personal income
goes to only one-fifth of US families; the poorest fifth receive five
percept.
          As the climate of Reaganism seeks to make both hay and example of
the poor, our deeply irrational military spending binge provides a
bounty for an intricate web of Pentagon and foreign forces,
contractors, sub-contractors and research institutions. Monied strands
of this web wrap themselves throughout every congressional district
and municipality--perhaps making impossible the cutting of our ties of
destructive dependency. Any discussion of hunger and poverty, of
housing and health care, of the arts and education--in the South and
the nation--must reflect upon the ransom we pay the Pentagon to hold
ourselves hostage.
          
            Let 'Em Eat Anecdotes
          
          Early in l984, prompted by the findings of the Citizens' Commission
on Hunger in New England, Dr. Larry Brown of Harvard's School of
Public Health helped to organize the Physician Task Force on Hunger in
America. With support from the Field Foundation, the Task Force began
to assess the extent of hunger in other sections of the country,
including the South. Historically the nation's most impoverished and
malnourished section, the South of the 1980s finds eighteen percent of
its people living in poverty. This compares with fourteen percent in
the West and about thirteen percent for both Midwest and Northeast.
          "Our nation has a serious problem to deal with," Dr. Brown has said
at press conferences wherever the Task Force has travelled during the
past year. "We are reporting our findings along the way to the
American public and to Congress. We will present a national report in
February of 1985."
          In May and June a dozen members of the Task Force on Hunger began
the Southern circuit of their tour with visits to Alabama, Tennessee,
Mississippi and North Carolina. Among the group were Rev. Kenneth Dean
and Dr. Aaron Shirley, veterans of the Southern hunger surveys
coordinated by Rev. Dean and Leslie Dunbar with the Southern Regional
Council and the Field Foundation in 1967 and again in 1977.
          In Mississippi, the Task Force on Hunger spent several days in
Jackson and in the Delta--where poverty has increased from thirty
percent in 1980 until it now includes over fifty percent of that
area's population. "The hunger and malnutrition I saw in Mississippi
are the worst that I've come face to face with," said Dr. Naomi
Kistin, a veteran inner-city pediatrician from Chicago's Cook County
Hospital who travelled with the Task Force.

          About 800,000 Mississippians, a third of the state's entire
population, have incomes which make them eligible for food
stamps. Only nineteen percent of the population is actually receiving
federal food aid. This puts about 300,000 Mississippians at highest
risk of hunger. The maximum monthly AFDC payment in the state is $120
for a family of four--the lowest amount in the nation.
          Despite the well established fact that feeding programs for the
elderly dramatically improve their health, and the fact that in
Mississippi 118,563 elderly are officially poor, only 12,300 receive
any federal food assistance.
          Most elderly Southerners suffer from one or more chronic diseases
which require special diets. The Task Force on Hunger heard many
stories like that of Mississippian Laura Jane Allen, age seventy-six,
who couldn't afford the diet her doctor had prescribed: "They tell me
what I should eat. I'm supposed to have fresh vegetables and fish and
stay away from that pork, salt and cheese--but l just can't buy the
right food with the money I have."
          In Tutwiler, Mississippi, a social worker reported that of every
hundred hospital in-patients she sees each month, about one-third are
malnourished. A nurse in Greenwood said, "it's a vicious cycle. Before
you know it, they're in the hospital because their blood sugar dropped
too low or they had an insulin reaction from not being able to eat. We
have patients eating the wrong things because those are the only
things they can get and they wind up in the hospital with strokes."
          At a Task Force hearing in the Delta, four hundred people crowded a
hall. "There were enough people present who wanted to testify," says
Joie Kammer of the Catholic St. Francis Center, "to have had the
hearing go on indefinitely. and there were telephone calls from the
elderly asking the doctors to come to their homes as they were unable
to come to the hearing."
          Many of the hungry in the Delta are victims of the long-term
unemployment which has accompanied the mechanization of Mississippi
plantations.
          Joyce Stancill, a home health nurse serving the elderly of
Greenwood, told the Task Force, "Most of my clients have been maids or
'yard-boys' or field workers on a plantation, for white people, and a
lot of them have never had social security payments. They're not able
to get social security now because the man worked them for forty or
fifty years and never paid in a dime. It's horrible to see what our
old people have had to go through."
          
            Rising Infant Mortality
          
          In Alabama the Physician Task Force split into two groups--one
visiting Birmingham and several west Alabama counties--and the other
travelling to Lowndes, Butler and Montgomery counties. They went into
soup kitches, feeding programs and food pantries. They talked to
officials. They collected state and local studies and reports. "Most
importantly," says Dr. Brown, "we went into dozens and dozens and
dozens of homes."
          "Some of the counties we saw in Mississippi and South Alabama are
on a par with the Third World. I have never seen so many empty
refrigerators."
          At the kitchen of the Trinity Episcopal Church in the depressed
steel city of Bessemer, Alabama, Rev. Dean observed that "entire
families are showing up at these soup lines, something unheard of
since the Depression." Vestry members of Trinity Episcopal voted to
begin the soup kitchen in 1982 at the urging of their minister,
Rev. Peter Horn, who had watched a trickle of requests for food turn
into a torrent within a few months.
          The Physician Task Force on Hunger scorns the policies Of Alabama,
Mississippi, North Carolina and a dozen other states that refuse aid
for families with dependent children to families in which both
"able-bodied" parents--although unable to find a job--continue to live
in the same household. This state policy promotes the break-up of
homes: the father often moves out so that his family won't be dropped
from AFDC.
          In Alabama, a maximum AFCD payment of $148 a month for a family of
four requires living on the outskirts of possibility. With food stamps
included, the maximum allotment for a mother and three children is
$400 a month or $4,800 in annual income. The basic welfare grants are
not adequate for "even the most frugal purchase of necessities."
          In Montgomery, Alabama Welfare Commissioner Leon Frazier told the
group that cutbacks in federally supported daycare had left "literally
thousands of low-income children and hundreds of handicapped adults in
the state without the assurance of even one nourishing meal a day."
          In 1982, Alabama's infant mortality rate increased for the first
time in many years for both blacks and whites from 12.9% per thousand
live births to 13.8%. Among black infants the rate increased sharply
from eighteen to 20.1 

deaths per one thousand live births. Yet, as the
Task Force on Hunger's preliminary field investigation summary
(October, 1984) notes, even these figures mask higher rates for areas
that are most affected by poverty and hunger. Hale County, in western
Alabama, has an infant mortality rate of thirty-one, almost three
times the national rate and as high as many Third World
countries. More than ten percent of babies born in Hale County have
low birth weights--a major factor contributing to infants' "failure to
thrive,"--leaving them susceptible to many other health problems.
          "We are all quite shaken at what we have seen," Dr. Brown said at
the end of the Task Force's first foray into the South. "We did not
see kwashiokor and marasmus*--which are signs of extreme malnutrition
that you see in Third World countries, but we did see widespread
hunger--and it was not hard to find. We saw malnutrition that was
altogether too extensive. Children are failing to grow properly, some
are dying.
          
            *Kwashiokor, is an illness which develops from a
combination of three dietary deficiencies: low calories, low vitamins
and low proteins. Under extreme reduction of calories, all the fat
storers are utilized and the body begins to burn its own structural
protein. The result is marasmus. Withhold enough protein and the
brain's cells start to blink out. Dr. Kenneth Dodgson of the Task
Force and of Rochester (NY) Memorial Hospital carefully warns that "we
are not seeing kwashiokor or marismus, but withhold enough food and
down the road we will see it."
          
          "There were three tornadoes while we were in Alabama. The news
media and the attention of the public was on those tornadoes, which
killed seven people. Every week in Alabama twice that number of
children die of infant mortality within the first year of life, due to
nutrition related illnesses.
          "Just this morning I held on my lap a six-year-old child who is the
size of a three-year-old. She is not getting enough to eat. We walked
across the street from this child's daycare center and talked to a
mother out in the yard. There were two more children there who were
small, thin and anemic.
          "In a Salvation Army soup kitchen in Montgomery, the director told
us that the economy, if it is improving, is not improving the lives of
the people that he sees. They were serving more people per month than
they had served in the last twenty-seven months.
          
            Take A Twinkie and Wait
          
          Of the dozen or so recent studies of hunger in the United States,
all--except for the report of President Reagan's Task Force on Food
Assistance (January, 1984)--show clearly that hunger exists in every
state, in every city and town.
          "Members of the Reagan Administration have referred hunger evidence
as 'anecdotal' material," says Dr. Brown. "I can tell you that our
research has not been anecdotal. And I can tell you that looking in a
refrigerator and finding three eggs and a piece of processed cheese
and water--as I have seen--isn't an anecdote for that family, whose
child--a five-year-old boy, has had no milk for three weeks. He eats
Cheerios and water for breakfast. His mother had tried to get
emergency food stamps but was turned down.

          "It's not hard to find hungry people in the United States. It's not
hard at all. First, you go to poor neighborhoods, in the cities, in
the towns, in the country. You talk with the people who live
there. Another way you can find out about hunger very quickly is to
ask the teachers in daycare centers and the Head Start programs what
kind of appetites the children have on Monday morning. What we've seen
across the country leaves no doubt that hunger is a problem for
millions of people in America.
          "When you go into the neighborhoods that we went in and you walk
down the street, you start talking with people, you go in their homes,
you say, "Can we please see where you prepare your food?" And they
take you in the kitchen and open an empty or nearly empty
refrigerator...It might be the refrigerator of a women with two
children, she's pregnant. And she has three sticks of butter in
there.
          "Ironically, people mislead you if you ask them if they are
hungry. But not like Mr. Meese said, as though people were out trying
to get something for nothing. You ask them, 'How are you doing for
food? How are the kids doing?'
          "Over and over again, with only a few exceptions, the response is
'Oh, we're getting by. We're doing all right.'
          "The lady I just told you about, I asked her that question and she
said, 'We're making it. We're doing okay.' When I asked her to take us
into her kitchen, we found the empty refrigerator.
          "People answer that way because of pride. I have children and the
last thing I would ever want to do would be to acknowledge to somebody
that I couldn't feed them.
          "These instances, multiplied over and over again paint a picture in
America which cannot be considered or dismissed as anecdotal and which
doesn't deserve to exist in our nation.
          "What we see is a picture of deprivation, which, while it may not
be as serious in degree as it was in the late 1960s, seems to be more
pervasive. Poverty and the hunger which it generates are no longer
limited to any particular subpopulation groups. Hunger cuts across the
lines of race now, and to some extent it cuts across class
lines. Hunger is reaching the "new poor"--people who have never been
hungry before, people who have not been in poverty before. Those who
have been poor for a long time are worse off now than they were. But
the new poor have appeared as a result of Reagan policies and the
economy."
          The face of Southern hunger looks different than it did twenty
years ago. "We're not seeing the kind of starvation that appears as
thin people and stunted growth," observes Task Force member Dr. Joyce
Lashof, Dean of the School of Public Health at the University of
California at Berkeley. "In their ragged form, the food assistance
programs that America constructed in the 1960s and '70s are keeping us
from going back to where we were. The soup kitchens and the food
stamps and similar programs are helping.
          "What we often see," continues Dr. Lashof, "are people who are
actually overweight because they're eating the wrong foods. They're
not getting the nutrients they need. They're malnourished in terms of
adequate proteins and vitamins."
          "President Reagan's Task Force on Food Assistance," Dr. Brown
points out, "did not engage in an effort which permitted them to
understand the dimensions of the hunger problem in the United
States. The governor's office in Mississippi came and testified before
our Task Force on Hunger when we went toJackson. Mississippi state
officials and private charities gave Reagan's Task Force a document of
testimony five inches thick. None of that was reflected in the
President's Task Force Report."
          Michael Raff, director of the state of Mississippi's Office of
Human Development, agrees that testimony of Mississippians to the
President's Task Force was "totally ignored."
          "I was asked by the executive director of the President's Task
Force," Dr. Brown continues, "if we would cooperate with them--could
they send people to go to our hearing up in New England? We agreed and
they did. They also asked for, and we provided, the names of experts
around the country in nutrition and food policy. Not one of those
experts was ever contacted by the President's Task Force."
          "The President's Task Force didn't even want to come to Chicago,"
recalls Cook County (IL) pediatrician D.T. Kistin. "They chose to have
their hearings in Rockford where it's very hard for the large majority
of people in our area who are hungry or who are active around these
issues to even get to. They made a point of limiting the number of
people that they would hear to very small numbers."
          "The Reagan Task Force" adds Dr. Brown, "ignored the evidence from
its own federal agencies--including the Department of
Agriculture--that show hunger to be a serious problem. They also
failed to collect data and failed to go into the homes of the
hungry."
          As its major recommendation, the report of the President's Task
Force proposed that states be allowed to drop out of the food stamp
and other federal food aid programs and instead receive block grants
to distribute as they saw fit. The proposed block grants, rejected by
Congress, disguised one of the Administration's steps to dismantle
what remains of a national committment against hunger. Block grants
would put an end to uniform eligibility and benefit standards and move
the struggle for food assistance out of Washington--where a weakened,
but still fiesty, welfare lobby is centered.
          In the South particularly, the poor have few friends in governors'
mansions and state legislatures.
          
            Senator No
          
          The very Southern politicians who could best serve their

constituents in need are often the most embittered and
uncharitable. In his tenure as chairman of the US Senate Committee on
Agriculture, North Carolina's Jesse Helms has proved a staunch foe of
poor and hungry people through his opposition to the WIC program
(which provides prescribed foods to pregnant and nursing women and
children under age five) and to the food stamp program. The Charlotte
Observer editorialized that for all his talk of protecting the lives
of the unborn, Helms has done little to support the lives of infants
after birth.
          The attention of Senator Helms fell upon Hunger Task Force director
Brown shortly after the doctor had testified before the Senate
Agriculture Committee in April of 1983. Brown told of malnutrition
studies he had conducted at Boston City Hospital which found
underweight babies and a "failure to thrive" at three times the
expected rate.
          Although Helms was absent during Dr. Brown's testimony, he soon
sent him a seven-page questionnaire.
          "The questions basically were designed to discredit the methodology
of the study," Brown recalls. "He challenged me on the school
breakfast and school lunch guidelines. He wanted to know how they were
set. I said they were set by the federal government."
          Helms' staff insisted that malnutrition was normal among the urban
poor in Boston. Brown suggested that there should be nothing normal
about infants failing to grow.
          
            States of Fear
          
          Throughout this summer and on into the fall, the Physician Task
Force on Hunger continued to visit Southern states and to collect
materials and testimony. Task Force members toured the lengths of
North Carolina and Tennessee before going on to Texas and the
Southwest. In October, the group released its uniformly grim
preliminary field reports.
          Poverty in Tennessee has risen from 16.5~o of the state's
population in 1980 to over twenty percent in 1984. Four-fifths of
Tennessee's poor consist of women, children and the elderly.
          Like Alabama and Mississippi, Tennessee provides no AFDC for
two-parent families who are unemployed. For those who do receive AFDC,
Tennessee has the lowest standard of need in the US--a family of four
must earn less than three-hundred dollars a month to be eligible (the
federal poverty level is $825). The state has no school breakfast
program. It has no relief program for jobless adults who are not
receiving unemployment compensation. Tennessee's state and local sales
tax can range as high as 81/2%.
          Southern state legislatures, searching for revenues for an array of
needs (most recently, public education) and yet lacking the
independence to tax business and the wealthy, have turned increasingly
to sales taxes. The results fall hardest on these states' most
politically powerless people. In Mississippi and Alabama (where the
sales tax rates are six and 6.7 percent respectively), as in
Tennessee, sales tax applies to food and to food stamps and represents
a regressive, direct tax on poor people.
          With the unemployment rate in east Tennessee and western North
Carolina running upwards of forty percent, the Task Force heard United
Methodist Minister Jim Sessions of Knoxville report that in the past
three years, Appalachia has lost one-and-a-half jobs for every one
gained. "There is no recovery here," observes Sessions.
          "With purchasing power down and poverty up," the Task Force writes
in its October field investigation summary of the Southern states, "it
seems unlikely that improvements in the economy which help the
better-off will have any impact on those who are not. Those who are
"recovering" were never hungry, and those who are hungry are not
recovering."
          In North Carolina, Dr. Brown and local representatives of the Task
Force tied hunger to the larger context of health and the Reagan
Administration's general persecution of the poor. Rev. Mac Legerton of
the Robeson County Clergy and Laity Concerned noted that county food
stamp recipients had little money left after paying monthly bills to
pay for medical needs. In mountainous Buncombe County, Task Force
member Dr. Agnes Lattimer saw broader problems: "There appears to be
considerable unmet need here . . . there is greater incidence of iron
deficiency and limited means of prenatal care."
          The percentage of North Carolina's total population living in
poverty rose by forty-two percent between 1981 and 1983, yet,
enrollment in the state's food stamp program during the same period
fell by more than a third. In addition, according to the University of
North Carolina's Nutrition Institute, while some 94,000 women, infants
and children are currently enrolled in the WIC supplemental food
program, at least 145,000 others have household incomes 

which make
them eligible. In North Carolina there are presently 415,000 poor
children.
          While acknowledging that "the desire for self-sufficiency Often
makes people reluctant to seek help," Dr. Brown and the Task Force are
quick to point to deliberate patterns of obfuscation and intimidation
being pursued by Reagan Administration welfare policy makers under the
guise of "greater efficiency" and the pursuit of "welfare cheaters."
New monthly reporting requirements mean that many families must have
their eligibility redetermined every month. This places extraordinary
burdens on the needy, creates more processing errors and leads to
eligible people being denied assistance. In one county, a sixty-four
year-old paralyzed man was dropped from food stamps because he failed
to come into the office for his recertification interview.
          "The focus of the federal government is now based on the premise
that hungry people are probably cheats," says Dr. Brown.
          In some locations, at the behest of federal officials, agents
reportedly are sent out to sell food stamps on the street. The buyers
are caught and the event is hailed as proof of widespread program
fraud--even though no food stamp recipient was involved as buyer or
seller.
          Charges linking the food stamp program with fraud and with criminal
prosecutions generate fear and embarrassment. Virginia Eldreth, food
stamp administrator in Buncombe County (NC) notes this effect: "An
elderly woman who had been hungry for weeks finally came in to apply
for stamps. She ,was trembling as she filled out the forms. I asked
her if she was all right. As it turned out, she was fearful she might
make an error and be thrown in jail for fraud."
          Task Force members found some North Carolina food stamp offices
decorated with posters announcing prosecution of persons incorrectly
filling out their long and complicated applications.
          As a food stamp administrator in Montgomery County, Alabama told
the Task Force this summer, "The name of the game at the federal level
is dollars and not people. We are under pressure about some elusive
thieves that we are not finding. We are wasting money on
administration that should be going to people."
          "Food stamp administrators," Dr. Brown adds, "have told us they
have had to divert workers from providing services and put them to
work setting up thirteen and fourteen-member fraud units that pore
over tremendous amounts of paper to see if people are getting overpaid
three or four dollars a month. To do this paperwork, they have closed
the food stamp outreach units which once tried to let hungry people
know about the program. A lot of people who are in need are being
missed."
          "There is a state of fear," says Rev. Kenneth Dean, a Task Force
member who once headed the Mississippi council On Human Relations,
"among the people running federal programs because audit reviews have
been used principally to harass the programs."
          "Over and over again," adds Dr. Naomi Kistin, "we heard from people
working on the food stamp program who said they had to spend all this
money being careful not to have too high of an error rate. Finally we
asked, "Is there any attention paid to the error rate in the other
direction? How many people should be on those programs who aren't? How
big is your waiting list? How many people could benefit from this
program if you could expand your services? Every place we went the
waiting list held from a third to a hundred percent of the population
being served."
          People who are persistent and lucky enough to get through the
application forms, verifying documents, and bureaucratic intimidation
are rewarded with an average food stamp benefit of forty-seven cents
per meal. In addition, 

they soon learn that the food stamps they
receive won't carry them through the month. "The problem is not that
people don't know how to spend their stamps," a Texas food stamp
administrator told the Task Force, "it's just that no one can live on
that amount." Most recipients run out of food stamps a week or more
before the month ends.
          "Nor," says Dr. Brown, "is there any way that the millions of tons
of food taken from hungry people through federal budget cutbacks over
the last four years can be made up by business, the for-profit sector
and the non-profit sector. Businesses are not set up to feed
people. And the churches and social service agencies can't do
enough. We need to immediately expand the food stamp program and
provide it with adequate resources to reach people who are needy."
          "Why should the richest country in the world, asks Helen Wright,
director of Urban Ministries in Raleigh--one of many North Carolina
church groups trying to feed the hungry--"put the eighteen percent of
the people in this state who live below the poverty line in the
position of begging for food?"
          By the time that the Physician Task Force on Hunger completed its
Texas visit this fall, the group had become convinced of the
pervasiveness of need everywhere they had travelled. In Houston,
emergency food demand in the city's soup kitchens has increased this
year by one-thousand percent over 1980. To the southesast of Houston,
in Pasadena, the Task Force considered the "irony of a middle-class
neighborhood with neatly kept lawns, where people don't have enough to
eat. We saw a lot of once-stable families now in shaky
circumstances."
          In Texas, New Mexico and the Southwest--as throughout the
South--the hunger problem is substantial, especially jeopardizing the
health of the most vulnerable population groups among the poor: the
elderly, pregnant women, infants and young children.

          
            Greed and the War Against the Poor
          
          At a time when many Americans have settled into a steady diet of
flag-eating, sword swallowing and credit card consumption, the notion
that we all must share responsibility for the extent of hunger and
poverty in our region, country and world does not go down
easy. Unwilling to acknowledge the reality of a political and economic
system which produces and is sustained by poverty and the fear of
poverty, the fortunate blame the poor for their own plight. The
apologists for greed--one thinks of the likes of William F. Buckley,
George Will, Clarence Pendleton--encourage our blindness to social
justice.
          Toward the last week of each month, when the food stamps run out
and the lines at the soup kitchesn grow longer, we begin to see the
shape of America's current hunger crisis. The immediate need--the one
being addressed by the Physician Task Force on Hunger--is genuinely
modest: to eliminate hunger and malnutrition in the US. Task Force
members believe this need could be satisfied within six months, and
for the total cost of one naval attack carrier. Given, however, the
prevailing American spirit, the Physician Task Force's aim appears
unattainable for years to come. Instead, we will see the Reaganites
attempt further cuts in assistance for the poor.
          Outside the necessary focus of the Task Force on Hunger stand the
implications of the draft of the recent Catholic bishops' letter on
the US economy judging the inequality of wealth within America and in
the world as "morally unacceptable." "The fulfillment of the basic
needs of the poor," write the bishops, "is of the highest
priority. Personal decisions, social policies and power relationships
must all be evaluated by their effects on those who lack the minimum
necessities of nutrition, housing, education and health care." The
bishops argue for redress within a reformed capitalist structure.
          That the bishops' advocacies--which would essentially shore-up
humanitarian features of the modern corporate welfare state--have
provoked outraged cries of "meddlers" and "liberal lobbyists" suggests
not only what may be in store for the Hunger Task Force, but just how
far our present slide into laissez faire social Darwinism has carried
us. Yet, there may be no better time than now, with liberalism in
disarray, to reckon and sound the fundamental injustices of the white,
men's club that holds capitalism as its sacred faith. There may be no
better time than now to put forward alternative futures to the
corporate world vision. Discussions of a caring society, of economic
democracy, of our bondage to militarism, of persisting racism, of the
reasons that women-headed households make up the largest poverty
group--all these discussions should simmer with the soup kitchens this
winter, and in the coming months.
          
            Guide to Published Sources
          
          Kenneth A. Briggs. "Catholic Bishops Ask Vast Changes in Economy of
U.S. New York Times, November 12,1984. Also in same
issue, "Excerpts From Draft of Bishops' Letter on the
U.S. Economy."
          Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. End Results: The
Impact of Federal Policies Since 1980 on Low Income
Americans. Washington. September, 1984. The Comined
Effects of Major Changes in Federal Taxes and Spending Programs Since
1981. Washington. October 1984.
          Citizens' Commission on Hunger in New England. American
Hunger Crisis. Boston. 1984.
          Congressional Budget Office. The Combined Effects of Major
Changes in federal Taxes and Spending Programs Since
1981. Washington. April, 1984.
          Steve Curwood. "Through the Safety Net. Boston
Globe, April 15, 1984.
          Barbara Mahany. "Hunger in America" series. Chicago
Tribune, Summer/Fall 1984.
          Joan Oleck. "Doctors find evidence of malnutrition among some
children in Eastern N.C." Raleigh News and Observer,
June 8, 1984.
          John L. Palmer and Isabel V. Sawhill. The Reagan Record: An
Assessment of America's Changing Domestic
Priorities. Washinton: The Urban Institute. August, 1984.
          Physician Task Force on Hunger in America. Preliminary Field
Investigation Summaries: "Hunger in Tennessee and North
Carolina"; "Hunger in Mississippi and Alabama"; "Hunger in New Mexico
and Texas"; "Hunger in Illinois and Missouri." Boston. October,
1984.
          Frances Fox Piven and Richard A. Cloward. The New Class
War. New York: Pantheon. 1982.
          U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Money
Income and Poverty Status of Families and Persons in the United
States: 1983. Washington. August, 1984.
        
        
          Statement of Dr. Aaron Shirley before the House Select Committee
on Hunger. Greenwood, Mississippi June 25, 1984
          By Shirley, AaronAaron Shirley
          Vol. 6, No. 6, 1984, p. 12
          
          My name is Aaron Shirley. I am a practicing pediatrician and the
project director of the Jackson Hinds Comprehensive Health Center in
Jackson, Mississippi. I also serve as chairman of the Board of
Trustees of the Mississippi Medical and Surgical Association, an
affiliate of the National Medical Association. I appreciate this
opportunity to come before you to share my views on the problems of
hunger and malnutrition in our nation. I am sure you are familiar with
the Field Foundations Survey of Hunger in the United States in 1967
with a follow-up study ten years later. I had the opportunity to
participate in these surveys and was also part of a team which visited
this area in April and May of this year. My first hand experience with
nutritional problems of the poor is not limited to the few weeks spent
during these studies however. Mine is an everyday experience as we
provide a wide range of health and health related services to more
than 26,000 poor in the City of Jackson and surrounding rural Hinds
County, including WIC certification and nutritional counseling to five
thousand poor pregnant women, infant and children.
          In 1967 when we examined children in this very town and outlying
rural communities we saw many children on the verge of actual
starvation. They were stunted in their growth and development, dull
and with very little vigor as you would expect of three, four and five
year old children. Ten years later, and again in April and May of this
year we found similar conditions but not to the extent to which they
existed in 1967. It cannot be denied that the overriding factor
contributing to the improvements which we did see has been due to the
combined benefits of the various food assistance programs put into
place during the past decade. This is not to say or to imply
that poverty related hunger and malnutrition no longer exist. It does
exist. It is still wide spread among the poor of our state, with
children and the elderly being particularly affected.
          With the absolute number of individuals in poverty growing, the
problems are sure to deterioriate, and without appropriate
intervention we may soon find ourselves back to the conditions of 1967
and the numbers adversely affected in this state would be high. For
instance, there are 425,000 children participating in the school lunch
program. Of these, 290,000 or sixty-eight percent receive the meals
free or at reduced price, meaning they are from families in
poverty. When we consider that poor children obtain one third or one
half of their daily nutrients from school lunch we can readily see the
potential negative impact on those who may no longer be able to afford
these meals due to cut backs and changes in eligibility
requirements.
          Some might argue that the difference will be made up at home. This
is just not the case. From our own first hand experience we find that
seventy percent of the five thousand individuals, mostly children,
which we certify annually for the WIC Program have home dietary
histories deficient in vitamins A and C. Forty-five percent are
deficient in iron and thirty percent deficient in protein. In those
children three to five years of age, fifteen percent are deficient in
calcium. And as we interviewed family after family recently and looked
in their refrigerators and on their pantry shelves towards month's end
we could easily determined the reason, not enough food!
          Over the past months there appears to have developed a controversy
over this issue of hunger and malnutrition in our country. It is my
understanding that even your being here trying to sift out the facts
has provoked some degree of resentment and suspicion on the part of
local officials. I can tell you over the years this has been a
predictable reaction of those who have consistently ignored the
problems of poor people and who have fought hard to retain a political
and economic system which perpetuates poverty and all that living
without an adequate income implies; poor housing, malnutrition, ill
health and shortened life span. You will see some of this for yourself
as you visit families in this area: I hope that you will keep in mind
as you observe these families that the hunger that they speak of is
not the occasional discomfort that you might experience on a busy day
in which you might miss lunch or some other meal. The hunger which you
see here is ongoing and leads to chronic malnutrition, and the
consequences of this type of malnutrition takes it's toll.
          Gentlemen, in closing, I ask that you give serious consideration to
immediately increasing the amount of funds for the various nutrition
support programs--all of them; food stamps, WIC, school breakfast and
school lunch. I say increase them all because it is obvious to many of
us that one meal, or even a portion of a meal can make the difference
between a child who is healthy, happy and capable of learning and
developing into a productive citizen or one who is hungry and
malnourished, apathetic and vulnerable to sickness and disease and
possibly a shortened life span.
        
        
          Of Hungry Children, 1967
          By Wheeler, Raymond M., M.D.Raymond M. Wheeler, M.D.
          Vol. 6, No. 6, 1984, p. 15
          
          I am distressed and concerned that Senators Stennis and Eastland
interpret my remarks this morning as libelous to the state of
Mississippi.
          I was born and reared and educated in the South. I love the region
as much as they do. I reported what I saw because it is intolerable to
me that this situation should exist in the region I love. I saw those
children and their parents, and I told you what I saw and the message
of despair and helplessness which they communicated to me.
          For the past twenty years I have worked in the South, my birthplace
and my home. During that time I have come to know in depth the white
and the Negro--their problems, their sorrows, their joys.
          Throughout these years, my heart has wept for the South as I have
watched the southern black man and white man walk their separate ways
distrusting each other, separated by false and ridiculous
barriers--doomed to a way of life tragically less than they
deserve--when by working together they could achieve a society finer
and more successful than any which exists in this country today.
          And through all of that dreadful pageant of ignorance and suspicion
and mutual distrust, the most distressing figure of all has been the
southern political leader who has exploited all of our human
weaknesses for his own personal and selfish gain--refusing to grant us
the dignity and the capability of responding to noble and courageous
leadership--when all of us had nothing to lose but the misery and
desolation which surrounds our lives.
          The time has come when this must cease, for we are concerned with
little children, whose one chance for a healthy and productive
existence--into which they were born--is at stake.
          I invite Senator Eastland and Senator Stennis to come with me into
the vast farm lands of the Delta and I will show you the children of
whom we have spoken. I will show you their bright eyes and innocent
faces, their shriveled arms and swollen bellies, their sickness and
pain and the fear and misery of their parents.
          Their story must be believed--not only for their sakes--but for the
sake of all America.
          --From New South, Summer 1967
          
            In July 1967 before hearings of the Senate Subcommittee
on Manpower, Employment, and Poverty, a team of six physicians
presented the results of a field trip into six Mississippi counties in
which they surveyed the, health and living conditions of black
children. Their report, published by the Southern Regional Council
under the title HUNGRY CHILDREN, states in part: "In sum we saw
children who are hungry and who are sick--children for whom hunger is
a daily fact of life and sickness, in many forms, an
inevitability. . . By the many thousands they live outside of every
legal, medical and social advance our nation has made in this
century. " The report was filed by Dr. Joseph Brenner of the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Dr. Robert Coles of Harvard
University Health Services; Dr. Alan Mermann of the Departmentof
Pediatrics, Yale University; Dr. Milton J. E. Senn, Sterling Professor
of Pediatrics, Yale University; Dr. Cyril Walwyn of Yazoo City,
Mississippi; and Dr. Raymond M. Wheeler of Charlotte, N. C., chairman
of the Executive Committee of the Southern Regional Council. Following
the presentations of the physicians, Mississippi Senators James
0. Eastland and John Stennis challenged the doctors' testimony as "a
libel to the state of Mississippi. " Dr. Wheeler then made the
following reply.
          
        
        
          Southern Banks Charge Ahead
          By Overton, JimJim Overton
          Vol. 6, No. 6, 1984, pp. 18-20
          
          A financial services revolution is underway and Southern banks are
doing their damndest to make sure they get as large a slice of the pie
as possible. In the process they are likely to wreak havoc on the
access to banking services that people at the lower end of the income
scale now have.
          Several factors have combined to cause major shifts in
banking. First (and for a number of reasons), banking revenues have
dropped mightily in the last few years. Second, the partial
deregulation of the financial services "industry" has created a new
set of competitors for banks--even some K Marts have begun offering
money market accounts to their customers. Third, the number of young
professionals now cropping up all over the South has produced a demand
for flexible financial services which can cater to the mobile and
affluent.
          Fourth, powerful regional sized industries are demanding broad
ranging financial services that many banks can't easily provide. And,
the country's megabanks--particularly expansion-hungry Citicorp--have
announced their intention to become nationwide banking centers and, in
doing so, to put the small fry of Southern banks, out of business.
          Southern bankers, traditionally among the stodgiest corporate
executives to be found anywhere, have leapt forward into their own
revolution. The keystone of their strategy is the push for new
legislation that will permit them to grow into regional banks that
serve the entire Southeast rather than just one state or sub-state
area.
          Traditionally, both state and federal governments have carefully
restricted banks' service areas, largely because of fears of how
powerful a national bank might become. Southern banks have established
loan-making subsidiaries in neighboring states, but they have not been
allowed to open full-service operations in other states. (With a few
exceptions. For instance, North Carolina's NCNB cleverly exploited a
loophole to buy up a fleet of Florida banks). In fact, most states
don't even allow their banks to open branches all across the state,
restricting them instead to a much narrower geographic region.
          Recently, Southern bankers have started demanding the right to
expand regionally--and found politicians quite receptive to that
demand for interstate expansion. Proclaiming the need for a "Southern
Common Market," the Southern Governor's Conference has pushed
legislators to enable banks from other Southern states to open up shop
within their borders. The message is taking effect: Florida, Georgia,
North Carolina, South Carolina and Kentucky have already passed such
legislation, and others are considering it.
          A look at North Carolina's recently passed legislation indicates
that in conjunction with other states' legislation, it will virtually
recreate the Confederacy economically: Effective Jan. 1, 1985, it will
allow banks in all the old,` Confederate states, except Texas and add
the District o' Columbia, to provide full-service banking in North
Carolina--as soon as those states allow North Carolina banks to invade
their boundaries.
          Naturally, the large Tar Heel banks--NCNB, Wachovia and First
Union--were very eager to get this bill passed. Forecasters predict
that regional banks will grow much more quickly than Citicorp-style
megabanks over the next few years. And since North Carolina allows
statewide banking, the NC Big Three felt confident that they would
move to the top of the heap in the regional banking wars. First Union
is so eager to get started that it has established a corporate goal of
quadrupling its assets over the next four years.
          But the bankers didn't take passage for granted. The NC Bankers
Association held eleven regional forums with legislators in March,
contributed heavily in the primary campaigns and quieted dissenting
voices among the smaller banks, who were less sure how much they
wanted competition from outside banks.
          The bankers issued a consistent message: We need to keep step with
the competition. As NCNB chair Hugh McColl told his stockholders, "The
state cannot afford to have its banks lose relative strength to
companies in other states."
          With all this muscle behind it--including support from Governor Jim
Hunt--the bill to permit regional interstate banking flew through the
General Assembly. With Legal Services lobbyists out of the way thanks
to new Reagan guidelines, there was no one to speak up against the
bill. Aside from some sincere reservations by rural legislators, there
were few roadblocks. In fact, the only real hurdle was the threat that
the Democratic-controlled leadership would block the bill in
retaliation for Hugh McColl's public endorsement of Republican
gubernatorial candidate Jim Martin several days before the bill hit
the floor of the house and senate. After a few trying days, the threat
fizzled, and the bill became law.
          As with the legislation in other states, everyone involved seemed
to forget that it might be important to assess the impact of
interstate banking on one important set of actors in the financial
services industry: the consumers. So it seems fitting to play a game
of (almost) twenty questions on interstate banking and what it might
mean for the average Southerner.
          First, a few appropriate background items:
          What's happening to retail consumers in the banking
revolution? The woeful economy of the last few years has prompted
banks to seek increased revenues from retail customers. (In the past,
almost all their income came from loan revenues.) Accordingly, service
charges on checking and the like have skyrocketed.
          In a study of the average service charges of North Carolina banks,
Professor Nick Didow of the School of Business at UNC-Chapel Hill
found that average bank service fees have risen thirty percent in each
of the last two years. However, customers who keep minimum balances

don't have to pay these fees, throwing the burden on those least able
to afford it. Concludes Didow: "When it comes to banking in this
state, the poor pay more and there is no way to dispute that."
          What does this mean for the low-income
consumer? One bank's marketing study obtained by a US House
member contains a chilling conclusion: Some banks are ready to lop as
much as fifty percent of the populace from their service market. Tim
O'Rourke, marketing director for North Carolina's Central Bank, told
the Durham Morning Herald: "As banks become
deregulated, they will act more and more like non-regulated
industries. If you can't be everything for everyone, you want to
choose your market." Already some ten percent of the population
doesn't even use any bank services, and, says Didow, "We're likely to
see more households that can't aford a bank."
          An example of the difference in banks' new focus is found in
Wachovia's new banking card. Hooked into the national Relay and Cirrus
networks, the card allows customers to withdraw money from several
thousand places across the country. Such a service is highly useful to
customers who travel frequently, but basically useless to a good
percentage of Wachovia's customers--who will still end up paying
higher charges for the privilege of having such a card for their local
needs.
          Are bigger banks more expensive for the average
consumer? Didow's research points to one strong conclusion: "The
bigger the bank, the higher the fee structure." Fees for an average
consumer range from $72 to $263 at North Carolina banks; most of the
higher figures occur at the larger banks.
          Given these trends, there are some fairly weighty questions yet to
be answered about the impact of regional banking:
          What information do we have on the impact of
interstate banking on consumers? A North Carolina legislative
study commission pondered the issue and produced the following
conclusion: If the banks support regional banking, we'll introduce
it. (Can you imagine any legislature supporting food-tax repeal or
lower utility rates just because a group of consumers wanted them
passed?) Banks across the South have produced reams of data to explain
why they need such legislation, but there is precious little
information available about how interstate banking will affect the
affordability or availability of financial services to the average
consumer.
          What will be the effect on consumers? Since there's no research,
there's no conclusion--but there is reason to worry. Preliminary
studies by the Federal Reserve indicate that transactions cost more
per unit at bigger banks than at smaller ones. If this is true, then
regional banking--which would spawn much larger banks--could result in
higher costs for the basic consumer services banks provide.
          Obviously, there are many consumers who need services like banking
cards that can get them cash across the country. But most do not. Will
banking services remain affordable and accessible to that large group
of customers who do not need the frills banks are devoting more of
their attention to?
          What will regional banking do to the loan side of
the banking business? Once again, there's no hard evidence, but
as Martin Mayer concludes in his new book, The Money
Bazaars, "The basic business of the banks continues to be
lending to businesses. And for the big banks, inescapably, the
business has been one of lending to big businesses." Several studies
have shown that small banks remain the major capital suppliers for
small businesses.
          It's not clear whether bigger regional banks will continue to
supply small business needs if they gobble up lots of smaller
institutions. Former NC senatorial candidate turned Washington banker
Luther Hodges Jr. commented recently in American
Banker: "Let me reiterate that interstate banking is not
bigness for the sake of bigness; it is increased size for the capacity
to serve the rapidly growing needs of regional industry (my
emphasis)." That's fine, Mr. Hodges, but what about the needs of small
businesses?
          In fact, numerous studies show how vital local small-business
development remains to many Southern communities--despite the
difficulty such businesses experience in locating capital. The Center
of Community Self-Help in Durham has assisted a number of worker-owned
businesses in getting started across the state. These businesses are
providing vitally needed jobs for hard-pressed communities. Frustrated
by their inability to get banks to invest in these enterprises, the
Center spearheaded the formation of a Self-Help Credit Union, which
provides vitally needed capital for these emerging businesses.
          Unfortunately, it seems highly likely that interstate banking will
only worsen the plight of small businesses; regional banks might serve
the needs of regional industry, but will those banks be there to
provide the funds communities need to keep developing? The prospects
don't seem optimistic.
          If we don't allow interstate banking now, what
should we do instead? A word dear to the hearts to most bankers
seems in order: caution. Professor Didow comments, "I don't know all
the answers, but I'd like to know the implications of regional banking
for the retail side of banking for all the involved parties." If
larger banks do charge more for services, he notes, "I do not believe
it is in the public's interest to allow banks to expand." It does seem
that for something as crucial to people's lives as financial services,

the least we could do is study these issues soberly, especially
states' ability to regulate effectively.
          Unfortunately, the legislation is already in place in all too many
states, and the banks are lining up to gobble up their small
competitors. However, even the most aggressive banks have to wait for
the legislation to take effect--and for each state's regulatory
apparatus to approve the merger. T here might still be some methods by
which concerned consumer groups could call for more study for the
impacts of regional banking, put some brakes on the rush to merger,
and get their legislators to reconsider the already passed
legislation.
          For a host of different reasons--the desire for a stable economy,
the fears of another depression--we have allowed banks an economic
security that most other enterprises don't enjoy--especially the
provision of federally insured deposits. In return, we've asked for
little. The record of corporate responsibility rolled up by many
Southern banks with regard to investing in the black community and
providing services to low-income people is pretty abysmal. To adopt a
favorite banker's expression, it seems only prudent that we should
slow down the interstate merger process and ask for some return
guarantees before we allow the South's banks to charge us with an
uncertain future.
          
            Jim Overton is the associate publisher of The
North Carolina Independent.
          
        
        
          The Bear. A film from Embassy Pictures,
1984. Larry G. Spangler, producer; Richard Sarafian, director; written
by Michael Kane; starring Gary Busey as Coach Paul "Bear"
Bryant.
          Reviewed by Gorn, Elliott J.Elliott J. Gorn
          Vol. 6, No. 6, 1984, pp. 20, 22-23
          
          I first moved to Tuscaloosa, carpetbag in hand, in 1981. I was
enough of a football fan to know that the University of Alabama
produced consistently strong teams and that Paul "Bear" Bryant was one
of the most successful coaches in the country. Still, I was
unprepared.
          Football at Alabama is unlike any other sports phenomenon I have
experienced. Lee Ballinger, a steel worker from Ohio and author of a
fascinating book on contemporary sports, In Your Face,
visited Alabama in the fall of 1982. He concluded that Ohioans love
their OSU Buckeyes, but that he had never seen anything like the
Crimson Tide mania.
          Earlier this year, I brought a friend to the Penn State game, which
Alabama won six to zero. My friend is from Connecticut, has been to
Yankee Stadium when New York clinched American League pennants, but he
claims that the noise level in Bryant-Denny Stadium that day surpassed
anything in his recollection. When Alabama scored, he had to restrain
himself from leaping from his seat, throwing up his arms and shouting
"Orgasm!"
          So it was as seeker of enlightenment that I put down my two dollars
for a Saturday matinee screening of Larry Spangler's film, The
Bear. Unfortunately, I remain unenlightened.
          The Bear is not a singularly bad film, but it's not
a good one either. Gary Busey portrays Bryant with tolerable
believability; the filming is competent though certainly not
distinguished; the writing is a bit flat but I've seen worse. All of
the facts are there. The film opens with Bryant's record setting win
number 315, cuts to Fordyce, Arkansas where strapping young Paul
fights a bear at a local carnival, moves to his student football days
in Tuscaloosa, his courting of Mary Harmon, and his succession of
coaching jobs at Kentucky, Texas A and M, and Alabama, and ends with
his final game at the 1982 Liberty Bowl in Memphis. In documentary
fashion we go from locker-room to locker-room, half-time speech to
half-time speech, victory to victory. Along the way we are treated to
one close up after another of Bryant/Busey's face: Great man shows
grit, determination, courage, anger, compassion, etc.
          It is all too prosaic and predictable. I half-expected before
seeing the film that it would dwell heavily on conventional
pieties--Saint Paul, the devoted father and husband, telling the boys
to write their mamas, say their prayers and make their daddy's
proud. The film does emphasize this side of Bryant, sometimes
excessively. But producer Spangler's coach also smokes, swears
occasionally, and kicks a few 

deserving players. The
Bear's makers insisted on these elements of "authenticity" and
for their pains were prevented from filming on the University of
Alabama campus; Bryant's heirs pressured the Wallace administration
into keeping the film crews out-of-state. But even with the touches of
the "real man" beneath the legend, the film remains
hagiography. Toward the end, Bryant confesses to his black chauffeur
that he feels guilty for ignoring his obligations toward the Almighty,
but the coach is reassured (and we are reassured) that by helping the
boys become good men, he was doing God's work all along.
          I do not mean to be cynical. Bryant was a remarkable man, and he
deserves better than the cheap commercial hype, passing for devotion,
which he has received. Perhaps the Coach is not an appropriate subject
for a fine film, or good literature, or even first-rate journalism. No
doubt many viewers are satisfied with an unartful invocation of
Bryant's achievements. A Tuscaloosa family sat behind me as I watched
the film, and it was obvious that they enjoyed it. During the showing,
I heard the father patiently explain to his wife and young children
the precise dates of Bryant's accomplishments, who played on which
teams, and other details of the living past. I suspect that for this
man, a truly fine film was not necessary. Merely recounting legendary
events evoked layers of meaning, and his own vivid memories filled in
what the movie missed. For such individuals, the film has a talismanic
quality. Like a cross, or like Bryant's houndstooth hat, the movie
itself becomes a transcendent symbol of events whose significance are
so implicitly understood that no explanation is needed.
          Of course, an explanation is needed, maybe not for the converted,
but certainly for the rest of us sinners who listened in slack-jawed
silence as dewey-eyed fans assured us on the day of Bryant's funeral
that he was one of the greatest men who ever lived. Maybe, as my
students tell me, Paul Bryant was a great man because he was a
winner. But the story must be more complex.
          The Coach's personal history was well known, and it paralleled the
region's. Like so many of his contemporaries, Bryan t grew up a poor
farm boy, the tenth of eleven children in an Arkansas family. But as a
football coach, Bryant became intimately associated with that hallmark
of corporate life, that seedbed of the bureaucratic and technological
forces which transformed the South after World War II, the modern
state University. Bryant, as the film indicates, was recruited to give
the University of Alabama national visibility. Yet even as he
succeeded, he remembered his roots, spoke the people's language,
mingled among average Alabamians, asked how they and their kin were
doing. By maintaining this family feeling, Bryant allowed his fans to
have their cake and eat their cornbread too. Alabama competed
nationally, but did so with their own good ole boy at the
helm. Moreover, the aura of the hometowner making it in the Big Game
rubbed off on his teams. Bryant was a great motivator who got the most
out of his players, the majority of whom were local boys, recruited
out of small Alabama towns, the heroes of hundreds of communities who
beat up on bigger, better fed opponents.
          Despite the attempts to deify him, my impression has always been
that Bryant's flaws, in combination with his strengths, made him
appealing. Everyone in Alabama knew that he muttered unintelligibly
during his Sunday morning post-game television show because, like many
of his fans, he toasted victory too frequently or drowned defeat too
deeply the night before. Everyone knew about the revels of all-night
poker games at the Stafford Inn in Tuscaloosa for influential alumni
and Tide supporters. But again, these were the flaws which kept Bryant
in touch with his fans, allowed them to identify with his spectacular
success, because he too was human. The contradictions--Bryant's pious
devotion to mama, Mary Harmon and Southern womanhood, alongside his
revelling in rough male camaraderie--was a double standard his fans
understood.
          Moreover, Bryant's ascendancy came precisely when his region
suffered from a damaged national image and an internal crisis of
confidence. During the 1960s, when Northerners thought of Alabama,
they envisaged police dogs, Bull Connor's fire hoses, and bloodied
freedom riders. But Bryant offered pride, unity, and a sense of
accomplishment to the citizens of a state impoverished by a colonial
economy and torn by racial tensions. Never mind that until the end of
the decade his teams replicated the same pattern of institutional
racism which embarrassed so many individual Alabamians. The point is
that Bryant's boys not only won they did so with dignity. They were
truly proud representatives of a state still smarting from public
humiliation.
          The Bear fails to capture any of the context which
made Bryant's life meaningful, indeed, which makes all sports more
than just fun and games. C.L.R. James, the Marxist historian and
social critic, has written one of the finest works on sports I have
ever read. I know nothing about, cricket and understand the game
poorly. But by reading James' autobiographical musings on the sport, I
now have some grasp of the game's social importance. James describes
his own upbringing in Trinidad amidst accounts of fast bowlers, short
legs and off breaks:
          
            My father's father was an emigrant from one of the smaller
islands, and probably landed with nothing F5ut he made his way, and as
a mature man worked as a pan-boiler on a sugar estate, a responsible
job involving the critical transition of the boiling cane-juice from
liquid into sugar. It was a post in those days usually held by white
men. This meant that my grandfather had raised himself above the mass
of poverty, dirt, ignorance and vice which in those far-off days
surrounded the islands of black lower middle-class respectability like
a sea ever threatening to engulf them . . . My grandfather went to
church every Sunday morning at eleven o'clock wearing in the broiling
sun a frock-coat, striped trousers and top-hat, with his walking stick
in hand, surrounded by his family, the underwear of the women
crackling with starch. Respectability was not an ideal, it was an
armour. He fell greviously ill, the family fortunes declined and the
children grew up in unending struggle not to sink below the level of
the Sunday-morning top-hat and frock-coat.
          
          Not a word about cricket, yet suddenly we understand the appeal of
that restrained and genteel sport.*
          
            * C. L. R. James, Beyond a Boundary
(New York: Pantheon, 1983), p. 17-18, originally London: Stanley Paul
and Co. 1963.
          
          It is this kind of description--placing cricket in the context of
race, class and colonialism, placing it against the backdrop of James'
own family history and the social conditions of the Carribbean--which
elevates his discussion 

of sport to art. Precisely this sort of
context is missing from The Bear. The American South is
no less complex nor less interesting than Trinidad. Bryant's
accomplishments, the tragedies of recent Southern history, and the
glories of Southern football all deserve their own C.L.R. James,
someone who can tell the story so others might understand.
          
            Elliott J. Gorn is assistant professor American Studies
at the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa. He is completing study of
the early history of prize fighting in America, to be entitled
The Manly Art.
          
        
        
          The Politics of Culture in an American Region
          Reviewed by Williamson, J.W.J.W. Williamson
          Vol. 6, No. 6, 1984, pp. 23-24
          
          All That Is Native and Fine: The Politics of Culture in
an American Region by David E. Whisnant. University of North
Carolina Press, 1983. 340 pp.
          The first time I ever laid eyes on David Whisnant was at a big
conference in the mountains called "Toward 1984: The Future of
Appalachia," and he was making like the Prophet Amos even then. That
was in 1974. He stood up in the concluding plenary session, conducted
by "the Goals and Objectives Committee" of the conference, and told
all those industry and government and think-tank types what he thought
of their agenda for Appalachia. He didn'd want nothing those guys had
to offer, no way they could preach it or talk it. Well, he slowed them
down, but he didn't stop .hem. They went ahead and adopted their
"Goals and Objectives" for Southern Appalachia, one of which read--
          
            3. Educational institutions in Appalachia must relate more
consciously to the mountain experience. They must include a concern
for the rich historical and cultural heritage of the region, an
awareness of the relationship between human beings and their land, and
of the alternatives for the future and for the human values
involved.
          
          Nice liberal-sounding words. So what's so wrong with pasting this
humanistic veneer of culture-salvation on top of your run-of-the-mill
three-day conference?
          One of the things wrong with it was that the people writing this
agenda for saving mountain culture were also simultaneously in the
service of the coal industry, the power industry, the petroleum
industry, the land-development industry, the railroading industry, the
steel industry, and the-ahem--higher education industry--all in their
way and in their time exploitive of the place and the people. This
iron y is also at the core of Whisnant's new book, All That Is
Native and Fine. What happens when agents of the dominant
American, mainstream, middle-class, industrial society get it in their
heads that they ought to help mountain people? What happened at
Hindman Settlement School from the 1890's on? What happened at the
White Top Folk Festival in Virginia during the 1930's? What happened,
even, when as intelligent and wise a woman as Olive Dame Campbell
decided to start a folk school in the North Carolina mountains? All
basically liberal, benevolent "interventions" for the sake of doing
good. But Whisnant's attitude toward them is the attitude the Prophet
Amos toward hypocrites of his own day--"Take thou away from me the
noise of thy songs; for I will not hear the melody of thy viols. But
let judgment run down as waters and righteousness as a mighty
stream."
          In other words, All That Is Native and Fine is a
tough book. It needles the reader with a profoundly disturbing vision
of do-gooders doing mainly harm (or "young ladies with weak eyes and
young men with weak chins. . . offering cocoa and sponge cakes as a
sort of dessert to the factory system," as one critic of settlement
workers called them). Ironies and paradoxes breed in this book like
mayflies on a humid night. For example. Olive Dame Campbell founded
the John C. Campbell Folk School (named for her dead husband) on a
rather naive and romantic notion that Appalachia in the early 1920's
was still an "isolated, preindustrial, premercantile society," but
Whisnant sets that notion against some sobering reality:
          
            By 1925, however, even rural Cherokee and Clay counties were
neither preindustrial nor premercantile. The local weekly newspaper
regularly cataloged the arrival of mass culture in the late 1920's: a
traveling tent show was competing for an audience with "The 

Thief of
Baghdad" (starring Douglas Fairbanks) at the Bonita Theater; an
eight-story hotel was rising on Murphy's main street; Parker's Drug
Store was installing a jukebox; private power companies were damming
the Hiwasee River to run the electric refrigerators advertised
alongside Fords, Whippets, and Hupmobiles. At the time the folk school
opened, the other big news stories locally were the opening of the
Appalachia Scenic High way from Atlanta to Asheville (via Murphy) and
early plans for the formation of the Great Smoky Mountains National
Park. Fly the spring of 1927 an automobile raced to Asheville in two
hours, thirty-nine minutes--nearly fifty miles an hour. The annual
Cherokee County Singing Convention, organized in 1894, was still
drawing as many as fifteen hundred people in 1925, but the old ways
were clearly dying
          
          That paragraph alone is worth the price of the book.
          Whisnant's most concise statement of doctrine is this: intervention
in a "culture" for whatever reasons is usually wrongheaded because
"the 'culture' that is perceived by the intervenor (even before the
act of intervention) is rarely congruent with the culture that is
actually there. It is a selection, an arrangement, an accommodation to
preconceptions--whether of mountaineers, or Indians, or Georgia
blacks, or Scotch Highlanders. Thus the culture that is 'preserved' or
'revived' is a hybrid at best"--mountain people taught crafts and
songs and dances that they ought to know and which they would have
known if only they had had the good sense to be educated at, say,
Vassar.
          So what about the nice little ladies and the kindly gentlemen with
big box cameras in their portmanteaus, all the ones who are unaware of
the larger ironies of their undertakings--their interventions--in the
mountains? Can't we give them a break and say it's all right what they
did, so long as they thought they were doing good? Well, no. Whisnant
is a stern judge; "Rescuing" or 'preserving' or 'reviving' a sanitized
version of culture frequently makes for rather shallow liberal
commitment: it allows a prepared consensus on the 'value' of
preservation or revival, its affirmations lie comfortably within the
bounds of conventional secular piety; it makes minimal demands upon
financial (or other) resources; and it involves little risk of
opposition from vested economic or political interests. It is, in a
word, the cheapest and safest way to go." Woe to them that are at ease
in Zion!
          Whisnant is careful not to offer comments on other culture-saving
ventures of more recent vintage. On his three case studies, his
research is exhaustive, and he doesn't gallop beyond his research to
phenomena like Foxfire, for example. But the message seems pretty
clear if implicit: what they did then they're still doing now, only
their technology is better and sometimes their funding. People still
come to the mountains and see what they want to see: cabins in the
laurel and all that stuff. They don't notice the plain truth--for
instance, that the most ubiquitous feature on the Appalachian
landscape right now is the satellite dish--and they certainly haven't
begun to deal with the reality of what that means. Whisnant says that
the cultural objects, styles, and practices introduced by the little
ladies and kindly gentlemen--the "intervenors"--have a nasty habit of
taking on a life of their own, get imbedded in too many people's minds
as examples of what life in this region is all about, and then those
false notions become the basis for public policy--governments at all
levels deciding to do for and do to mountain people on the basis of a
profoundly warped understanding of who those people are and what
motivates them. That is the evil that comes from trying to save
someone else's "culture," and those are the dangerous "politics" of
Whisnant's sub-title.
          This is a sobering book. It needs study by a great host of "culture
workers," inside these mountains and out.
          
            J.W. Williamson is editor of the Appalachian
Journal.
          
        
      
    
  
