
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 6, Number 3,
	       1984
        
          The Second Greensboro Verdict
          By Reston, James, Jr.James Reston, Jr.
          Vol. 6, No. 3, 1984, pp. 1-3
          
          During the filming of "88 Seconds in Greensboro," the PBS Frontline
treatment of the 1979 Greensboro, North Carolina killings by Ku Klux
Klansmen, I was standing behind the lights, chatting casually with one
of our willing extras. He was known simply as "Big Man" for obvious
reasons, and he towered over me, as he waited to shoot a sequence on
the breath machine that we were using to visualize how cotton mills
test for brown lung disease. The disease, so widespread in the cotton
industry, was the grievance that had attracted the young Communist
doctors to the cotton mills of Greensboro, an attraction which
eventually led to their death. Big Man's role in the documentary was
simply to blow as hard as he could into a tube, while a gauge measured
his lung power. The sequence is what is known affectionately in the
television business as "wallpaper," for narration on the cotton mills
would eventually be laid over it.
          As we watched another mill worker huff and blow into the tube under
the instructions of Marty Nathan, the widow of Dr. Michael Nathan, who
was slain on November 3, 1979, and Dr. Paul Bermanzohn, who had
miraculously survived a bullet in the brain, Big Man observed
offhandedly how everyone had cleaned up their story in the three years
since the shooting. Since his friends were the victims, I was
intrigued, and I asked him what he meant. He proceeded, through my
insistent prodding, to reveal a startling new detail about the
Communist Workers Party (COOP) planning for November 3, for he had
been present in the important strategy sessions in the days before the
"Death to the Klan" march.

          With speed, our filming schedule was restructured for the following
morning, and braving a driving rain, we took Big Man to the corner of
Everitt and Carver in Greensboro, the site of the televised
killings. There, with slow and deliberate precision, he pointed to the
apartments in the seedy Morningside Homes project where in the days
before the March, the CWP had stashed weapons including rifles and
shotguns, presumably in anticipation of a blazing showdown with the
Klan.
          Because "88 Seconds in Greensboro" was an exploration of the role
of Edward Dawson, the police informer who led the Klan to the point of
confrontation, rather than a reconstruction of the event itself, the
Big Man sequence did not make the final cut of the film. It was,
however, there in spirit. The narration had characterized the five
dead as "far from innocent victims."
          As the second Greensboro trial drew near and after I received a
call from a defense lawyer about the "outtakes" of the film, I worried
about the protection of the Big Man segment and sought assurance from
WGBH in Boston that no outtakes would be turned over to the trial. It
was not so much that the Big Man interview altered the essential facts
of the case. It did not. Those essential facts remained: A peaceful
demonstration had been underway. Klansmen drove into the neighborhood,
led by Dawson. No police were present. After a few sticks rained down
on Klan cars, a stick fight broke out. Moments later, the Klansmen
strode back to their cars, removed their weapons, and in the most
public killings in memory, captured by three local television crews,
they mowed down five people. None of this was altered by Big Man's
information. In the brutal eighty-eight seconds, the Communist arsenal
had never been retrieved.
          Rather, the essential facts of who did what to whom were in
jeopardy of being overwhelmed by image. The center of justice had come
unstuck. The easiest way to digest this event had become to think of
it as a shootout of two equally despicable groups, each equally
culpable. The lawyers for the Klansmen, of course, played upon that
public perception. My Big Man sequence was sure to be waved like a
bloody shirt as "proof" that the Communists were just as blood-thirsty
as the Klansmen.
          In relating the Big Man story to a few trusted friends in the past
year, I have been struck by its ability to shock. It is as if even
progressive minded people, perhaps particularly that type, must have a
pure image of heroes and villains, before they will rally to the cause
of the victimized. But heroes and villains in real life are seldom
pure. The victims of Greensboro were "far from innocent," and perhaps
that denies them the status of martyrs that they coveted. But they
remain victims of a vicious murder, and to me, the fact that they
might have been unsavory makes the principle of their protection all
the more important to uphold. When a democracy can let violence occur
against its unsavory elements, it is in trouble. Whatever their
beliefs or manners, the Communists were murdered in exercise of their
constitutional rights as Americans.
          Many Northerners hold that federal justice in the South should
somehow be different from state justice, hence, the shock of the
second acquittal in federal court. This is an outdated notion for the
South is no longer like Philadelphia, Mississippi in 1964, where state
justice was so unfair and racist that federal court was the only
remedy to fix it. The question of this case is not so much the racism
of the South, as the art of the courtroom. By perfectly legal,
dignified procedures, two all white juries have now considered the
Greensboro case, and that is wrong. By the strictures of the court,
the federal prosecutor in the second trial was evidentally unable to
prove a racial animus on the part of the Klansmen, and that is
ridiculous. In the first trial, through a perfectly fair election, the
jury chose a foreman who was a former member of an anti-Castro, CIA
supported freedom fighting group. Could he completely suppress his
anti-Communism in judging a crime against Communists? And after the
first verdict, another juror confessed, as was his right, that to him,
killing Reds was not the same as killing people.
          In some ways, the second Greensboro verdict is irrelevant. In the
1980s, murder should be murder, not the denial of civil rights, and as
this second verdict shows, the transfer to federal court of such a
brutal crime brings with it a host of new and often restricting
rules. It becomes an exercise of trying to shove a square peg into a
round hole. The federal prosecution was a fixit job from the start,
foisted upon Reagan's justice department by the outrage of the first
acquittal. The Justice Department was never enthusiastic about
undertaking the job, not in an administration which has slackened the
restrictions on covert surveillance nationally and covert provocation
internationally.
          The only new aspect of the Second Trial was the presence of Edward
Dawson in the dock. To some, Dawson was the symbol of an official
conspiracy, but the trial never aired that issue fully because Dawson
never took the stand. His relation to the FBI and the Greensboro
police department 

has not been explored in a court of law. The extent
to which he felt he was operating under official orders that day goes
to the question of official complicity in the event. But that question
must await yet another forum.
          The forces behind the victims claimed after the second verdict that
the formulation of the federal charges were too narrow. To blame
failure on a technicality of legal regulations after a four-month
trial and a four-year trauma for a city seems to get everyone off the
hook...except the city of Greensboro. For as justice continues to be
denied for whatever reason, new forums are found, and the case goes on
and on. For after the second acquittal, many asked again in
astonishment, how can it be that such a public, televised crime can
happen in America, and no one be punished for it?
          Now, the focus shifts to the third arena: the $49 million civil
case of the victims against the city of Greensboro and the federal
government. It is regrettable that it has taken this long to get
around to the question of ultimate responsibility. The Greensboro
citizens are sure to plead that they have suffered enough already from
this case, but the fact is that the city's role in the affair has been
skirted through the first two major rounds.
          For all the sophisticated evidence like the FBI acoustical tests on
the video tape to determine the location of each of the thirty-nine
shots fired in the eighty-eight seconds, there are several simple
questions which finally will have to be addressed:
          Would the Klan ever have found the gathering at Everitt and Carver
Streets that morning, if they had not been led there by the agent of
the city of Greensboro, Edward Dawson? All but Dawson in the Klan
caravan were from towns far away from Greensboro.
          In our documentary, "88 Seconds in Greensboro," Dawson freely
admits to a leadership role at every important moment on that fateful
morning. To what extent, did he have guidance from his police contact?
If there was no guidance, does this amount to official negligence? Or
what does it say generally about the entire system of police
undercover agents in America?
          Why did Dawson, the agent of the city, hurl out the first
provocative taunt at the curbside demonstrators from his lead truck,
an act that began the chain of events?
          Would the massacre ever have happened, if the police had been there
in force at what was clearly a volatile and dangerous situation?
          One can hope that the questions of ultimate responsibility for this
troubling case will finally be laid to rest by the civil
proceedings. But from hard experience--through the Joan Little case,
through Nixon and Watergate and even the Jonestown disaster, all of
which I have written about--I cease to expect from a court of law any
clean consideration of moral or social or philosophical problems. We
know that on November 3, 1979 in Greensboro a dastardly crime was
committed. But if there was a conspiracy, it was more than a criminal
conspiracy. The Greensboro disaster was the product of historical as
well as criminal malfeasance. Secret societies within our government,
we have learned, can be just as dangerous as secret societies
without. Official omissions at the very least joined with racist
commissions.
          The Greensboro tragedy has a lot to do with the American South in
the late 1970s, but it also has much to do with America itself in the
mid-1980s.
          
            James Reston, Jr. lives in Hume, Virginia. His film
"88 Seconds in Greensboro" appeared in the Public
Broadcasting System's "Frontline" series. He is the author of
Sherman's March and Vietnam, forthcoming from
MacMillan.
          
        
        
          Government in South Carolina: Taking Care of Business
          By Walser, JimJim Walser
          Vol. 6, No. 3, 1984, pp. 3-13
          
          State Senator Tom Smith was angry--and the South Carolina General
Assembly was about to discover the reason.
          It was February of 1983, weeks after the South Carolina House of
Representatives began debating a plan designed to cut sharply rising
homeowner property taxes, reform the state income tax system (one of
the most regressive in the nation) to make the rich pay more, and send
some financial help to the state's eleven-hundred public schools, then
taking a public flogging for producing the lowest average scores in
the nation on the college-entrance Scholastic Aptitude Test.
          Designed by Governor Dick Riley as the cornerstone of his new
second term, the tax package died quickly in the House.
          One reason--perhaps the major reason--for the derailment of the
package was the South Carolina Chamber of Commerce, a high-profile
coalition of over eighteen-hundred state businesses and 3,700
individuals with an annual lobbying budget of over one-million dollars
a year.
          Weeks earlier, on the eve of the House debate, Chamber officials
warned that Riley's plan would frighten new businesses away from South
Carolina and prevent current ones from expanding. According to the
Chamber, a 1982 Harvard-MIT study proved that "relative tax burdens"
are the "single most important consideration in decisions (of
industries) to relocate from the Frostbelt to the Sunbelt." Lowering
homeowner property taxes, the Chamber concluded, would shift the
property tax burden back to industry. And higher property taxes for
industry would cost the state new business, jobs, and prosperity in
the 1980s.
          It is an argument that is heard a great deal across the South today
as highly financed and organized business coalitions fight unions,
pro-worker legislation and higher corporate taxes, attempting to carve
out a more profitable business environment in Southern states which
are increasingly pitted against one another in recruiting out-of-state
industry.
          But on this occasion, Smith, a sharp, forty-five-year-old, drawling
Pamplico, SC, farmer-lawyer with a few populist tendencies, rose in
the wreckage of House debate to call the Chamber's bluff.
          "We have been lied to," Smith announced to a hushed Senate. "For
the past many weeks, the Chamber has attempted to stampede the members
of this General As-

sembly into making serious decisions based on bad
and false information."
          Smith produced a letter from the author of the Harvard tax study,
Rober W. Schmenner, who said "tax incentives for industrial location
are not the most important" factor in industrial relocations."
          "The Chamber of Commerce is doing a grave injustice to the people
of South Carolina, " said Smith. "It has put us in a very, very bad
light . . . (and) . . . has sowed seeds of dissension and confusion
among this state's citizens by sending a message across this nation
which interferes with tour industrial development."
          Responded Chamber executive vice president Lowell Rease to Smith:
"For a politician to be calling the Chamber of Commerce a liar is like
a frog calling us ugly."
          Government in South Carolina is undergoing a change in command--a
subtle but significant realignment of power that is altering the way
the people's business gets done.
          Dominated for decades by a small band of rural potentates sent to
Columbia to operate a bare-bones government whose main purpose was to
perpetuate a segregated society, these days the sessions of the SC
General Assembly sound more and more like corporate board
meetings--replete with executives, their lobbyists, and a
what's-good-for-business theme rippling through debate on nearly every
piece of legislation.
          Gone are the days when patriarchs like former State Senator Edgar
Brown of Barnwell, the thirty-year (1942-72) chairman of the Senate
Finance Committee, ran state] government like it was a personal
checkbook - frugally, with little advice and no consent.
          And with the passing of Brown and his successor as Senate President
Pro Tempore, Marion Gressette, in March, new forces are moving into
the somewhat chaotic breach.
          Chief among those forces is the state's business cartel, using
money, wall-to-wall lobbying, and a unity of influence that some
legislators say borders on political blackmail in a small, poor,
mostly agricultural state where forty years ago there was hardly any
business at all, a state hungry for jobs and eager enough to accept
just about any kind.
          The governmental objectives of these business-and. banking
interests are simple, succinctly stated in the 1983 editions of
South Carolina Business, the Chamber's annual
magazines: "Avoid bad legislation; maintain a union-free environment;
reduce health care costs."
          What has made it easier for business to establish a beachhead in
South Carolina is an almost complete absence of any organized
opposition from unions, consumer, or civil 

rights organizations.
          Most consumer activist groups have long-since vanished in the
state, or, like the local branch of Common Cause, operate on lean
budgets which limit public visibility and impact. Some antinuclear
groups, including the Palmetto Alliance, the Grass Roots Organizing
Workshop, and the new SC Energy Research Foundation, have won some
court battles over environmental safety at nuclear power plants and
the federally-owned Savannah River defense plant near Aiken. But the
impact of consumer and environmental groups is rarely felt inside the
capitol dome on a day-today basis.
          Women's groups, punctured by the Senate's 1978 decision to scuttle
the proposed Equal Rights Amendment, have a low profile in the General
Assembly. Some women do hold key policymaking roles in more
traditional lobbying vehicles, such as the eighteen-thousand member SC
Education Association, a teachers' group. Other women's groups
organize primarily around single pieces of legislation. Recently,
Sistercare, a Columbia-based women's shelter, has lobbied with some
limited success on domestic violence legislation. But as one
legislative organizer said, "There's no umbrella organization of
women's groups and it really limits the effectiveness of lobbying
women's issues."
          Civil rights organizations seem more concerned with electing more
black members of the General Assembly than affecting specific
legislation. That's an understandable concern in a state where leaders
have apportioned blacks out of the legislature for decades, with a
succesion of county-wide and multi-member district plans limiting
black elective chances.
          Currently, only nineteen of the state's 124 House members and only
one of the state's forty-six senators are black. That should change
later this year, when the Senate's long battle to reapportion after
the 1980 census is heard in a Washington courtroom. The state NAACP
and others are seeking to carve out as many as nine majority-black
Senate districts, though even in the best of circumstances only four
or five of those districts would meet the accepted threshold of being
truly winnable for black candidates. Only 325,000 of South Carolina's
596,000 voting-age blacks are registered--and even registered blacks
tend to vote in lower percentages than white voters in the state.
          Black legislators optimistically predict that even four or five
black senators would alter the dynamics of moving social and
progressive legislation through the General Assembly.
          "A lot of times you will find that the Senate will kill things the
House has passed," said John Matthews, a House member and chairman of
the Legislative Black Caucus. "Check the record and you'll find that
most issues that have a direct impact on minorities are brought up in
the House. I think when you get five or six members (of the Senate)
who will speak up for minority issues, you'll find a new
sensitivity."
          Other observers, including some white legislators sympathethic to
minority causes, aren't so sure. They cite votes when the black caucus
was unable to agree, even on such emotionally charged issues as
removing the Confederate flag from the House chamber. Others say
blacks are susceptible to pressure from business groups, too, since
many represent rural areas where the resident industry carries even
greater clout than those in urban areas.
          Nearly 93,000 South Carolinians belong to labor unions, but that is
the least percentage (7.896) of any state's workforce in the
nation. Frustrated labor organizers are simply trying to survive in an
atmosphere where the instruments of finance, the press--and,
increasingly, government--lie in the hands of a small group of
textile, banking, and manufacturing executives.
          "It seems labor organizations always are a whipping boy for some of
the politicians," says Randy Kiser, twenty-nine, the young president
of the South Carolina AFL-CIO. "It makes good headlines and
propaganda, especially if not many of the voters are unionized."
          While a succession of SC governors has boasted how the hundreds of
new factories and plants have radically altered 

the makeup of the SC
economy in the last two decades, the surge of building, development
and progress has nevertheless left the state forty-eighth in the
nation in per capita income and as high as fiftieth in many health and
quality-of-life statistics. While business complains about corporate
income and property taxes--and actively seeks to elect a General
Assembly full of representatives pledged to curtail them - the state's
public school system is one of the nation's poorest: forty-seventh in
per-pupil spending, forty-fourth in teacher pay, and forty-sixth in
adult illiteracy.
          "There's a lot of bragging all about how we don't need unions and
we've never had unions," says Kiser. "But in the figures we're always
coming up on the bottom."
          From their finely appointed offices in a downtown Columbia
high-rise bank building, the staff and corporate sponsors who run the
South Carolina Chamber of Commerce can oversee the architectural heart
of state government.
          From there on the fifth floor they can view the nineteenth century
Roman Corinthian State House, where metal stars mark the spots
Sherman's cannon balls bounced off the walls over a hundred years ago,
and where, inside, legislators launch government policies that alter
the political landscape. Beyond the State House, the vista is dotted
by a half-dozen new concrete-and-steel state office buildings, named
after a succession of rural political barons--Brown, Blatt, Gressette,
and Dennis--who once ruled the state with virtually unchallenged
authority. There, thousands of state employees stoke South Carolina's
governmental engine.
          To many South Carolinians, the Chamber of Commerce's vantage point
is more than fitting symbolism.
          Many legislators and political observers now consider the Chamber
of Commerce, its corporate clients, its local branches, and the broad
business establishment it represents much more than just another
lobbying group.
          Nobody agrees more with the assessment of a rising business role in
government than the born-again free enterprisers who run the Chamber
of Commerce itself.
          "Without any question, I think the state Chamber reached the
heights of its political influence in the state," executive vice
president Reese says proudly of last year's business effort to
convince the General Assembly to kill Riley's package. "Business did
have a significant role in the whole debate and it turned out
favorably for us. Members got involved to a great degree. I feel like
we had a great impact."
          To many, the wave of businesses and manufacturers arriving in the
state since World War II--united under the banner of the state Chamber
and the closely allied SC Textile Manufacturers Association--is now
the fourth branch of government in South Carolina.
          Though unelected and prone to conduct most of its business in
private, the new branch is not necessarily the fourth most powerful,
either.
          After all, South Carolina is a state where author V.O. Key writing
in Southern Politics, called the governor "little more
than a ceremonial chief of state." Later, authors Jack Bass and Walter
DeVries, updating Key in The Transformation of Southern
Politics, dismissed the state Supreme 

Court as "an
institutional defender of the status quo," elected by and consisting
wholly of former legislators.
          For years, as those authors noted, power in South Carolina resided
in the all-white, all-male Senate, where a collection of
near-dictators ruled with the help of the most strictly
seniority-based system of government in the South.
          But in the last twenty years, changes have swept the Senate. The US
Supreme Court's one-person, one-vote rulings and subsequent
reapportionment forced an end to the one-senator-per-county
system. Home rule stripped the senatorial power to control load
budgets and the subsequent loss of patronage and authority hurt
senators' prestige. Some of the older senators died, and others were
defeated for re-election. By the 1970s, federal aid flowing to state
agencies, with the money governed by federal guidelines, stripped away
another layer of senatorial influence. Finally, rules changes inside
the Senate, forced by younger senators and outside pressures, somewhat
loosened the iron grip of seniority.
          These days, the SC Senate isn't what it used to be--for better or
worse.
          Three or four senators still hold disproportionate influence, but
there are days when even members of the Senate--like poor Tom
Smith--wonder aloud who is running the governmental show in South
Carolina.
          For years, there was little question. Even into the early 1980s,
Senate President Pro Tem Marion Gressette of tiny Calhoun County and
Senate Finance Committee Chairman Rembert Dennis of rural Berkeley
County near Charleston, himself the son of a state senator, remained
the two most powerful legislators. Gressette was elected to the SC
House in 1924 and to the Senate thirteen years later. Beginning in
1953, the Senate Judiciary Committee he. chaired became know as
"Gressette's Graveyard," a reference to the chairman's inclination for
killing bills--especially progressive ones. Gressette was credited
with almost singlehandedly stopping passage of the Equal Rights
Amendment in South Carolina. Dennis's Finance Committee rewrites the
appropriations bill when it arrives from the House each
spring. Senators with pet projects pending in the appropriations bill
are rarely inclined to confront Dennis on other issues. Dennis,
sixty-five, is now the Senate President Pro Tempore.
          "Cronyism, and that's the popular word for it, is a fact of life in
everything we do up here," says Smith. "We're a small state. The
financial power and the business power is within a mile, almost, of
this State House, and the university (the University of South
Carolina) too. Because we are so small everybody knows everbody. They
all went to the same school together, that kind of stuff."
          But many legislators and observers consider the days of aging
symbols like Dennis numbered. Single-member district representation is
coming to the SC Senate, after decades of legislative and court fights
to avoid it, including a current confrontation with the US Justice
Department to limit the number of majority-black Senate
districts. (See Southern Changes, May/June, 1983.) That
fight might not be decided in time for the 1984 elections, but almost
any resulting plan will guarantee at least five or six blacks in what
was the South's last all-white legislative body until late 1983--when
longtime civil rights activist I.D. Newman won a Senate seat in a
special election.
          There are predictions and talk that the new 1985 Senate will throw
out the seniority system Gressette and his allies worked decades to
preserve. And, finally, there is age. Gressette, in poor and declining
health for years, died on March 1, flashing a new tremor through the
foundations of the Senate.
          Ironically, it was the irascible Gressette, of all people, who
stood between the state's business community and one of its most
prized goals--a constitutional amendment to severely limit the future
state spending and taxation. The off-shoot of anti-tax sentiments in
high-tax states such as California and Massachusetts, the spending
limit was considered by Gressette as an intrusion by business
interests into the affairs of government. Gressette didn't mind

telling business leaders to butt out.
          "We just don't need that set in concrete," Gressette said before
his death. "The General Assembly is capable of approving a balanced
budget. It always has."
          Over five years, Gressettee repeatedly frustrated attempts to pass
the amendment, which had as many as ninety co-sponsors in the House,
after intense lobbying by SC businesses.
          This year the spending limits bill is back on the General
Assembly's agenda. With Gressette gone, and the Senate's decades of
prestige teetering from outside forces, South Carolina's business
community rests in an unparalleled position to move into the
vacuum. Already, the line between what's-good-for-government and
what's-good-for-business is becoming less and less distinct in South
Carolina.
          "My impression is that with any major legislation, such as the
sales tax package, there are certain people in the state you've got to
run it by," says Smith. "The Chamber group in the Bankers Trust
building. The (former Gov. Robert) McNair law firm (also located in
Bankers Trust). People of that nature. The business community is very,
very powerful. There isn't any question about it. Maybe that's good,
but it's a fact."
          By mid-1983, Gov. Dick Riley, had certainly reached a similar
conclusion.
          As Riley began preparing a new education-improvement package and
considering ways to get it through the 1984 General Assembly, his
first steps were aimed at locking down business support. He courted
corporate executives over lunch at the Governor's Mansion, stalked out
new Chamber president John Huguley, a Charleston businessman, and
attended a series of business conventions specifically to push the
need for improving the state's eleven hundred public schools--and the
advantages such improvement afforded business.
          "We have done less to increase the funding of education than any
other southern state except Alabama," Riley told the Textile
Manufacturers Association last May. "Florida and North Carolina,
states which we compete against for economic development, are in the
process of launching major new funding initiatives for education. And
they already spend $15,000 more per classroom than we spend in South
Carolina."
          Later in 1983, Riley appointed a select committee to draw up a
blueprint for improving South Carolina's schools and another committee
to recommend the ways to pay for it. He loaded both committees with
business executives and bankers, naming Greenville businessman Bill
Page as chairman. By November, the committees recommended a $210
million program which featured teacher pay increases (the state pays
teachers less than all states except one), remedial programs for the
state's 200,000 below-average students, and a statewide building
program to improve school facilities in the most impoverished
districts.
          Deep in the plan, however, were attempts to appeal to the
free-enterprise, results-oriented inclinations of the management
representatives on the committees. There was the expected talk about
merit-pay for "better" teachers, which many teachers and school
professionals consider little more than a public relations gimmick. A
particularly interesting twist was pushed by some businessmen on the
panel: cash bonuses for schools where students perform well, and
incentive programs for teachers and even students to earn cash bonuses
for good work. Finally, after months of cajoling from Riley, the state
Chamber endorsed the one-cent sales tax increase in early 1984--but
only if no other realistic way could be developed to pay for school
improvements. The SC Textile Manufacturers Association disagreed with
that conclusion, and worked actively against the plan. But the
influence of the Chamber's endorsement helped push the 1984 bill
through the House. It awaited passage in the Senate in late May.
          
          Charlie Daniel would have wanted it this way.
          Daniel, the Greenville construction magnate who built his firm an
international reputation, was probably the first SC businessman to
understand the value of a legislature that would help--not hinder,
meddle, or tax--private business.
          "To Daniel's way of thinking," wrote Fortune
magazine in October, 1954, "the greatest weakness of the northern
states was that their governments were either hostile to industry,
taxing it unfairly, or indifferent to its welfare. In the South,
particularly in South Carolina, there was no hostility to business,
and the tax situation was generally favorable to it. What Daniel was
anxious to see, however, was a South Carolina government conspicuously
friendly to industry, aggressive in working to bring in new business,
and capable of inspiring business with confidence in its
stability."
          In the wake of World War II and Korea, Daniel and others set about
to get rid of what they called "jackleg" delegates to the legislature,
to put into office men who knew the value of good government, who
would create the proper blend of regulation and taxes. Usually, that
meant less of both.
          The results came swiftly in the mid-1950's: a "right-to-work" bill
to discourage unionism, a three percent retail 

sales tax to pay for
schools (replacing a property tax which put much of the burden on
industry), tax exemptions for manufacturing equipment, rescinding a
franchise tax on out-of-state corporations, and outlawing blue laws
prohibiting women from working in mills on Sunday (thus interrupting
some textile processes requiring twenty-four hour-a-day
monitoring).
          Northern plants streamed southward, drawn by this new tax climate,
and the absence of unions. A New York textile company,
Deering-Milliken, was one of the earliest and the most enthusiastic
recruits, moving its corporate headquarters to Spartanburg and tying
its fortunes closely to research and to graduates of Clemson
University. Board Chairman Roger Milliken, an avowed anti-unionist who
fought the longest battle in history with the National Labor Relations
Board over the closing of Darlington mill where workers voted to
unionize, formed an immediate friendship with Daniel and Daniel
Construction built Milliken plants across the Carolinas and
Georgia--without so much as a written contract. And when Clemson
University needed a new president in the mid-1950s, Clemson board
chairman Charlie Daniel reached out and recruited a Milliken plant
manager, Robert C. Edwards.
          Daniel died in 1964. These days, no one symbolizes the industrial
strength of South Carolina like Milliken, whose two
billion-dollar-a-year, Spartanburg-based company is the country's
largest privately-owned firm, with twelve thousand employees.
          Milliken, who rarely grants interviews, is influential in several
business organizations, a lifelong backer of Republican Party
causes. He helped Barry Goldwater's rise to the GOP nomination in
1964, raised over $360,000 in campaign contributions in a few days for
Richard Nixon in 1972, and, at one point, turned down a cabinet job in
the Nixon adminstration. His personal attorney, George Dean Johnson,
has been chairman of the SC Chamber and is one of its most
high-profile lobbyists at the State House. Another business group
Milliken spearheads, the Palmetto Business Forum, is considered even
more conservative than the Chamber. In 1980, Johnson and Milliken
allies helped form a group seeking to block a constitutional amendment
allowing a gubernatorial succession--an effort many interpreted as a
move to shift power from the legislature to the governor. Business
lobbyists like their chances of influencing targeted legislators,
elected by smaller constituencies, rather than a candidate elected
statewide.
          Perhaps none of the current crop of 170 members of the SC General
Assembly personifies the new legislatures like House Speaker Ramon
Schwartz, a portly, good-natured attorney from Sumter, a small town
twisting around Shaw Air Force Base forty miles east of Columbia.
          Schwartz, fifty-nine, was elected speaker in 1980, replacing state
Rep. Rex Carter, a Greenville attorney who now frequently lobbies in
the General Assembly for the Chamber of Commerce. His style of
leadership is steeped in loyalties and good-old-boy networking.
          In 1982, when the Legislative Black Caucus was pushing for a black
to be appointed to the all-white University of South Carolina Board of
Trustees, Schwartz agreed that the caucus's proposed candidate was
qualified. But Schwartz refused to withdraw his support from a friend,
his white accountant and golf partner who frequently accompanies
Schwartz to USC football games. Schwartz's friend won the election,
angering black legislators.
          "I think black representation on the boards of universities is an
idea whose time has come," Schwartz, who represents a district less
than seventeen percent black, said afterward. "But I'm not willing to
let it come with my good friend Sam Benson as the sacrificial
lamb."
          Schwartz makes no bones about his other friends and loyalties,
boasting of his close relationships with state business leaders. In
1981, he was the Chamber's "Legislator of the Year," awarded the honor
at a three-day, all expenses paid party for the General Assembly at
Myrtle Beach.
          In early 1983, Schwartz emerged as an outspoken critic of Riley's
attempt to reform the state income tax system, which would have cut
taxes for anyone making less than $22,000 annually--and increased
taxes for those making more.
          By late 1983, Schwartz joined Lt. Gov. Mike Daniel to tour the
state trumpeting the virtues of the constitutional state tax and
spending limitation, blocked by Gressette's opposition and only
lukewarm support over the years from Riley.
          Why would the speaker of the House of Representatives 

barnstorm the
state to promote a piece of legislation weakening the authority of the
House he leads?
          Critics point to Schwartz's obligations to those who salvaged his
office for him in the fall of 1982.
          Schwartz faced the toughest reelection campaing of any House
Speaker in memory from a political neophyte named Jim Ross.
          Ross, a retired military officer, became the lightning rod for
Sumter voters offended by Schwartz's wholehearted support for a new
$600 million Union Camp paper mill to be built on a site at the mouth
of the state's Santee-Cooper lake system. Santee-Cooper, a
world-reknowned bass fishing outlet, stretches seventy-five miles
through the heart of the state and attracts millions in tourism,
fishing and tax revenues each year. Union Camp, a paper products
manufacturer based in New Jersey, operates mills in Savannah, Georgia,
and Franklin, Virginia where fish kills and offensive odors have been
linked to the plants.
          The Union Camp fight quickly became a classic of
jobs-versus-environment confrontation. When Schwartz refused to join
activists demanding that the US Army Corps of Engineers order a
full-scale Environmental Impact Statement, a normally routine gesture
to assess the damage a mill might do, Ross's campaign was born.
          Eventually, Schwartz defeated Ross by a 115-vote margin out of
nearly 4,500 votes cast, in a race filled with so many election
irregularities that the Sumter Democratic Executive Committee ordered
a new election. Later, SC Democratic Party officials, including many
of Schwartz's long-time allies, overruled the county party and
certified Schwartz as the winner.
          But Schwartz's victory wasn't easy or cheap. To win, Schwartz set a
new spending record for a local House race, raising and spending
$34,075 to attract just 2,281 votes in a race for a $11,000-a-year
job. Thousands of dollars were contributed by the state businesses
whose interests Schwartz frequently supports in Columbia: realtors,
banks, electric and gas companies (including some which don't serve
his district), and textile companies.
          When Ross, who spent only nine thousand dollars questioned the
acceptance of such donations, Schwartz told reporters it was "most
flattering" that business had enough confidence in him to back his
re-election.
          "I don't see any conflict of interest in taking campaign
contributions from utilities," said Schwartz. "I had an extremely
close race and I would have hated to test the waters without it
(money)."
          In early 1984, Schwartz became the primary opponent of Riley's
latest plan--a pure one-cent sales tax to benefit public education in
South Carolina.
          "He's right in their pocket," said a Riley aide of Schwartz's as a
spokeman for business. Schwartz faces another bitter primary fight
against Ross this summer, a confrontation which could turn into
another cause celebre for corporations and political action
committees.
          Another politician who was the beneficiary of business largess in
1982 was the current Democratic lieutenant governor, Mike
Daniel. Similar business support in 1986, which appears likely, could
propel Daniel into the governor's office for eight years.
          Daniel, a forty-four-year-old Gaffney attorney and the son of a
loom repairman, emerged as the favorite son of the state's
textile-and-banking establishment as he spent over $500,000 winning
the $34,000-a-year lieutenant governor's job two years ago. A
lieutenant governor in South Carolina has few official duties, but it
has historically proved to be a key stepping stone to the
governorship.
          Daniel is already seen as the business cartel's designated
candidate in the crowded field seeking the governorship in 1986, a
race most state voters haven't given one thought to. It's an informal
endorsement, of course, but it could be crucial with up to a dozen men
who would be governor already itching to announce. The 1986 winner
will likely serve for eight years, since South Carolina's new
gubernatorial succession law (as have others across the South) has
left incumbent governors virtually unbeatable for reelection.
          What kind of governor would Daniel be?
          His record shows that, politically, he will make no waves. And his
1982 campaign was a textbook example of how valuable well-heeled
friends in high places can be in a close, hard-fought statewide
election.
          Daniel's chief opponent for the job was former State Sen. Tom
Turnipseed, a controversial, confrontational and maverick populist and
an outspoken critic for ten years of the state's business
establishment especially utility com-

panies and big banks. (See
Southern Changes, August/September, 1982)
          Daniel's campaign was built on a foundation of business support. At
cocktail party, after drop-in, after reception, Daniel raised over
$200,000 for the race in the early stages. Included was a
thousand-dollar-per-person cocktail party at Columbia's exclusive
Palmetto Club, with the invitations signed by Bankers Trust Chairman
Hootie Johnson and Citizens and Southern Bank Chairman Hugh Chapman,
member of a prominent state textile family.
          Still, Turnipseed led the first primary with forty-four percent of
the vote, drawing much of his support from among South Carolina's
black voters, who make up nearly thirty percent of the registered
voters. Daniel finished second with thirty-one percent of the vote in
a five-candidate field. Though Turnipseed seemed poised for victory,
he lacked the fifty percent majority needed to avoid a runoff. Daniel
and his supporters used the two-week interim to launch a
television-and-telephone campaign portraying Turnipseed as an
irresponsible and dangerous radical.
          It took money to organize and Daniel was able to raise it. In ten
days, Daniel raised at least $101,000, nearly half as much as he
raised in the previous four-months of the campaign. Much of the money,
about $70,000, arrived in gifts of a thousand dollars or more,
including gifts of up to $10,000 from Riegel Textile Corp., $6,000
from Springs Mills, $5,000 from Greenwood Mills, and $4,000 from
Liberty Corp., a Greenville-based insurance and holding company whose
board chairman, Francis Hipp, is a prime mover in the Chamber of
Commerce.
          One of Daniel's phone banks was based at the State Chamber of
Commerce headquarters in Banker's Trust Tower in Columbia, provided
free by Reese, who says now he'd do the same thing anytime to defeat
Turnipseed. Seventy-nine fulltime callers contacted registered voters
in key white, upper-middle-class voters, including Republicans, with
the message: "Can I tell Mike he can count on your vote Tuesday to
help us stop Tom Turnipseed?"
          Turnipseed, meanwhile, was able to raise little money for the
Democratic runoff, and depended on the momentum from his first
primary, when he led Daniel by 39,000 votes and swept thirty-nine of
the state's forty-six counties.
          But it wasn't enough. The new strategy--backed up by fresh
money--turned the election around. Daniel, who other House members
could never remember sponsoring or leading a major piece of
legislation through the chamber, won the nomination by eight-thousand
votes.
          "They just bought the election, that's the only thing you can say,"
said Turnipseed. "It was extremely negative politics, and if you've
got the money you can get the message out to defeat anyone."
          In the general election, running against maverick Republican State
Sen. Norma Russell, Daniel's advisors attempted to flesh out his fuzzy
image by linking him to reform legislation.
          At one press conference, Daniel called for stricter limits and
tougher disclosure rules for lobbyists working the State House. Later,
Daniel advocated more stringent guidelines for the burial of nuclear
waste in the state at nuclear dumps in Barnwell, SC.
          But late in the campaign, when Daniel's advisors decided he needed
an extra push from television advertising to ensure victory against
Russell, Daniel borrowed $100,000 from Bankers's Trust. His co-signers
were several veteran State House lobbyists, including one who
represents the nuclear waste dump.
          Daniel won the general election easily. Since then, Daniel has
joined Schwartz to become the two primary elected officials pushing
the Chamber's tax and spending limitation in the General Assembly and
to the public.
          Records show his $100,000 campaign debt from '82 is gradually
disappearing. During late 1983, while Daniel toured the state for the
Chamber pushing the amendment, he received thousand dollar
contributions from Hootie Johnson, Hamrick Mills, Burlington
Industries, and Spartan Mills Chairman Walter Montgomery, and dozens
of smaller contributions from textile executives, bankers, and their
political action committees.
          
          Some of the legislative and electoral activism by business groups
is considerably more circumspect than the Schwartz and Daniel
campaigns, or the red-white-and-blue conventions the Chamber of
Commerce sponsors each autumn for legislators at one of South
Carolina's coastal resorts.
          But it is a testament to the level of influence achieved by the
Chamber and allied business groups that on some key General Assembly
votes they have been quietly able to win over the most skeptical of
enemies.
          Take the General Assembly's Legislative Black Caucus, for
example.
          Most of the state's nineteen black House members are suspicious of
big business and its expanding role of influence in state affairs. In
part, that's because the state's business-and-banking community is run
by an almost exclusively white executive power structure. And, in part
it's because business's legislative agenda, including tax breaks,
means that other groups--including the poor--end up paying more. And
in South Carolina the poor are often also black.
          "I think the influence of the special (business) interest groups
has increased substantially in the ten years since I got here," said
state Rep. John Matthews, forty-four, a school principal and farmer
who is chairman of the Black Caucus. "I don't think it's good for the
state. What happens is, they (business groups) don't tend to look at
the state as a whole, from a balanced point of view. They only look at
it from whatever position they are pushing.
          Yet when the Chamber and its allies speak, even some black
legislators tend to listen.
          In April, when the business lobby's constitutional tax and spending
limit package came up for a key House vote, it was expected to attract
little, if any, black support. But when the votes were counted, six
members of the caucus voted for the amendment on second reading and it
passed by eighty-three to twenty-four, one vote more than the
eighty-two votes (two-thirds of the House) needed for a constitutional
amendment. Even Matthews, who was absent on second reading, voted for
it on the routine third reading despite his reservations.
          "I was not totally sold on the idea," said Matthews later. "I still
have mixed emotions about it."
          Matthews and other blacks deny it, but one reason for 

the
unexpected and ultimately critical shift of black votes on the issue
could have been lobbying by the state's large banks on another,
unrelated program.
          The day before the House vote on spending limits, a black lobbyist
arrived in the House to meet with the Black Caucus.
          The lobbyist was Moses Clarkson, a well-known black businessman and
chairman of the SC Department of Health and Environmental Control, who
also lobbies for the Chamber of Commerce on certain projects.
          Clarkson was there to explain a ten-million-dollar loan program for
minority-owned businesses in South Carolina, a proposal being
considered by a group of SC bankers.
          Both Matthews and Clarkson denied any connection between
discussions of the loan program and how black members voted on the
constitutional amendment (which must still pass the SC Senate this
year to go on the ballot).
          But one member of the caucus told reporters there was definitely a
quid pro quo.
          "It was a bone being tossed out . . . come out and help us and
we'll sweeten the pot on the other side," one legislator told
The State newspaper of Columbia, saying Clarkson had
"indicated what could open on the horizon, depending on the outcome of
the (spending limit) vote.
          Why would seven black legislators vote for a constitutional
amendment which critics say could freeze or cut social program which
have greatly benefited SC minorities over the last fifteen years?
          "Some of them just thought it was an idea whose time had come,"
explained Matthews recently. "Some thought it may work."
          Of course, neither hardball lobbying nor passing out campaign
donations to politicians is anything new for business--in South
Carolina or any other state.
          For years, big utilities such as Duke Power, SC Electric and Gas,
and Carolina Power and Light gave not only campaign donations, but
also kept many legislators who were also lawyers on healthy
retainers. This practice is now largely abandoned, mostly because of
pressure from Turnipseed and other activists in the early 1970s.
          But the size of the current campaign gifts, the increasingly formal
network collecting and disbursing the donations, and the level of
access and influence in the General Assembly this organized activism
seems to be giving business, is unparalleled.
          A study of campaign contributions to members of the SC House in
1981-82, conducted by University of South Carolina-Aiken political
science professor Robert Botsch, found that eighty-three percent of
all campaign funds given to winning SC House candidates in 1982 came
from interest groups--business, lawyers, or health care groups with a
direct interest in legislation.
          "There are virtually no labor groups, no consumer groups, no
environmental groups in South Carolina," said Botsch. "And I think the
biggest surprise to me was no agricultural groups. Put all the
business and corporate contributions together and it amounts to
$270,000." Botsch's figures don't include donations from private
individuals who are major corporate chiefs, such as Milliken, who
prefer to give under their own names.
          "In effect, you have a very conservative estimate of the amount of
money given by business groups (eighty-three percent)," said
Botsch. "And it's still by far the most of any state I've ever heard
of. One study found fifty-four percent in Arizona. That's about the
highest previous figure from interest groups."
          There are contributing questions about the motives driving business
to assume their new role in politics in South Carolina.
          Businessmen, particularly professional spokesperson like Executive
Director Reese of the Chamber, insist industrialists are interested in
expanding the state's shaky economy and lifting the quality of life in
the state for everyone.
          However, critics, including former Greenville mayor and state
Development Board Chairman Max Heller, an Austrian immigrant and
self-made millionaire, describe the new role of business as one of
self-interest and obstruction to prosperity.
          "They (the state Chamber of Commerce) have been an advocate of tax
reduction. They have been an advocate of greater incentives. They have
been an advocate of investment tax credits. They have been advocates
of reducing taxes . . . regardless of what they are," Heller, now
retired and living in Miami Beach, told the Greenville News last
year. "To the best of my knowledge, they have never helped to bring an
industry in."
          Industry's role in obstructing the recruitment of new business is
an old but largely untold story in South Carolina.
          On the presidential campaign trail earlier this year, US
Sen. Ernest "Fritz" Hollings of South Carolina talked about his
experiences as governor (from 1959-63), telling audiences he not only
had to fight poverty and undereducation, but the state's business
establishment as well, in finding and persuading new industry to come
to a job-starved state. It's a story Hollings has rarely, if ever,
told publicly in South Carolina.
          Recently, when the Japanese auto firm Mazda selected Greenville as
one of three possible sites for its first US auto plant, some upstate
businessmen were upset. Eugene Stone, the seventy-seven-year-old
patriarch of Stone Manufacturing Company of Greenville, warned of
unions, a 

higher wage base, and a shortage of workers if the
four-thousand employee plant arrived in town.
          "We wouldn't like to see a big union plant coming in here in a big
way," said Stone. "We'd much prefer our boys and girls not to have a
union." Stone Manufacturing is active enough in SC politics that one
of its executives, Tom Marchant, is a member of the General Assembly
and spends much of his time in Columbia.
          Some members of the General Assembly, though unwilling to criticize
the Chamber and its business brethren publicly, say many executives
don't understand the function of government.
          "They say they want to run the state like a business, but how many
businesses have to worry about 400,000 people on food stamps?" asks
one legislator privately. "The functions of government are very
broad. You can't look at it like a profit-and-loss statement. We're
dealing with human lives, and a lot of our people are untrained,
illiterate and losing out."
          For years, surveys have ranked South Carolina's business climate
among the best in the country, but Chamber officials continually cite
surveys and their research showing the state faltering.
          Recently, State Senator Tom Smith drew up a list of at least $115
million in business tax exemptions already on the books in South
Carolina. Included were five-year exemptions from property taxes for
new and expanding industries, exemptions on certain inventories not
sold on retail level, exemptions for pollution-control equipment,
fuels used in production, and equipment used in mining and quarrying,
and many others. Up to $5.6 billion statewide is exempt from county
property taxes, according to Smith, costing counties thousands of
dollars.
          Smith, standing outside the Senate chamber, had to excuse himself
quickly and get back to the floor for a debate.
          Inside, the Senate was considering repeal of the state tax. On
retail inventories. Merchants and business groups said it would give
the state an advantage over North Carolina and Georgia in recruiting
new industry.
          Business lobbyists have been after the General Assembly for years
to approve the exemption. This year, it looked like it just might
pass.
          
            Jim Walser, thirty-four, has been a member of The
Charlotte Observer's bureau in Columbia since
1979. From 1972 until l977, he was managing editor of Osceola
Newsweekly, also based in Columbia.
          
        
        
          Voting Rights in Edgefield County
          By Mcdonald, LaughlinLaughlin Mcdonald
          Vol. 6, No. 3, 1984, pp. 13-14
          
          Edgefield is a small, rural county in South Carolina, lapped along
its western boundary by the stately Savannah River. Local residents
work on farms, pick the peaches that ripen each year in the hard,
often savage, heat of early summer or drive to nearby Aiken and
Augusta for regular city jobs. The principal town and county seat is
also called Edgefield. On most days it appears deserted, except for a
granite monument in the middle of the town square that keeps a mute
but perpetual vigil for the Confederate dead. A handful of stores just
off the square advertise U-Need-A-Biscuits, dry goods and second-hand
shoes. The trade, however, is indifferent.
          Across the way stands the historic old courthouse, the shutters
drawn tightly against its graceful floor-to-ceiling-length
windows. Upstairs in the quiet and musty chamber of the main
courtroom, faded photographs and oil paintings of Edgefield's most
famous native sons hang from the walls in solemn and numerous
procession--Thomas Hugh Wardlaw, the author of South Carolina's
Articles of Secession, Preston Smith Brooks, the Congressman who
knocked Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner insensible to the floor
of the Senate with a gutta percha cane for making an anti-slavery
speech and unfavorable comments about a favorite uncle, General Martin
Witherspoon Gary, the famed "Bald Eagle of the Confederacy,"
B. R. "Pitchfork Ben" Tillman, a reconstruction era terrorist who
later led the movement for "legal" disfranchisement of South Carolina
blacks, ten governors, any number of congressmen and judges, and
Senator Strom Thurmond, who, during most of his political career, was
foremost in the fight for white supremacy and against effective civil
right laws.
          Edgefield County, taking a chapter out of its rich Confederate
past, recently returned to confrontation and open racial controversy
when it refused to comply with the Voting Rights Act of 1965 by
submitting for preclearance its 1966 law adopting at-large
elections. Jurisdictions such as Edgefield which have long, aggravated
histories of discrimination in voting are required by Section 5 of the
Act to preclear any new election practice, either by submitting it to
the Department of Justice or by bringing a law suit in the federal
courts for the District of Columbia and proving that the practice does
not have a discriminatory purpose or effect. Edgefield refused to do
either, despite the fact that the attorney General notified local
officials that the county's at-large elections were unenforceable.
          Prior to 1966, Edgefield's county government was appointed by the
Governor upon the recommendation of the local legislative
delegation. This system of appointed government had been established
throughout the state by Tillman when he was Governor in 1894 as a way
of insuring that blacks could not elect locally their own
representatives. The appointed system worked just as Tillman
envisioned it would--no black ever served on Edgefield's county
government. The appointed system was changed in 1966, however, in part
because of reapportionment and the likelihood that Edgefield would
lose resident members of its legislative delegation by being paired
with a more populous neighboring county.
          The new form of government established for Edgefield in 1966 was a
three member council elected at-large. Although the new procedures
were clearly covered by Section 5, the county made no effort to comply
with the Voting Rights Act. Blacks subsequently ran for the county
council on numerous occasions, but because a majority of Edgefield's
voters are white, and because voting is strictly 

along racial lines,
no black was ever able to win a council seat. Indeed, no black in this
century has ever won a contested at-large election in Edgefield.
          In 1971 Edgefield amended its 1966 law to enlarge the county
council from three to five members. This time it requested the
Attorney General to approve the voting change. It did not, however,
request preclearance of the earlier 1966 legislation, nor did it
indicate that at-large elections were a post-Voting Rights Act
election change nor that an appointed system of local government had
ever been in effect. The Attorney General, after reviewing the
increase in size of the council, concluded that it did not have a
discriminatory purpose or effect and granted preclearance.
          In December of 1980, blacks in Edgefield learned for the first time
that the county was using at-large elections illegally after a search
of documents by the Department of Justice turned up the fact that the
1966 Act had never been submitted for review, and after the Attorney
General wrote local officials a formal "please submit" letter. When
the county refused to make a submission, a group of local blacks
brought suit asking that the federal district court enjoin any further
use of at-large voting until the county complied with the Voting
Rights Act.
          The district court dismissed the Edgefield County blacks'
complaint, concluding that the Attorney General--despite his
assertions to the contrary,--had in fact precleared the 1966 Act, and,
moreover, that the legal effect of -preclearing the 1971 increase in
size amendment was to preclear the underlying 1966 Act adopting
at-large elections. On February 21, 1984 a unanimous U.S. Supreme
Court disagreed and reversed. McCain v. Lybrand, 104
S. Ct. 1037 (1984).
          The Court held that the Attorney General had not considered and
precleared at-large elections in Edgefield County when he precleared
the increase in size of the council in 1971, and that there was no
such thing as constructive, or legally implied,
preclearance. According to the Court, the Voting Rights Act requires
that covered jurisdictions submit their election law changes to the
Attorney General "in some unambiguous and recordable manner...with a
request for his consideration pursuant to the Act." Edgefield had done
neither.
          Edgefield has not been alone in failing to comply with the
preclearance requirements of Section 5. From 1965 through 1968,
neither Mississippi, Louisiana nor North Carolina submitted a single
voting change for Section 5 review. Alabama submitted one in 1965, but
none for the next three years. Georgia made only one submission during
the first three years of the Act, and Virginia made none. Submissions
have increased sharply in recent years (the current rate is
approximately 1,000 submissions a month from all covered
jurisdictions), but surveys by the Department of Justice, the Southern
Regional Council and others reveal that Section 5 jurisdictions are
still using hundreds of uncleared voting practices, such as
Edgefield's at-large elections.
          The Supreme Court's decision in the Edgefield County case closes a
possible loop hole to the many jurisdictions which continue to violate
Section 5. No longer can they claim that once they precleared any
amendment to an unsubmitted voting practice, the unsubmitted practice
itself was also precleared by implication. A contrary ruling would
have allowed covered jurisdictions to play a kind of shell game with
Section 5 by enacting innocuous amendments to fundamentally
discriminatory voting practices, and contending that preclearance of
the former constituted approval of the latter.
          McCain v. Lybrand may be a break with the
racial and political traditions to places such as Edgefield where
blacks have been excluded from the electorate and where the Voting
Rights Act has been ignored, but it is a positive step in the
direction of enforcing the Fifteenth Amendment and realizing its
promise of equal political participation for all citizens.
          
            Laughlin McDonald is director of the Southern Regional
Office of the American Civil Liberties Union.
          
        
        
          Roadside Theater
          By Hatfield, SharonSharon Hatfield
          Vol. 6, No. 3, 1984, pp. 14-18
          
          The small room at the Brumley Gap Coon Hunter's Club in Poor
Valley, Virginia was so cold that the slide projector had to warm up
before the show could begin. But the coal stove and the rapidly
growing crowd soon filled the room with warmth. By the time the first
lines of Red Fox/Second Hangin' were spoken, the chill
had long been forgotten.
          Framed against the projected photographs of nineteenth-century
Appalachia, the actors began spinning a tale of hardship and violence
in the early coalfields. They told of Bad Henry Adams, a man who shot
and killed his neighbor without rising from the supper table. (The
quarrel, they said, was over a dog.)
          "There was an old man sitting right up front, and he looked bored
as hell," recalls actor Don Baker. "I was determined to get some kind
of response out of him, so I said, 'You're Bad Henry Adams, pretend
you're eating.' I looked real menacing at him and pointed my fingers
like a gun. When I did that, he just put his hand in his pocket and
whipped out a knife. I jumped back and said, 'Okay, you don't have to
if you don't want to.' After the show I found out he was stone cold
deaf."
          Roadside is a folk theater that draws on the heritage of the
Cumberland Mountains in southern Appalachia. It takes its art to
people who may never have been inside a theater. On that particular
night at the Coon Hunter's Club, Roadside's benefit performance helped
pay lawyers who were representing Brumley Gap citizens in their fight
to block a proposed pump-storage electric project in their
community. The citizens eventually prevailed and were able to prevent
their bottomland farms from being flooded to make way for the
project.
          "Grassroots art means trying to have people not only be moved
aesthetically by the quality of the art presented, but to encourage
people to get up and work from their own resources," says Dudley
Cocke, director of Roadside Theater. "Art should encourage people to
do something with their lives and communities. That transformation is
an important factor in art."
          This sense of possibility that Roadside imparts to its audiences
has carried the small theater company far from its home base in the
coalfields of Eastern Kentucky and Southwest Virginia to Off-Broadway,
Lincoln Center, the 

Midwest, California and rural Nevada, and to a
host of settings in the South. They have often found urban populations
as receptive to their improvisational storytelling as people who have
grown up in the rural, oral tradition.
          A region abundant in folkways and myth as well as in coal and
timber, Appalachia carries an image of backwardness and ignorance due
to what outsiders have written and said about it. In an area where
over half the land in many counties is still owned by corporations
based elsewhere (some as far away as London), exploitation of natural
resources and native people has been an all too common occurrence
since the late 1800s. Roadside's original full-length piece,
Red Fox/Second Hangin', for example, tells the story of
the collision of ways of life that led to a legal lynching in Wise,
Virginia, during the country's first coal boom in the 1890s.
          When Roadside founder Don Baker returned to his native Wise County
from a job as arts counselor in Washington, DC, in 1971, he did not
encounter the pristine environment often sentimentalized in novels
about Appalachia. Cars, electricity, radio and TV had been present for
decades, but a more recent technology--strip mining--was on the verge
of an unprecedented and unencumbered heydey. Another coal boom was
underway with it would come another alteration of both the social and
actual landscape.
          Roadside Theater's director, Cocke, believes that despoilation of
the land goes hand in hand with the uprooting of indigenous cultures
in southern Appalachia. "It's a whole process of impersonalization."
Perhaps it was this sense of loss that led Don Baker and his fellow
actors to seek out the richness of the past through the oral tradition
instead of more contemporary, conventional forms. "We tried to figure
out what kind of theater made sense here," Baker explains. "We had
neither the time nor the inclination for costumes, or elaborate
staging but we all had storytelling in common."
          The framework for Roadside Theater's existence was already ID place
when Baker returned to the coalfields. Appalshop (The Appalachian Film
Workshop) was a collective set up in Whitesburg, Kentucky, by the
Office of Economic Opportunity in 1969 to train mountain people for
media careers. Paradoxically, there were almost no media jobs
available in the region. After OEO funds dried up in 1972, Appalshop
secured grants from private foundations and the National Endowment for
the Arts. Today, Appalshop's media center in Whitesburg is home to a
record company and recording studio, film and video artists,
photographers, the theater company, a central administrative corps and
a soon-to-be-completed community radio station.
          Roadside was formed in 1974 from the Appalachia Actors' Workshop,
which had performed traditional plays like Peter Pan
and A Midsummer Night's Dream. Instead of using
established scripts, Roadside chose to draw its resources directly
from the collective memories of the community. The young theater
company acknowledged that conventional theater seldom reaches the
hollows, farm communities and mining camps that make up so much of
central Appalachia; and when it does, it makes little
impression. Roadside chose to build upon the strong theatrical
heritage of the mountains--the church services, music and
storytelling.
          What emerged was a style of storytelling that did not depend on
props, costumes or staging effects. The human voice, magnified by two
or three storytellers speaking simultaneously, could reach an audience
of five-hundred with the same power as when it entertained a few
neighbors on a summer evening. "We began by telling traditional tales
that we had all grown up hearing," explains Baker. "We told these
tales together, batting lines back and forth, saying some phrases in
unison, feeding off each other's rhythms."
          Roadside's first show was a collection of stories called
Mountain Tales. The stories combines familiar
Appalachian settings and music with archetypes found in folk
literature throughout the world: Mutsmeg and her two wicked sisters
(similar to Snow White and her wicked stepkin); Wicked John and the
Devil (a humorous Faustian tale) and the Jack or quest tales -- all
contain symbols identifiable to many people.
          "We were in Zuni three days," recalls actor and writer Ron Short
about a recent Roadside visit to the Zuni pueblo in New
Mexico. "There, our stories became real. Many of them deal with
hunting, tending sheep, spirits, giants. The Indian kids understood
every bit of that. We told the story of the swamp snake, and after the
show they calmly showed us a picture of theirs. On the other hand,
kids in Arlington, Virginia, for example, would say, 'That's
impossible, that snake died millions of years ago."
          "Kids in places like Arlington have been deprived of the chance to
believe in myth," agrees Cocke. "That's why they turn to figures like
ET. People like myth and need it. Our mountain tales, like those of
the Native Americans, are mythological."
          Roadside's second project was to script an original fulllength
production in the mobile, popular form they had developed with
Mountain Tales. The result, Red Fox/Second
Hangin', is a departure from the whimsy of 
Mountain
Tales to what might be called revisionist history at its
best. Don Baker had long heard tales of M.B. "Doc" Taylor, a preacher
and former US marshal! who was the second of seven men hanged in Wise
County before 1900. Red Fox, as Taylor was called, was revered by many
mountain people but was convicted of murdering an entire family. Baker
decided that this was a paradox worth exploring.
          In researching the Red Fox story, Baker enlisted the help of Dudley
Cocke, a friend from his study days at Washington and Lee
University. "We began by reading history books," says Baker. "It
wasn't until we began interviewing older people who had known Doc
Taylor or whose families passed along stories about him, that our
research began to differ markedly from the written version. We sensed
that in these interviews we were getting closer to the truth."
          Baker and Cocke collected old newspaper clippings, as well as
letters and diaries of the period. They spoke with one elderly man who
actually witnessed the hanging. The breakthrough came in the attic of
the Wise County Courthouse when they found the original transcript of
the Red Fox trial. The transcript suggested that the preacher had been
framed by powerful men in the burgeoning coal industry.
          Using a conversational tone, actors Gary Slemp, Frankie Taylor and
Don Baker merge sixty different characters into a gripping detective
story. A series of slides made from original photos of Doc Taylor's
life and times gives the story a firm setting, and a ten-minute file
segment re-enacts a crucial event.
          Like Red Fox/Second Hangin', the musical
Brother Jack also draws from folk memory and old
documents. While the title story and several of the songs were written
by actor Ron Short, other tales were adapted by Baker from material
collected within fifty miles of Roadside's home by the Federal
Writer's Project in the 1930s. In Brother Jack,
storytellers Angelyn DeBord, Tom Bledsoe and Short spin yarns alone
and in unison, trade-off lines and sing to banjo and fiddle
accompaniment. The mood changes from that of "acting a fool" in a
wrestling story to one of quiet drama in the tales of murder and coal
mining disasters. A sense of the despair and fatalism that sometimes
pervades mountain life is offset by the protagonist Jack (the
archetypal Jack of Jack and the Beanstalk), who is
always "wishing for something better."
          "The whole concept behind Brother Jack is how we in
the mountains got here," says Baker. "We talk about death, about men
and women, about the Civil War--and we've tried to deal with them in a
lot of different ways." The play also explores the perpetual question
of human purpose. "We use religion, prayer, mystical stuff, even jokes
to try to understand it, so we have a good time. But right in the
middle of the good times, something taps us on the shoulder and says,
'Hey, you can't forget'."
          Roadside's fourth major production, South of the
Mountain, premiered in October 1982 at the Regional
Organization of Theatres South (ROOTS) festival in Atlanta and enjoyed
a three-week run at the Dance Theatre Workshop in New York City in
September 1983. In this musical, author Ron Short depicts his boyhood
world in Dickenson County, Virginia, through original songs and the
reflections of his family.
          A common thread which runs through Roadside's productions is a
search for cultural identity. In the words of Short, the 1980s are "a
time of conflict" for many ethnic groups in this country. "Like here
in Appalachia, people are asking, 'Should we mainstream? Should we
change the way we talk or think?'"
          In South of the Mountain, Short deals with these
questions directly as he explores the choices that individuals must
make when their society changes from an agriculturally-based one to an
industrial, coal-mining community. One New York drama critic
complained that questions like these are no longer valid in today's
modern world. In contrast, Short recalls being overwhelmed after the
performances by people from the audiences who could relate. "The
second generation Italian people were saying to me, 'This is the story
of my life'," Short says. "the hillbilly thing was less important."
          In April, Roadside toured several predominantly Navajo communities
in southern Utah on a Western States Art Foundation tour sponsored by
the Utah Rural Arts Consortium. In the West, Cocke and Short were
amazed by parallels between the Native American cultures and their own
rural Southern one. In the Indian villages the actors found a strong
affinity for the land, an oral history tradition, and conflicts
between old and new.
          In the Native American communities, says Cocke, "There's a wide
deep gulf between the traditional way and the modern way. Two
seemingly irreconcilable ways of 

being. The two tracks go parallel but
it's a no-man's land in between. I was sitting in a house waiting for
an ancient religious dance to begin, and ever so often out the door
I'd hear bells and see a dancer or two running by to join his
group. Directly the drumming started, and in the corner I noticed that
Love Boat was on TV. The program never looked so
strange."
          The tour was perhaps a learning experience for both visitors and
hosts. Some of the Roadside cast members, with their long beards, were
objects of curiosity to be sure. Actor Tom Bledsoe, who sports a red
beard and long blond hair, was the object of some good-natured teasing
from Indian children who thought he looked like a band member of ZZ
Top. But beyond that, the Roadside cast may have been quite unlike
most Anglo people the Native Americans had seen, an example of a
possible bridge between the modern and the traditional. "After all,"
notes Cocke, "we were white people doing something between the two
extremes."
          In talking with some of the teachers at Montezuma Creek, Short
learned a truth about his own art. "They were wondering about the
possibility of developing their own kind of Appalshop. The great
conflict was how do they cross over from that religious all-sense and
tell their story so it still has meaning. I had to ask this question
of myself and my work too."
          During the past year Roadside has enjoyed the artistic fellowship
of other regional theater companies who are attempting to maintain a
sense of cultural identity. Roadside was a part of Tell Me a
Story, Sing Me a Song, a touring performance festival which
included the Free Southern Theater from New Orleans, A Traveling
Jewish Theater from San Francisco and El Theatro Campesino from San
Juan Bautista, California. Through their use of indigenous
storytelling and music, and by re-examining their people's history,
the four companies have produced some of the past decade's most
exciting original American theater.
          In the spring of 1983, the four groups performed simultaneously in
the San Franciso Bay area. Last December, the joint tour included a
festival at Jacksonville State University in Jacksonville, Alabama,
produced by Josephine Ayers, a pest producer of the Alabama
Shakespeare Festival. The show also traveled to Roadside's home base
in Whitesburg, Kentucky, and the groups will probably collaborate on
future tours.
          In bringing their art to a large, non-theater-going audience,
Roadside has spent nearly ten years on the road. The company maintains
a schedule of two hundred performances and workshops annually, as well
as a summer tent tour of coal camps and back hollows. Many of these
are one-day stands.
          For most of its existence, Roadside has had no resident theater,
instead rehearsing in church halls, living rooms or even
outdoors. According to Cocke, the peripatetic lifestyle has given
Roadside an uncanny ability to size up an audience and set the tone
accordingly. "You can imagine that some of the groups we run into have
no clue who we are," he says. "But the idea has always been to go with
the space we find ourselves in and to meet the audience more than
halfway."
          Coupled with the rigors of the traveling life is the need
for Even with the opening of the 160-seat Appalshop theater
in 1982, the theater-going audience in the Whitesburg area is so small
that the company could never hope to survive on ticket sales
alone. Government grants play a large part in keeping Roadside
afloat.
          In Lee County, Virginia, a man auctioned off a cow and used the
proceeds to help pay for the performance. Roadside was able to match
the cow's sale price with a state arts grant.
          "Theater is losing ground nationally," observes Roadside's
director, "and some smaller theaters are falling by the way. We just
keep trying to hold on. We're like a company with just one car (in
this case a blue Ford van), while other larger companies have a fleet
of limos. They may lose their limos because they can't pay for them,
but we keep plugging along with our one car."
          Finances have played a large part in Roadside's decision to tour
beyond Appalachia. The actors reject the notion that one must leave
the mountains "to be somebody" but they know the value of media
exposure and interaction with other professionals. "Touring outside
the region wasn't necessarily what we wanted to do at first," explains
Cocke, "but we made the decision to do so in 1976 or 1977. We had to
get some stamp of approval before we could convince the national
funding agencies--and ironically, the even less flexible state
agencies--that we did qualify. We'd still like to find a way to travel
less."
          Roadside's five full-time and eight part-time employees form a
community that stretches over the three counties and two states in
which they live. Touring is sometimes a family affair. Eight-month-old
Jubel Slone has been traveling with actress-mother Angelyn De Bord
since he was eight weeks old. A full-time staff at Roadside's
Whitesburg office handles bookings, mailings and fundraising. For the
most part, the company is traditionally taught. Roadside tries to keep
a reservoir of trained talent that can be called upon for various
productions. Writers Short and Baker are both currently working on new
plays.
          A criticism of Roadside's work voiced by some political activists
is the charge that the shows aren't political enought.
          "There are a lot of ways to get at politics," responds Cocke. "Some
would say a Zuni dance isn't political. Much of Roadside's work comes
from the perspective of a whole culture, way of life."
          Adds Short, "Our work takes something as fragile as cultural
identity and places it in a public forum." Short says his work has
been termed apolitical because it does not openly advocate social
change. "I feel that a political statement, like life, is a whole lot
broader than that," he says: "It's an exploration of human values that
I'm most interested in. In watching a play which explores these
values, people are free to get their own ideas."
          One way in which the theater company is exerting considerable
influence is through their work in the nation's school
systems. "Taking it to the schools is just like taking it to the
streets," observes Jack Wright, an early Roadside member.
          The actors are committed to the idea that a good performance
doesn't end with the applause. Cocke notes: "One criticism of arts
programs in general is that they don't have a conception of the more
basic values they're trying to promote beyond the immediate
performance. I'm interested 

in things that go beyond immediate
aesthetic value. We hope the people who see our shows will gain a
sense of possibility about their own lives and communities."
          In many of the school tours, the ability of the actors to ignite
this sense of worth in one's own heritage is evident. A teacher from
Chincoteague, an island off the coast of Virginia that was isolated
from the mainland until 1930, wrote to say that she hoped Roadside
could return to "help the students appreciate and develop the
marvelous supply of tales and remembrances in their own area. Our area
is very rich in this valuable resources, but there have been only
isolated efforts to explore and appreciate what we have. It would be a
wonderful experience for our entire community to have someone direct
efforts to explore our own folk history."
          According to Cocke, Roadside would like to develop the financial
resources to be able to embark on these community treasure hunts for
two or three weeks at a time in different localities. He notes that
funding sources generally lean more toward the
twenty-shows-in-twenty-four days tour than to supporting a long term
residency in one community.
          A climate of uncertain financial support places pressure on the
company to come up with consistently good productions. While this may
explain Roadside's good track record, Cocke says it "doesn't encourage
chance taking with new writing. We know some things we'd like to try,
like a summer works-in-progress festival to encourage local people to
write for us, but we just are not in a financial position to do
so."
          One indication of an outreach toward new writers is a play opening
in May at the Appalshop theater in Whitesburg. Drama students at
Whitesburg High School will present In Ya Blood, which
is based on a film by the same name which was produced by Appalshop in
1973. Under the direction of Roadside's Jeff Hawkins, the students
wrote an original script about the choices young people must make in
deciding whether to leave the mountains or stay and face the limited
opportunities for employment.
          After a decade of writing and production, another challenge facing
Roadside is one which confronts many independent artists across the
country: how does one gain access to the media? While the company has
succeeded in keeping a busy touring schedule, it has yet to reach a
wide radio and TV audience. Both Red Fox and
Brother Jack have been recorded as radio serials, but
both have yet to find a buyer. Similarly, a video presentation of Red
Fox was completed in 1983, but is still awaiting nationwide
distribution.
          "What we're facing with TV--I mean all of Appalshop's work--is that
the PBS system is not responding to independent artists," says
Roadside's director. "It's very difficult for film and video people to
get their work on PBS and get paid for it. It's a political problem
because our message generally is contrary to the message that has been
selected for viewing. Also, there is a certain style that producers
getting the money have figured out. But what PBS is forgetting is that
audiences will respond to content."
          "The gulf between traditional and modern life is not just a concern
of a particular ethnic group like the Native Americans," Cocke
maintains. "Appalachian people are struggling with the same things as
people in other parts of the country. More than anything, it's a
question of finding a path through life."
          
            Sharon Hatfield is a free lance writer who lives in
Virginia.
          
        
        
          Morality and the MX
          By Sitton, ClaudeClaude Sitton
          Vol. 6, No. 3, 1984, pp. 18, 20
          
          Self-appointed guardians of the nation's morals on the radical
right usually fall silent when the arms control issue comes up. I have
in mind the Reagan administration's supporters of moral majoritarian
stripe--the Jerry Falwells, the Jesse Helmses and the like.
          How can these radicals work themselves into a lather over food
stamps, sex on TV and abortion while ignoring a nuclear arms race that
could cut short humanity's earthly tenancy and turn the world into a
cinder? Their moral priorities seem a bit skewed.
          In May, the US House of Representatives approved construction of
fifteen MX missiles to be added to twenty-one already being
built. Never mind that our nuclear arsenal, as is true of that of the
Soviet Union, has tripled since 1969, when each nation had enough
firepower to destroy the other no matter which launched the first
strike.
          The events that could suck the two countries into a nuclear
conflict grow more common. Those of recent weeks suggest how real the
danger is.

          The Iranians and Iraqis began a new round of attacks on oil tankers
and appear determined to turn the Persian Gulf into a lake of
fire. The influential International Institute for Strategic Studies
announced in London that US relations with the Soviet Union had sunk
to their lowest point since the 1962 Cuban missile crisis. Hostilities
in Central America and US overt and covert involvement there grew
apace.
          No one has a sure way to halt this rush toward mutual
annihilation. President Reagan's approach hasn't worked. if anything,
it has pushed the world nearer the brink by the massive, and costly,
weapons buildup. But an alternative was suggested the other day to by
Joseph Cardinal Bernardin, the archbishop of the Roman Catholic
Diocese of Chicago, in a commencement speech at Emory University in
Atlanta.
          Bernardin headed the informal committee of Catholic bishops last
year that issued the pastoral letter "The Challenge of Peace: God's
Promise and Our Response." Unlike the radicals of the political right,
he thinks moral purpose has a vital role to play in this area.
          To ignore the moral dimension of foreign policy, says the cardinal,
is to erode both the religious and constitutional heritage of
America. The first provides for moral assessment of public policy
through the insights given us by religious pluralism. The second
supports such moral values as respect for life and reverence for the
law.
          "In the past," says the cardinal, "war was used as a last resort to
protect key political values. In our time, the use of nuclear weapons
would threaten all our values--political, cultural and human. Such an
acknowledgement drives us to the conclusion that the prevention of
nuclear war must be given primacy in the political process."
          Bernardin represents no peace-at-any-price faith. Catholics, as he
points out, have had a long and painful experience with communism, in
Lithuania, Hungary and Poland, for example.
          "We cannot be naive," says the cardinal. "Some cold realism is
needed, as we stated in our pastoral letter. But the depth and
seriousness of US-Soviet divisions on a whole range of issues should
not make us lose perspective concerning a central moral and political
truth of our age:
          "If nuclear weapons are used, we all lose. There will be no
victors, only the vanquished; there will be no calculation of costs
and benefits because the costs will run beyond our ability to
calculate."
          Bernardin thinks that giving first priority to prevention of use of
nuclear weapons requires that arms control be insulated from other
US-Soviet differences, an end to the policy of "linkage" pursued by
the Reagan administration. Without that separation, he argues rightly
that there always will be enough division to block arms control.
          No doubt the cardinal shares the concern of the moral majoritarians
over sins of the flesh. But his concerns reach far beyond their narrow
perspective. Unlike them, Bernardin knows that Americans no longer
live in a world in which war can be used as a tool of foreign policy,
for that could lead to the most immoral of all acts, the destruction
of humankind.
          
            Claude Sitton is editor of the Raleigh News and
Observer
          
        
        
          Southerners in Congress Save the MX
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 6, No. 3, 1984, p. 19
          
          More than a year ago, in May of 1983, when the US House of
Representatives and Senate approved flight testing of the MX missile
and development work on the Reagan Administration's latest proposal to
base the MX, Representative Les AuCoin (D-Ore) warned his colleagues
how difficult it would be to stop production of the missile once any
money had begun to be spent. "No strategic weapons system that has
ever passed this stage of funding . . . has been permanently
cancelled," he said. With House votes in November of 1983 and in May
of 1984, the MX has indeed moved to the production line.
          In the November House vote and again this May, no region of the
country supported the MX so strongly as did the members of Congress
from the eleven Southern states. In both instances, the switching of
only a handful of votes would have blocked the MX.
          Attempts to stop funding of the MX failed by a vote of 208 to 217
on November 1, 1983 and by a vote of 212 to 218 on May 16, 1984.
          Southern members of Congress provided eighty-six votes in support
of the MX this May. Fifty-one of the seventy-two House Democrats who
supported continued funding were Southern Democrats. Particularly
damaging were the votes of six Southern Democrats who had opposed the
MX in November, but who switched and supported it in May. North
Carolina Democrats Ike Andrews, Tim Valentine and Charlie Rose; South
Carolina's Robin Tallon; Florida's Claude Pepper; and Ron Coleman of
Texas.
          "Y" signifies a Yea vote to stop the MX. "N" signifies a Nay vote,
in support of the MX. Vote #1 was taken 11/1/1983; vote #2 on
5/16/1984.
          
            
              
                ALABAMA      
                1       
                2  
              
              
                Bevill (D)   
                N       
                N
              
              
                Dickinson (R)
                N
                N 
              
              
                Edwards (R)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Erdreich (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Flippo (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Nichols (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Shelby (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                ARKANSAS 
              
              
                Alexander (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Anthony (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Bethune (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Hammerschmidt
                Y       
                Y 
              
              
                FLORIDA 
              
              
                Bennett (D)
                Y       
                Y 
              
              
                Bilirakis (R) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Chappell (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Fascell (D)
                Y       
                Y 
              
              
                Fuqua (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Gibbons (D) 
                Y
                Y 
              
              
                Hutto (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Ireland (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Lehman, W (D) 
                Y
                Y 
              
              
                Lewis, T (R)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                MacKay (D) 
                Y       
                Y
              
              
                Mack (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                McCollum (R)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Mica (D) 
                Y       
                Y
              
              
                Nelson (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Pepper (D)
                Y       
                N 
              
              
                Shaw (R) 
                N       
                Y
              
              
                Smith, L (D) 
                Y
                Y 
              
              
                Young C (R)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                GEORGIA 
              
              
                Barnard (D)
                ?      
                N 
              
              
                Fowler (D) 
                Y       
                Y
              
              
                Gingrich (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Hatcher (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Jenkins (D) 
                N       
                Y
              
              
                Levitas (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Ray (D)
                N       
                N  
              
              
                Rowland (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Thomas, L (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Darden (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                LOUISIANA 
              
              
                Boggs (D)
                N       
                Y 
              
              
                Breaux (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Huckaby (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Livingston (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Long, G (D) 
                Y       
                Y
              
              
                Moore (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Roemer (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Tauzin (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                MISSISSIPPI 
              
              
                Dowdy (D)
                Y       
                Y 
              
              
                Franklin (R) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Lott (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Montgomery (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Whitton (D) 
                Y       
                Y
              
              
                NORTH CAROLINA 
              
              
                Andrews (D)
                Y       
                N 
              
              
                Britt (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Broyhill (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Clarke (D)
                Y       
                Y 
              
              
                Hefner (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Jones, W (D) 
                N
                Y 
              
              
                Martin, J (R)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Neal (D) 
                N       
                Y
              
              
                Rose (D) 
                Y
                N 
              
              
                Valentine (D)
                Y       
                N 
              
              
                Whitley (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                SOUTH CAROLINA 
              
              
                Campbell (R)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Derrick (D) 
                Y       
                Y
              
              
                Hartnett (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Spence (R)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Spratt (D) 
                Y       
                Y
              
              
                Tallon (D) 
                Y
                N 
              
              
                TENNESSEE 
              
              
                Boner (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Cooper (R) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Duncan (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Ford (D)
                Y       
                Y 
              
              
                Gore (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Jones, E (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Lloyd (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Quillen (R) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Sundquist (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                TEXAS 
              
              
                Andrews (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Archer (R) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Bartlett (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Brooks (D)
                Y       
                Y 
              
              
                Bryant (D) 
                Y       
                Y
              
              
                Coleman (D) 
                Y
                N 
              
              
                de la Garza (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Fields (R) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Frost (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Gonzalez (D)
                Y       
                Y 
              
              
                Gramm (R) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Hall, R (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Hall, S (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Hance (D) 
                N       
                ?
              
              
                Hightower (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Kazen (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Leath (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Leland (D) 
                Y
                Y 
              
              
                Loeffler (R)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Ortiz (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Patman (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Paul (R)
                Y       
                Y 
              
              
                Pickle (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Stenholm (D) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Vandergriff (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Wilson (D) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Wright (D) 
                Y
                Y 
              
              
                VIRGINIA 
              
              
                Bateman (R)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Bliley (R) 
                N       
                N
              
              
                Boucher (D) 
                Y
                Y 
              
              
                Daniel (D)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Olin (D) 
                Y       
                Y
              
              
                Parris (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Robinson (R)
                N       
                N 
              
              
                Sisisky (D) 
                Y       
                Y
              
              
                Whitehurst (R) 
                N
                N 
              
              
                Wolf (R)
                N       
                N 
              
            
          
        
        
          Benjamin Elijah Mays 1894-1984
          By Cook, Samuel DuBoisSamuel DuBois Cook
          Vol. 6, No. 3, 1984, pp. 21-24
          
          As I have said so often, I am one of Bennie Mays' "boys." I have
been one of his "boys" since I was a kid in the rolling countryside
and on the red hills of Griffin, Georgia, and I will be one of his
"boys" until I die.
          Dr. Mays had a love affair with the basic and perennial values of
the human enterprise: excellence, decency, justice, non-violence,
love, good will, reason, nobility, concern for others, compassion for
human suffering, respect for the dignity and worth of every man,
woman, and child, sensitivity to human needs, a heightened sense of
personal and social responsibility, and the love of God. He was so
many things: prophet, scholar, educator, apostle of social justice,
champion of human excellence, author, humanist, humanitarian, teacher,
voice of the voiceless, a chief founder of the Civil Rights Movement
and the Black Revolution, a major architect of the New South,
inspirer, motivator, and transformer of youth, and peerless spokesman
of the gospel of Jesus of Nazareth.
          Dr. Mays was a hard taskmaster. I sometimes thought that it was
easier to please God than Dr. Mays. His standards for himself and
others were inordinately high, lofty, and demanding. Truly, they could
never be fully satisfied--thank God. He kept us stretching, striving,
aspiring, and always looking up.
          I have told him that the title of one of his books, Lord,
the People Have Driven Me On, was a great misnomer. The Lord
knows that Bennie Mays drove the people on. And I told him that Bennie
Mays drove the good Lord on. He was always inexhaustible, creatively
restless, irrepressible, tireless, always dreaming of new worlds to
conquer, new 

mountains to climb, new rivers to cross, new tasks to
tackle, new challenges to meet. Life, for him, could never be
finished. No wonder that, in spite of the spate of books he wrote, he
was working on three more when he died. And he always thought that his
best book, on the Brown public school desegregation case of 1954, was
yet to be written. He lived in the world of anticipation, and not
simply in the world of memory. He lived in the creative world of
hope. He died dreaming. He died aspiring to greater things and loftier
heights. What a magnificent way to die! Dr. Mays was a daring,
incurable, and incredible dreamer. Dreams were a central part of his
longevity, productivity, meaning, zest, and inspiration.
          Dr. Mays was born free. He lived free. He died free. Always
courageous, he was a prophet to the core of his being--always
emphasizing the creative tension between the "is" and the "ought,"
promise and fulfillment, the Kingdom of man and the Kingdom of God. He
never forgot the prophetic responsibility to speak "truth to power."
He was always his own man, always a man of great moral courage,
rebellion, and affirmation. Fierce independence and individualism,
nobility, and supreme integrity were hallmarks of his great
life. "Never sell you soul" was a central theme and imperative of his
teachings and life. His soul was never for sale to anybody at anytime
for any price. In a world of constant pressures and counter-pressures,
he had supreme integrity, character, and incorruptibility.
          Bennie Mays taught us how to live. He also taught us how to
die. Miss Cordeila Blount, his devoted niece, said to me the day of
his death: "Bernie was so remarkable. He was remarkable in life. He
was remarkable in the twilight of life and in death." Yes, our beloved
Dr. Mays lived with grace and dignity, and died with grace and
dignity.
          Even as he confronted the frailties of age and death, Buck Bennie
was mighty tough. He made a game of wrestling with, and defying
death. He was utterly defiant and outrageously uncooperative. More
than once, he escaped the cold clutches of death, with the clarion
call "I ain't got time' to die." "I'm too busy serving my master."
Until the final encounter, he won every battle with death. This was so
symbolic of the man. Dr. Mays was always a great fighter--whatever or
whomever the foe.
          Mrs. Sally Warner, his superb confidante, great friend, and
assistant, told him, after he had been in intensive care at the
hospital a few months ago, that she had called several people. Alert
and sharp as always, he got the message. As only Bennie Mays would and
could say, he commented: "I fooled you, didn't I?" He fooled all of us
so many times.
          "The time and place of a man's life on earth are the time and place
of his body," said Howard Thurman, "but the meaning and significance
of his life are as vast and as 

far-reaching as his gifts, his times,
and the passionate commitment of all his powers can make it."
          Dr. Mays touched, enriched, inspired, educated, motivated,
transformed so many lives--black and white, rich and poor, male and
female, learned and untutored, Gentile and Jew, Protestant and
Catholic, Northerner and Southerner, religionist and secularist. So
many owe him so much.
          Dr. Mays lived a long life. But longevity has no intrinsic
merit. As Dr. Mays reminded us so often, it is not how long but how
well. It is not the quantity of years but the quality of service that
counts. Dr. Mays gave to life the highest and the best we can give to
life: the gift of self. He followed his own advice that "Lives are
saved by giving them away." "The truly great men of history are not
those who hoard and keep," said Dr. Mays, "but those who dedicate
their lives to some great cause and who give themselves to the benefit
of the people." Again, "the only way to save our lives is to give
ourselves to others in some worthwhile service. Giving is the inherent
in living."
          Dr. Mays was one of the world's greatest educators and 

philosophers
of education because he applied the Christian conception of human
vocation and service to the whole educational process.
          With ringing eloquence and prophetic power, Bennie Mays insisted
that
The search for happiness is an unworthy
goal. y you go out looking for happiness, you don't know what to look
for or where to look. yyou marry looking for happiness, it is an
unworthy aim. People should marry because they love each other; not
for happiness, but for better, for worse, for richer, for
poorer.
          It is
Not important that people be happy. Was
Moses happy? .... Was Socrates happy? .... Was Jesus happy? .... Was
Mahatma Gandhi happy? ....
          
            
              We argue still further, what right have we
to be happy? They tell me half of the people of the earth are starving
Why should we have bread enough and to spare while our brother
starves? To be personal, who am I? I am no better than my starving
brother. Who am I to be happy? But for the grace of God. I, too, might
be starving Who am I to ride around in Pullman cars and jets while
others starve?
            
          
          
            
              Where may happiness be
found?
            
          
          
            
              If happiness is to be found, it will be
found in noble endeavor, endeavor that gives satisfaction and is
beneficial to mankind. It will be found in struggling, in toiling, and
in accomplishing something worthwhile. Happiness, if it is to be
found, will be found in a job well done ....
            
          
          
            
              If happiness is to be found, it will be
found in pursuing and accomplishing something worth" while, and the
quest must be continuous--no complacency and no
satisfaction.
            
          
          
            
              If happiness is to be found, it will be
found in noble living A man lives nobly when he has an honest
conscience, when he can say: The community is better off because I
gave my best to it. I did not exploit people for my personal gain
. . .
            
          
          
            
              If happiness is to be found, it will be
found when we live more for others than we do for
ourselves.
            
          
          Yes, Bennie Mays represents the Kingdom not of this world. The
Kingdom not of this world is the Kingdom of God. It is the Kingdom of
truth, love, righteousness, human service, social and racial justice
and caring--beyond race, color, creed, sex, ethnicity, culture and
other boundaries of estrangement.
          What greater legacy can a person leave to his loved ones, friends,
disciples and fellow human beings than the precious, unique and
enduring legacy of Bennie Mays?
          You and I must make his vision, legacy and work our own. Because of
the death of Bennie Mays, you and I, all of us, must do a little more
to promote the cause of excellence, decency, justice, the higher
possiblities of history and culture and the Beloved Community of all
of God's children. To mind come the words of Micah: "He has showed
you, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord require of you but to
do justice, and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with your
God?"
          So, our very special Dr. Mays, our beloved Bennie Ma. our "Buck
Bennie," who has meant so much to so many, we mournfully and yet with
joy, say: Hail, thanks, love and farewell.
          
            Samuel DuBois Cook is President of Dillard University and
a member of the executive committee of the Southern Regional
Council. Dr. Cook's remarks are excerpted from his eulogy to
Dr. Mays.
            Excerpts from the eulogy by Samuel DuBois Cook, March 31,
1984.
          
          
            By Gloster, Hugh M.Hugh M. Gloster 
            Vol. 6, No. 3, 1984, p. 22
            Dr. Mays had his "finest hour" as President of Morehouse College,
where he worked for thirty of his eighty-nine years--from 1921 to 1924
as a teacher and from 1940 to 1967 as President. When he assumed the
presidency in 1940, the College had been seriously weakened for eleven
years by self-sacrificing contributions of President, teachers,
facilities, and land to the Atlanta University Affiliation and by
inflation, recession, unemployment, and other ravages of the Great
Depression. By the time he retired in 1967, however, he had laid a
firm foundation for the future growth and development of the
College.
            Dr. Mays had to wait a long time to see the demise of
disfranchisement and segregation in Georgia. He was fifty-two years of
age and had been President of Morehouse for six years before he was
finally able to vote in local and state elections, and he was
seventy-two and nearing retirement at Morehouse before he finally saw
segregation fade away in this state.
            The overthrow of segregation in Georgia required a massive effort,
and at the forefront of that effort were many students of
Dr. Mays. Hamilton Holmes was one of the first two blacks to gain
admission to the University of Georgia. Martin Luther King, Jr., upset
segregation first in Montgomery and finally throughout the country and
then went on to receive the Nobel Peace Prize and become the nation's
greatest civil rights leader. Lonnie King and Julian Bond, Morehouse
students, led the sit-ins that integrated restaurants and hotels in
Atlanta. Maynard Jackson became the first black Mayor of Atlanta, and
honorary alumnus Andy Young succeeded him in that office. In addition,
Michael Lomax was elected as the first Black Chairman of the Fulton
County Commission, and Horace Ward was appointed as the first black
Federal Judge in this state.
          
          
            --From the funeral tribute to Dr. Mays by Hugh
M. Gloster, President of Morehouse College.
          
          
            By 
              Mays, Benjamin E.Benjamin E. Mays 
            Vol. 6, No. 3, 1984, p. 23
            As a child my life was one of frustration and doubt. Nor did the
situation improve as I grew older. Long before I could visualize them,
I knew within my body, my mind, and my spirit that I faced galling
restrictions, seemingly insurmountable barriers, dangers and
pitfalls. I had to find answers to two immediate and practical
problems: 1) How could I overcome my father's immutable opposition to
my insatiable desire to get an education; and 2) Even if I succeeded
in changing Father's attitude, how could I get the money to go away to
school? I knew that my father had no money to give me, but I longed
for his sympathetic approval, or at least his consent.
            There was a third problem which, though not so immediate, was even
more urgent--more frustrating, more confusing. This was a "white man's
world." How could I be free in this world? How could I grow to my full
stature as a man? The white boy born in Greenwood County, South
Carolina knew that the county, the state, and the nation belonged to
the white world and therefore to him. As one of the disinherited, one
of the black boys, how could I know that a part of the county, state,
and the nation belonged to me too? How could I exist, let alone live,
without cringing and kowtowing to white men as I had seen my elders
do? How could I walk the earth with dignity and pride? How could I
aspire to achieve, to accomplish, to "be somebody" when there were for
Negroes no established goals? Moreover, aspiring was dangerous. It was
all right for a Negro to "hitch his wagon," but he'd better not "hitch
it to a (white) star." My teacher in the one-room school, my pastor,
and the church people of Mount Zion had inspired me to want an
education far beyond what the four-month Brickhouse School could
offer, and away beyond what my parents could possibly provide. How
then could I get to a better school? How could I manage to remain in
school more than four months out of the year?
            My greatest opposition to going away to school was my father. When
I knew that I had learned everything I could in the one-room
Brickhouse School and realized how little that was, my father felt
that this was sufficient--that it was all I needed. Weren't there only
two honest occupations for Negro men--preaching and farming? My father
must have repeated this dictum a thousand times. What did schooling
have to do with farming? Would reading all the books in the world
teach a man how to plow, to plant cotton and corn, gather the grain,
and harvest the crop? Since my father saw no future for his sons
except farming, education was not necessary. It was equally
superfluous for the ministry. God "called" men to preach; and when He
called them, He would tell them what to say!
            Father had another reason. He was convinced that the education went
to one's head and made him a fool and dishonest. One of my cousins, a
bright sixth- or seventh-grade scholar who taught at one of the county
schools for the miserable salary paid Negro teachers during that
period, forged a note on a bank, skipped town, and was never
caught. He never returned to his home community. Later he joined the
Ninth Cavalry. He wrote me occasionally, telling how much better the
racial situation was in his part of Kansas than it was in the
South. Whenever I pressed my father about further schooling, he would
always remind me of what my cousin had done. The more education, the
bigger the fool and crook! Though less literate than my father, my
mother was far more understanding of my problems, and was a
sympathetic listener to my hopes and dreams, my fears and plans. She
had only two things to give me--her love and her prayers. She gave
both with an open heart.
            My mother believed that God answered prayers. Though not so
credulous or optimistic about prayer as she, I was nonetheless greatly
influenced by her prayer life. I sought a way out through prayer. I
prayed frequently as I worked in the field and many nights alone in
the moonlight. I often plowed to the end of the row, hitched the mule
to a tree, and went down into the woods to pray. On moonlight nights,
I would leave the house and go into the field and pray. My prayers
were all variations of the same theme: a petition to God to enable me
to get away to school. My desire for an education was not only a dream
but a goal that drove me and prodded me, day and night. I left the
farm not to escape it but to find my world, to become myself.
            I accepted the prayer jargon of the older people. I asked God to
move out of my way "every hindrance and cause" which kept me from
getting an education. Afterward I was sorry that I had prayed that
way, for if God had answered my prayers as spoken, Father would have
been the first obstacle to be moved out.
          
          
            --Benjamin E. Mays, Born To Rebel
(1971).
          
        
      
    
  
