
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 6, Number 1,
	       1984
        
          Southerners and Central America. The Ideology of
Domination
          By Kirkpatrick, DowDow Kirkpatrick
          Vol. 6, No. 1, 1984, pp. 1-3, 5-6
          
          
            Southerners, of all US citizens, should be best equipped to
understand the peoples' rebellion in Central America. The forces which
impoverished the South for a hundred years are the same which produce
oppression in Latin America.
            The primary issue is the ideology of domination versus dependency,
not East versus West, capitalism versus
communism. The application of the ideology of domination has produced
dependency in Central America and the US South. Dependency results in
the oppression of poverty.
            Born a Yankee, Georgia is my home. Almost fifty years ago I made
that choice. Native born Southerners have affirmed my decision by
accepting me as something other than a carpetbagger. This personal
history may give a perspective on the history of our region not seen
so clearly by others.
            Another factor sharpens my perceptions. I am a member of The
Century Club, persons who have traveled in one hundred countries. I
prefer to think of myself as at home in the world--not a Southerner,
nor a Yankee, not even an American. I resent passports and
visas. National boundaries are anachronisms in today's world.
            For nine years I have served The United Methodist Church as a
missionary-in-reverse. Based on the conviction that God is speaking a
special word today among the oppressed poor of the world--a word North
Americans need 

to hear--have lived a substantial portion of each year
somewhere in Latin America. During these periods of residence I have
not preached to them, nor taught, nor been associated with a project
which did something for them. Just the reverse, I have sought to live
in Peru, Central America, Cuba and Brazil in a listening, learning
mode.
            The balance of each year is spent in the United States (my mission
field) trying to preach and teach to North Americans. The implications
for us of what Latin Americans know about religious faith--that we
don't seem to know--is my message.
            From such experiences I expect Southerners to be aware of the
parallels between their impoverishments and the plight of the Latin
American poor.
            In February 1982 I was invited to debate, in Atlanta, Lawrence
Pezzullo, US Ambassador to Nicaragua during the end of the Somoza
dictatorship. In preparation for this event I clarified my memory of
one of the dramatic examples of this domination/dependency
syndrome.
            Former Georgia Governor Ellis Arnall has documented his role in
helping to liberate the South from the disparity of freight rates kept
in place by a conspiracy of northern railroads. "As a boy in Newnan I
learned about the poverty of a great segment of our Georgia
people. . .As I grew older. . . I realized that the south was merely a
colonial appendage of the imperial domain called the north."
            Let me set next to Arnall's image, "a colonial appendage of the
imperial domain," a conversation with the chief economist of the
Sandinista Government of Nicaragua in November 1983.
            Xabier Gorostiaga, Jesuit priest, Cambridge-trained economist,
heads the Central American Institute for Economic and Social
Research. The Institute has recently issued An Alternative
Policy for Central America and the Caribbean (June
1983. Summary and Conclusions of a Policy Workshop held in The Hague),
which includes the observation that "The United States' commitment to
preserving its hegemony in the region has given the struggle for
social justice in Central America an anti-imperialist character."
            To return to former Governor Arnall: "The people of the south had
reason to know that he who controls the means of production has a
vehicle for tyranny."
            During his terms as Attorney General (1939-43) and Governor
(1943-47) of the state of Georgia, Ellis Arnall carried the case of
the South against "the imperial domain" to the US Supreme Court, won
freedom from "the North's stangle-hold," and helped break the
"shackles." Until then it cost thirty-nine percent more to send a
freight shipment from Atlanta to New York than the same shipment
coming from north to south. This was only one of many repressive
economic, social and political factors operating against the
development of the South.

            Governor Arnall's description of his homeland in the 1920s and '30s
sounds like El Salvador and Guatemala today:
            
              I found that the only way the few textile mills in the South
could stay in business competitively with their Northern counterparts
was by paying low wages, requiring the workers to live in mill
villages owned by the companies, requiring the workers to trade with
the mill commissaries on credit terms which were much higher than
offered by non-company stores, to use child labor and other devices
which the mill owners did not want to employ but which were required
for them to stay in business.
            
            He continues with a description which accurately parallels what I
have heard from economists in Nicaragua and Cuba concerning the state
of the economies they inherited from US--supported Somoza and Batista
domination:
            
              The end of the Civil War intensified the North's strangle
hold, since the exhausted South was left entirely without capital with
which to develop its own manufacturing. The North concentrated on the
exploitation of the Southern natural resources which were so
plentiful. The Northern owners of Southern plants confined their
efforts to crude processing of these raw materials, shipping them
north for final fabrication into usable articles....As each carload of
raw materials moved north, that much less wealth was left in the
South.
            
            This should help us understand what Latin Americans mean when they
say, capitalists decapitalize dependent
nations.
            The turning point in Governor Arnall's struggle came in 1942 when
he won a decision (Georgia vs. Evans) in which the US Supreme Court
held that Georgia was a "person" and could sue as a person under the
antitrust law.
            Southerners with a strong streak of humanity should be expected to
regard Central America as a "person." This perspective would challenge
the Reagan Administration's insistence upon seeing the Central America
revolution as a battleground between the forces of "communism" and
those of "freedom."
            The only way to understand correctly the Sandinista Government and
the rebellions in El Salvador and Guatemala is to know the
revolutionary significance of regarding the people of those nations as
"persons." This is the definitive difference between US policy and the
Central American Alternative:
            
              
                The politics of counter-insurgency and containment adopted by
the United States over a decade ago, but applied with renewed zeal
under the Reagan administration, is essentially defensive.
                It
proposes no alternative other than that of repressing popular
demands.
              
            
            I have added the emphasis, because that sentence clearly
distinguishes the differences between US and Sandinista regard for
persons.
            What kind of alternative results from a commitment to people as
persons?
            
              
                The first proposition is that no Regional Alternative can be
implemented successfully unless it conforms to what we have called the
'logic of the majority', that is to say, any solution must, above all,
conform to the interests of the Region's poor who constitute the vast
majority of the population. If a Regional Alternative is to be
genuinely democratic, its fundamental characteristic must be to give
the common people not merely a voice, but the leading voice, in
constructing their own society.
              
            
            This contrasts with other models based on the logic of profit,
capital and growth for growth's sake.
            
              
                Ordinary men and women have come to see themselves as agents
of social change and have begun to recover their identity both as
individuals and as citizens of a nation.
              
            
            While US observers focus on our fetish for 'elections' as a sign of
democracy, we easily overlook the democratic pluralism, more extensive
than a two party electoral process, in the emergence of popular
organizations. These grass roots organizations, pluralistic in their
political positions and multi-class in composition, provide a more
representative presence in the Council of State in Nicaragua than the
Congress of the US.
            I recently spent some time with the Council of State which is
composed of elected representatives of thirty-six different
organizations, only six or seven of which are political parties. The
diversity there makes the Senate of the United States look like a
collection of clones. Again, quoting from the Central American
Institute's Alternative Policy:
            
              
                The formal political institutions of El Salvador and
Guatemala have collapsed ... Given this situation, popular struggles
are opening up new space for a political alternative based on a mixed
economy, non-alignment and new forms of participatory
democracy.
              
            
            A second fundamental of this Alternative is nonalignment. Xabier
Gorostiaga defines what this means--diversifying the dependency. "We
intend to build an economy," he said in private conversation, "which
rests on four equal legs: one-fourth with the US, one-fourth with
Latin American countries, one-fourth with Europe, and one-fourth with
Africa and the socialist countries, including Russia. In the past our
national economy rested very unevenly on two legs--one very big one
with the US and a much smaller one with the rest of the world. This is
no way to stabilize a society. We must diversify our dependency."

            
              
                As we approach the end of the twentieth century, it is clear
that national sovereignty and self-respect cannot be attained by
living in anyone's 'backyard.' In failing to concede political and
economic space for non-alignment, the United States, far from
guaranteeing its security, jeopardizes it. This, above all, must be
the message of all those, including friends of the United States in
Western Europe, who wish to promote peace.
              
            
            The third proposition is that any alternative must be regional in
character. "For the many small (in some cases island) economies of the
area, the only alternative to economic dependence on the United States
is the construction of a regional market. . ."
            This is the truth behind the falsehood which accuses Nicaragua of
supplying the El Salvador revolution. "One must remember that the
Region has a shared colonial history, and, today, an increasingly
shared experience of oppression and violence against which so many
common people of the Region are united in different forms of
struggle."
            Governor Ellis Arnall rightly tried to lay Southern oppression on
the consciences of Northern states as a national concern. The same
lesson is being clearly spoken from Central America to the United
States' South, North and to the entire world.
            In a 1943 address to the National Governors' Conference in
Columbus, Ohio, Arnall said:
            
              
                We (in the South) have seen, for eighty years, our land
despoiled and exploited in an effort to turn it into a colonial empire
whose riches others might enjoy. We have seen our section isolated
from the rest of America by economic barriers that impoverished our
people. We have seen the leadership of other sections of America turn
away from our urgent pleas for justice with blind eyes and deaf ears
... We ask but one thing: Equality and full fellowship within that
union which we helped to create. We ask no more. We will compromise
for no less.
              
            
            The same plea comes from Latin America to North America in this
moment. We cannot talk of our affluence without including their
poverty. They are poor because the poor subsidize the rich. We could
not be what we are without making them what they are. As north and
south must be seen as one unit in the US, so the south and north of
the American hemisphere must be regarded as a single unit.
            There is a more fundamental factor in Central America which
explains the present social, economic and political ferment. It is an
actuality with which Southerners should be easily 'simpatico'--the
religious factor.
          
          
            II
            Central America is engaged in a twentieth century biblical
reformation. Failure to see this is to misread everything else going
on there.
            "The Bible Belt" is a characterization of the South meant to be
derisive. The label could be appropriated positively, if allegiance to
the Bible links us to a profound understanding of Central America
revolution as biblical reformation.
            A new Christian faith, born in struggle, lived biblically, is as
radically different from the conventional religion practiced in US
churches as Luther's Reformation differed from the theology of Pope
Leo X in the sixteenth century.
            This is not just a "religious" phenomenon. Believer or not, the
person who ignores the social, economic and political results of this
biblical reformation flaws the entire analysis. The reading then is as
shallow as a social, economic, and political history of the past four
centuries would be with Luther omitted.
            The modern day reformation covers all of Latin America. Central
America is simply the place where, in this moment, it is most
dramatically available to our understanding.
            The Regional Alternative referred to above is the social, economic
and political outcome of reading the Bible from the perspective of the
oppressed poor. If the 'good news' is that God has taken an option for
the poor (as Jesus says when annoucing his reason for coming), then
the mission of the church must be to opt for the poor. When the church
lives faithfully this option, a social, economic and political
revolution, based on the logic of the majority, may be expected.
            I'm tired of hearing Marx given all the credit for what Jesus
initiated.
            Who can estimate, for example, the impact on the future of this
hemisphere of a hundred-thousand small organizations of the poor in
the slums of Brazil--communities which fight political battles for
justice and read the scriptures together in the light of their
struggles?
            The rich, who study the Bible and accept its call to conversion,
discover the same truth, so obvious to the poor. Don Emilio Baltodano
is the Comptroller General of Nicaragua. Before the revolution he was
a wealthy coffee exporter. He asked his fourteen children and
children-in-law what they wanted of his estate before he gave his
wealth to the Sandinistas. They wanted nothing. Several of them are
Ministers in the present government.
            Let me report some observations made at a weekly Bible study I
attended in Don Emilio's home in November 1983. A young mother, who
was described to me as from perhaps the richest family of anyone
present that night, said, "Thank God I don't have the security and
isolation I previously had. Then we went to the beach as a family. Now
all my children, except the five year old, are in the mountains. We go
as a 

family to pick coffee. Then we had no understanding of our
people. Now we don't have privileges above others, but we are close to
the people."
            Another responded to Luke 12:32. "According to the gospel the poor
are giving the most, not the rich. They give everything. The gospel is
demanding more of us. We have not given enough yet. We must change our
idea of family. These crucified people are our family. They are our
hope."
            The dean of the law faculty reminded the group that their social
class were descendants of historical figures of the nation. "We have
not only our own sins, but the historical injustices. Our past
privileged position was a bad privilege. Now it is a good privilege to
be a servant of the poor."
            Ricardo Chavarria, Vice-Minister of Energy, recalls the scripture
of the evening's study saying, of those who have much, much will be
expected. "But historically much was demanded of the poor. To live in
Nicaragua today is a privilege far greater than to be rich. The rest
of Latin America will be expecting a testimony of Christians. If we
fail, it will affect all of Latin America."
          
          
            III
            Of all the conflicting interpretations, what can we believe about
Central America? It is not oversimplification to summarize the truth
in four points:
            The revolution of the poor is happening.
            It is a revolution we can't stop. The only impact the US is having
and seems intent on having is to make the victory of the oppressed
more costly--for them and for ourselves.
            It's a revolution we shouldn't want to stop. To be true to our own
idealism we should be on the side of the people, instead of against
them.
            The Latin American revolution is a biblical reformation which will
shape every aspect of the future of this hemisphere.
          
          
            Dow Kirkpatrick is a missionary-in-reverse of The United
Methodist Church, bringing the Christian Faith as believed and
practiced in Latin America to North Americans. A substantial portion
of each year is spent in residence somewhere in Latin America,
listening and learning From January to June he holds
Encuentros throughout the US. In these spiritual life
retreats he helps persons re-examine their own faith in the light of
Latin American realities. Most recently (fall of 1983) he travelled to
Argentina, Brazil, Nicaragua and Cuba--his sixth visit to Nicaragua
and seventh to Cuba.
          
        
        
          The Kissinger Commission Report
          By Kirkpatrick, DowDow Kirkpatrick
          Vol. 6, No. 1, 1984, p. 2
          
          The Kissinger Commission report (the President's commission on
Central America) fails to recommend an alternative for Central
America. It calls for more of what has already failed.
          This failure results from flawed premises. The first is that US
national security overrides everything else. The second is the
assumption that US security can best be assured by casting the problem
as geopolitical. "The real enemy of the United States is not Russia,
but the poverty of the people," said a Central American to me
recently.
          The plight of the people is recognized by the Report, but the
solution is to depend on the same old structures and dynamics which
have been the cause of the impoverished of the region. As outlined in
this article and the following interview, there is an Alternative,
neither US capitalism nor Soviet socialism, which designs an economic
system to bring full humanity to the majority of the people. If we
really want a secure region close to our borders, then we should join
the poor in reorganizing society to meet human needs.
        
        
          "The Logic of the Majority"
          By Gorostiaga, XabierXabier Gorostiaga
          Vol. 6, No. 1, 1984, pp. 6-10
          
          
            Xabier Gorostiaga: 
            I was born in the Basque
country in the north of Spain. My family was very persecuted at that
time, after the Civil War (1936-39). In the confrontation between
General Franco and the Basques, my father was very involved in the
Basque fighting. Then we went into exile. Exile and persecution are
part of my vital experience.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            You were in a Catholic
family. Was the Christian faith a vital force in your family?
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            Yes. Especially with my mother,
later also with my father. My father was not a good Christian at the
beginning, but was transformed by the religious thinking of an
atheist, the Basque philospher Miguel de Unamuno. Then when the
Vatican put Unamuno's writing on the black list of forbidden books, my
father had to rethink his own atheism and his own religious
beliefs.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            The condemnation of the Vatican
caused your father to re-think the Christian faith.
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            Yes, but in a very dialetical
process. Because instead of saying, "Well, I won't have anything to do
with the church," my father said, "This man is a real Christian. I
don't know why the church condemned this fellow." It forced him to
rethink. It was a starting process to get closer to an evangelical
attitude toward life. And in the last years of his life he was a very
committed Christian.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            So did you become a Jesuit
early in life? And leave home?
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            I came to Latin America very
young to do all my religious studies here. The novitiate we call
it. Then I studied in Cuba, from 1958 to 1960, in El Caballo, a small
town close to Havana. And the Cuban experience was an incredible
experience for me. At that time I realized that the role of the
Catholic Church in Cuba was a very traditional, very conservative
role. The Cuban Church was very rich and had no contact with the poor
in Cuba. We were not allowed at that time even to hear Fidel Castro on
television. And even though some Christians took part in the
revolution, the church was not considered part of the building of a
new society. And that experience, in the negative sense, also was
important for me.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            So you stayed in Latin America
after that training?
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            Yes, all the time except my
final years doing theology studies. I did my theology studies in a
university in the Basque country in order to be close to my mother and
father who were very old at that time, and in order that they would be
present at my ordination as a priest.
            You know the Jesuit province is organized with five 1` small
nations in Central America, from Guatemala to Panama. I lived one year
and a half in Guatemala, a year in Salvador. In 1961 I was naturalized
in Nicaragua. I had a Nicaraguan passport until Somoza took it
away. At that time I was an economic advisor of the Panamanian
government working on the Panama Canal treaty negotiations so I took
the nationality of Panama.
            I maintain my Panamanian passport, but I consider myself a Central
American citizen. I have been living in all these countries. I have
been involved in reform in El Salvador, working with my Jesuit
colleagues in Guatemala. For me, Central America is a nation.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            So your spiritual formation is
very clear then. Has that resulted in an attitude toward the faith
that differed from your childhood faith?
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            I was very traditional in my
faith when I was a child and even when I became a Jesuit. But what
moved me to become a Jesuit was my experience with shantytowns,
immigrant towns in the Basque country. People from Andalusia, from
Galicia, the poorest part of Spain came to these towns and were living
in incredible conditions. Every Sunday for more than three or four
years I went with two or three Jesuits to help build houses to teach
these people. I think that was the experience that converted me to a
real Christianity, the experience that induced me to be a Christian,
and also to imitate two or three of these Jesuit priests that I saw
working for so many years with these very, very poor, oppressed
people.
            Later my experience in Cuba, in Ecuador with the very poor
Indians, and in Panama with the campesino movement in which Father
Hector Gallego, a martyr, was killed in 1971. That experience changed
my life. I realized that as Jesuits we had spent four hundred years
teaching, assuming, that the rich people would be the creators, the
builders of a new society. I realized that we were absolutely
wrong. That these people will receive some training, some Christian
feelings, but that they will not fight against a society that they are
the builders of. I consider that only the oppressed can build a new
society. The rich have no interest in a new society because they are
the owners of the present society.
            Then at the beginning of the 60s, before Medellin*Medellin, Colombia, where the Latin
	    American Roman Catholic Bishops in 1968 changed the
	    historic alignment of the Church with the dominant class,
	    and took an 'option for the poor.'

and after, there
was a generation breakthrough in the lives of many Jesuit priests,
nuns and laymen in Latin America. We said what Monsignor Romero said'
"I was converted." We found a new way of reading the gospel, a new way
of praying, a new way of looking at the different values of
society. That was a real conversion. We went to work with the poor,
trying to convert the poor and the funny thing is that the poor
converted us.  
            From 1969 to 1971 I did undergraduate studies, and later on
post-graduate studies, at Cambridge University. It was a fascinating
experience, but very hard because I had in my background in Latin
America the sufferings of the people and here I was living in that
incredible, marvelous town of Cambridge. I really had to convince
myself every day that that was useful for the poor. And that was my
full commitment. I was thirty years old and the only thing that forced
me to carry on five years work in economics was my purpose to give a
new tool, a new instrument, to the poor of this part of the world. And
now I realize that they were five worthwhile years.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            Xabier, as an economist you
have been the motivating force behind a research institute that is
based here in Nicaragua but is for all Central America. At a workshop
held in Holland, that group has recently (June of 1983) issued this
Alternative Policy for Central America and the Caribbean. Could you
talk about the main points in the Alternative.
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            The basic one is the logic of
the majority. We realize that the logic of capital, the logic of
transnational companies has created underdevelopment, exploitation,
poverty, misery and nowadays, a social and political explosion. This
logic doesn't solve the problems of the majority in this part of the
world. Everybody nowadays talks about the basic needs, but they don't
talk about a new logic. The basic needs can be accomplished through a
very paternalistic way: "We the rich will provide some things."
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            Sounds like you're talking
about Reagan's Caribbean Basin. . .
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            . . . Initiative. The key point
of the logic of the majority is that we need a new historical subject
to build a nation. And this historical subject will not be the rich,
will not be the transnational companies, will not be the logic of
capital, but will be the logic of the majority of people--illiterate,
oppressed. Let's put all the power, the resources, the land, the
education, the health, in the service of the majority. I think that
this is the key purpose of a social revolution. And I think the
Sandinista Revolution has taken the logic of the majority as the basis
of the new society. It is becoming a term of reference for many, many
small poor countries of the Third World.
            Our proposition is: Let's satisfy basic needs. Let's satisfy even
artificial needs but with a logic of a new society, a much more
egalitarian society. Instead of having a trickling down effect, let's
have a trickling up effect. Let's start building an accumulation
model, a growth model that is based on the needs of the population,
the priorities of the majority. And we think that this is real
democracy. Other-

wise propaganda dominates the market, not the real
needs of the population.
            Non-alignment is another very important aspect in our
Alternative. Our international relations have been linked to the
United States in a sort of umbilical cord. Seventy to eighty percent
of our technology, our production, our exports and imports were linked
to the United States. Then the pattern of production and consumption,
the model of United States' society was transferred to the very poor,
underdeveloped small countries.
            When we are talking of non-alignment, we are talking of
diversifying our dependence. We are very small, poor underdeveloped
countries. We cannot be independent, but we can diversify our
dependency and maintain one-quarter of our relations with the United
States, one-quarter of our relationships with Europe, one-quarter of
our relations with the rest of Latin American--especially with our big
neighbors in Latin America such as Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela,
Colombia. And the quarter that is left is the non-aligned
countries--the African and Asian countries (the South-South relation)
and the socialist countries including Russia, Czechoslovakia,
Bulgaria. Instead of walking with two legs--one big leg with the
United States and one with the rest of the world--let's have four legs
and walk as a mature animal. This diversification of dependency is
part of the non-alignment and it creates the basis for an
international plurism and is the way in which we can break our
dependency from the United States without breaking our friendly
relations with it. We will treat the United states as we treat the
rest of the world. We cannot be independent countries in the backyard
of anybody.
            I think there's a possibility of having a much more friendly,
efficient, productive relationship between these small countries of
Central America and the US people. The problem is that
you have your own oligarchy there that doesn't agree with this
model.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            Let's talk about popular
participation. What do you mean by democracy?
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            I don't think there can be a
human model, a Christian model, unless there's a democratic
model. What does democracy mean--in a very developed society such as
the United States and in a very undeveloped society?
            Democracy has an important component of economic participation. I
don't know why--and I asked David Rockefeller in our last meeting--in
the Inter-American Dialogue--why democracy in the United States stops
at the door of the factory. Because we think, in terms of the
productive system, there is no democracy in the United States. We
think that democracy has to start in the productive system. That is
why in Nicaragua we have built 3,500 cooperatives. And the people
decide what to produce, decide and discuss the cost of production,
decide what will be the price. And there's a tremendous fight between
the ministry of planning and the cooperatives--that's democracy.
            The basis for democracy is literacy, the satisfaction of basic
needs and a sort of national identity in order that elections will not
legitimate oppression. In the last forty years in Central America we
have had more elections than in any area of the world. Elections here
have justified and legitimized oppression. Elections may be a tool of
anything. When you have a terrorized country like El Salvador or
Guatemala, elections will represent terror and fear.
            Elections should be tools of democracy. First you have to build
democracy in order that the elections can be a representation of
democracy. In Nicaragua the constitution gives us six years (from 1979
to 1985) in which to hold elections. In the first year after the
Revolution we began a literacy campaign. A year later we had decreased
illiteracy from fifty-five percent to twelve percent. In our health
campaign we have eradicted polio and almost eradicated yellow fever
and malaria. We have been able to decrease infant mortality forty
percent without doctors, without hospitals--only through popular
mobilization. Literacy and malnutrition are not technical or financial
problems, they are political problems.
            For me it is a legitimate sign of the democracy of a country when
the government provides 150,000 machine guns to defend the country,
the people take the arms and there is no shooting, no killing in the
streets. The people return the arms to the government after
training. Can you imagine Pinochet distributing arms to the Chilean
people? This is the only country in Latin America where the US
Ambassador can walk at night without bodyguards.
            At the moment I consider, without any doubt, that the main enemy of
democracy in this country is the administration of Ronald Reagan. The
war might make it impossible to create the basic conditions for
elections. It is a very difficult problem to solve.
            You ask me, "Is the Sandinista Revolution a Marxist revolution?" I
will say, "No." "Is it a Christian revolution?" I will say, "No." "Is
it a nationalist revolution?" I will say, "No." Because it is a
mixture of these three. This is a very nationalist revolution Sandino
symbolized the nationalism of this revolution. Obviously, this is a
Marxist revolution in the sense that a lot of Marxist thinking is
going on, and not the European Marxist thinking of Cold War, a much
more Creole Marxism--much more Latin American, with lot of indigenous
roots in the culture and history of Latin America and with lot of
Latin American thinking--philosophers, poets. This is a Marxism of
poets. And this is also a Christian revolution.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            This is such a central fact
that I am surprised that the press and the politicians of the US
ignore it.
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            It is very good when thousands
of Chris-

tians from all over the world come to this country and they
see the vitality and the originality of this church. The new ways in
which the people pray, the new way in which the church is organized,
the new role of women within the church, the new role of laymen within
the church. Obviously, some people in the church, some members of the
hierarchy, see all this as heresy. But I think that what is going on
here is the maturity of these Christian people who are very poor and
they are getting a new maturity in the Christianity. This revolution
has been one of the most important spiritual experiences of my life. I
think that the kingdom of God is not something that will happen in
heaven, but something that we have to start building on this earth as
the human beings that we are.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            In this report on an
Alternative Proposal you state that "the United States commitment to
preserving its hegemony in the region has given the struggle for
social justice in Central America an anti-imperialist character." What
you've just described, will the United States agree to it?
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            I would say that the majority of
the people in the United States will agree if they get knowledge of
what we mean with that. These countries of Central America are the
countries in the world that have suffered more intervention from the
United States than from any other part of the world. Twenty-eight
military interventions. In the case of Nicaragua we were occupied
twenty-five years by US marines. Then, they left us the gift of
Somoza.
            The breakthrough in Central America is a historical
breakthrough. The small countries in Central America are fighting for
independence, for sovereignty, are trying to break down this model of
banana republics. The problem is that this social revolution against
the five percent rich people, the oligarchies in these countries, in
order to create a much more equal and just society, at the same time
it is a social revolution, it is a geopolitical revolution. Because
this five percent, the oligarchies in these countries, the military
are the natural allies of the US interests in the region.
            We will not become part of any bloc. Not the Soviet Union, not any
bloc.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            How can you avoid that?
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            That's difficult. But this is
our definition, our project. And I will say that the Soviet Union at
the moment has been generous. Cuba has been generous with us. The
pressures that these governments have created on Nicaragua is minimal,
I will say nil, in relation to the pressure that has been created by
the United States, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            Xabier, if we go back to the
years before 1979, I knew Nicaraguan people in exile and others who
were studying the Bible. It was easy to find signs of hope for the
struggle in those years because they could see in the biblical message
that God is on the side of the oppressed. Then in 1979 the victory
came here and in my several visits in the two or three years after
that it was so easy to feel the joy and exuberance. The people seemed
to feel that the victory gave vindication to their hope. Now, it's a
very different situation. We're under the pressure of aggression from
the United States. Would there be in the biblical message any sign of
hope if the United States overthrew the revolution?
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            I recommend you do two things
that helped me very much. The first would be to go to a militia
training and see how the militia does the military exercises. Look at
the eyes of these people. Do you see hate in the eyes of these people
or happiness, confidence, hope. Do you see camaraderie? You see how
the social relations change in militia training. And how the people in
the middle of this very difficult situation, this US intervention, are
happy, they don't fear. They are confident that they can destroy an
intervention in this country.
            I don't consider that this revolution can be destroyed at this
moment. This revolution may be corrupted in some years. The US marines
may come here. They may occupy Managua. The majority of the people
will go to the mountains and a fight of three, four years will occur
and after that a victory will occur. My fear is not US
intervention. My fear is the problems of internal corruption. That
this revolution will lose the originality, the freshness, the
commitment to the people, the participatory democracy. I fear the US
marines may produce a lot of suffering and destruction. But I feel
that this revolution cannot be destroyed as a social
revolution. Maybe, as it is happening nowadays, Reagan is
consolidating this revolution, and unifying the people. Polarizing the
people that are not happy with the revolution--the rich, some members
of the Church hierarchy. But I will say that a substantial majority,
from seventy-five to ninety percent, are behind this revolution.

            The problem of a revolution is that it is human. The problem of a
revolution is internal, another story.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            So this is not the kingdom of
God?
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            No. It may be part of the
process to build the kingdom of God. And I believe in that. But the
sin is within us. But it may be part of the process of building
justice, and equality among us and with the rest of the world.
          
          
            Kirkpatrick: 
            What would you say to
Christians within the United States?
          
          
            Gorostiaga: 
            That this is an incredible
opportunity to establish Christian relations between your people and
our people. I consider what is happening in Central America something
very important for the United States. I consider that the Reagan
Administration and some economic and political leaders in the United
States are trying to cut the relations between this new phenomenon and
the US people. Distorting this phenomenon. Presenting this revolution
as totalitarian, as Marxism-Leninism in the worst sense of the
phrase. Because I consider that maybe for the first time there is the
possibility of having Christian relations between the churches here
and the churches of the United States without paternalism. And more
than that, maybe even a teaching position from our side with relation
to the US church. Transforming the old relation of colonialism. I
think the vitality of these churches, the conversion of these churches
is essential for the United States. And also, I think this is
biblical, as you have said, the poor, the rest of Israel is
here. Maybe in twenty years you will have to come back to missionize,
but at the moment I think we have a role to preach to the rest of the
world, to Europe and the United States. I think that the genuine
Christianity is here, more than in the very developed rich nations of
the world.
          
          
            Recommended Reading
          
          
            Ministers of God, Ministers of the People: Testimonies
of Faith from Nicaragua by Teofilo Cabestrero. Published by
Orbis Books, Maryknoll, New York 10545. Interviews with Ernesto
Cardenal, Fernando Cardenal and Miguel d'Escoto.
          
          
            Christians in the Nicaraguan Revolution by
Margaret Randall. Published by New Star Books, Vancouver,
Canada.
          
          
            On his most recent visit to Nicaragua (November, 1983)
Dow Kirkpatrick spoke with Xabier Gorostiaga, chief economist of the
Sandinista Government, Jesuit priest and head of the Central American
Institute for Economic and Social Research. In the following
interview, Gorostiaga talks about the formative influences upon his
commitment to Central America and about the Alternative Policy
for Central America and the Caribbean, a report recently
issued by the Institute as a result of an international policy
workshop held in The Hague during the summer of 1983.
          
        
        
          The Bomb Plant on Trial
          By Bowman, SueSue Bowman
          Vol. 6, No. 1, 1984, pp. 10-12
          
          Fifty demonstrators who blockaded entrances to the Savannah River
Plant last fall were found guilty of a traffic violation January 11,
but the nuclear weapons facility which produces the plutonium for US
weapons, sustained a direct hit to its reputation.
          The two-day trial of the protesters, before Aiken, South Carolina,
Magistrate Court Judge Max A. Meek, resulted from a demonstration
October 24 hosted by the Natural Guard, a coalition of peace and
environmental groups (see Southern Changes, December
1983). The blockade coincided with international demonstrations
against nuclear weapons.
          A three-man, three-woman jury deliberated over an hour before
returning a guilty verdict for "failure to obey a police officer." The
defendants were sentenced to one-hundred dollar fines or eleven days
in jail.
          During the trial, blockaders explained that to prevent a "greater
harm," they were compelled to disobey police orders to leave the road
in front of the plant. The thread running through expert testimony
suggested that they had every reason to be concerned. A former
Department of Energy "company man" confirmed allegations that SRP has
withheld reports of widespread radioactive contamination; an authority
on the medical effects of radioactive contamination warned that the
plant endangers the lives of people living around it; a retired Navy
admiral and Pentagon nuclear weapons strategist testified that
increased production and deployment of nuclear weapons has greatly
increased the threat of nuclear war and that the Bomb Plant would be a
first target.
          DuPont, contracted by DOE to run the plant, is guilty of a pattern
of negligence and has suppressed information about radioactive
contamination, according to DOE's former head of nuclear waste
management at SRP. William Lawless, nuclear waste project engineer for
six years, said a 1981 report which outlined his criticisms of the
waste program was reclassified as a "draft" report. He said DuPont
objected to the contents of the report and that because of the
reclassification, the document could be withheld from the public, even
if requested through the Freedom of Information Act.
          Lawless gave many examples of contamination reports withheld from
the public and numbers-juggling by the company to make releases appear
harmless.
          One report deliberately withheld was a 1977 internal document which
listed forty "monitoring wells" on SRP property which had been
contaminated with radioactive tritium. Some of the wells contained
levels of radiation 200,000 times that allowed for drinking
water. (Out of court, Lawless said this discovery caused him to quit
drinking plant water.) According to Lawless, the contaminated water,
as much as 400,000 gallons from one well, was pumped out of the wells
onto the ground to conceal high levels of radiation. This would result
in temporarily lowered readings of contamination in those wells.
          No records on types of hazardous and radioactive waste were kept at
the "burial ground" at the plant. For twenty years, pipes in which
tritium was manufactured were buried "uncapped" at the plant,
contaminating the water.
          There was extensive corrosion in twenty-seven high level waste
tanks, even before they were fully constructed, and Lawless testified
that reports of these conditions were deliberately suppressed.
          Numbers were juggled and regulations rewritten to make releases of
radioactive gases appear less significant. "In the real world, the gas
is still there," he said.
          Robert Alvarez, Director of the Nuclear Weapons and Power Project
for the Washington-based Environmental 

Policy Institute called
Lawless' testimony "startling and highly significant .... This is the
most significant finding about SRP that's been made public in
years."
          SRP officials accuse Lawless of misinterpreting facts, and said the
reports were available to anyone who asked for them--but each report
must be requested by name.
          Lawless' testimony about mishandling of waste at SRP, and
discrepancies between public and internal reports, magnified the
testimony by Dr. Carl Johnson, former Director of Public Health,
Jefferson County, Colorado. Johnson told-the jury how the releases and
discrepancies translated into dangers to health.
          Johnson told the packed courtroom that declassified SRP internal
documents from 1954-1975 showed radioactive releases were much larger
than those reported to the public. On March 15, 1955, an accidental
release of radiation resulted in radiation levels four hundred times
background level. "In my opinion it should have resulted in evacuation
of this area."
          Johnson said that it is hazardous to live in Aiken or the
surrounding area, that residents lives are in danger "to a medical
certainty." Johnson based his predictions that the area would show
high cancer rates on data from Hiroshima and Nagasaki and on his own
extensive studies of health effects around the Rocky Flats nuclear
weapons facility in Colorado. "There is no level of radiation without
effect," he said several times
          Rear Admiral Gene LaRocque, retired after thirty-one years in the
Navy, seven as Pentagon nuclear weapons strategist, brought the
spectre of nuclear war into the courtroom. He spoke matter-of-factly
about the vulnerability of facilities like SRP in a nuclear attack.
          "Plutonium production facilities would be among the first targets,"
he said. "If we hit a production facility (in the Soviet Union). . tit
would spread radioactive material over a tremendous part of the
country and be a devastating blow. . .It would be a natural first
target. . .We would want to get their war-making capacity."
          "We need to assume that the whole Aiken area would be a prime
target for a nuclear strike," LaRocque said. If an attack hit right on
the plant, due to wind shifts, "the radioactive materials would be
impossible to control. . . We don't have plans to deal with that sort
of catastrophe."
          LaRocque said that with the offensive posture of US nuclear policy,
we've actually decreased our national security. The military is geared
to "fight to win. . we're uncomfortable with deterrence."
          "We're ready now in thirty minutes to destroy the Soviet Union. All
the president has to do is say go." he added.
          LaRocque defended the blockaders' tactic. "Civil disobedience is
one of the many good ways to bring it to public attention. . .People
should do something every day to prevent nuclear war."
          Framed in the context of expert testimony, defendants' compelling
reasons for blockading the road and being arrested made absolute
sense. In the courtroom, a very diverse group of individuals told
their stories.
          Adele Kushner, a retired county employee and grandmother from
Atlanta, said, "I have become concerned over what kind of world we are
leaving for our grandchildren." She said she had tried every other
means to get her government's attention before deciding to participate
in the blockade.
          Beth Ann Buitekant, a registered nurse from Atlanta, talked about
the inadequacy of the health care system because of military
expenditures. About weapons proliferation, she said, "I personally
have no control over it, except to do exactly what I have been
doing."
          Andy Summers, a Methodist minister and pastoral counselor from
Savannah, downriver from the plant, said nuclear war would result in
"destruction on such a massive basis that we hardly have the
capability to think about it" and that this results in a "psychic
numbing." "We need to develop new, vivid symbols to come to grips with
the worsening situation."
          Brett Bursey, program director of a social action organization in
Columbia, South Carolina, noted, "Not only are they doing something
against the wishes of the majority of the American people, but they're
lying about it." He referred to Lou Harris polls indicating that
three-fourths of the American people support a nuclear freeze.
          Bursey expressed the importance of civil disobedience in American
history, including the Boston Tea Party and civil rights
movements. "There would not be black people on this jury if years ago
black people didn't refuse to go to the back of the bus," he said,
addressing the one black juror.
          Ed Clark, 77, a church pianist from Greenville, said his
participation in the blockade was "a way of bearing witness against
the nuclear arms race. . .which could happen tomorrow. I felt it was
an urgent matter--I had to take part."
          A former welder at SRP and other facilities, Butch Guisto, who grew
up and still lives in Augusta, testified that his welds were never
X-rayed, and that there was a "cavalier treatment about radioactive
releases" at that plant. "I know for a fact that tritium releases
occur," relating that he had been present on several occasions. "I
live in this area, and I'm just as responsible as anyone else," he
added.
          Testimony in the trial deeply affected even the defendants, who are
generally more educated about nuclear issues than the average
citizen. Local farmer and blockader Steve McMillan had testified that
he became concerned 

about the Bomb Plant over a period of time. "I
began to suspect the people in our area weren't getting the truth," he
told the jury. Walking out of the courtroom after the verdict, he
slowly shook his white head--"It's worse than we said it was."
          The jury chose to take the prosecutor's way out and find the
defendants guilty of the traffic violation. "They broke the law, plain
and simple," Assistant South Carolina Attorney General James Bogle
told the jurors.'
          Defendant Randy Tatel commented on the jury's decision. "I
empathized with the jurors in that they couldn't have remained
objective in reviewing the evidence. It would have meant overcoming
the numbness, the years of acceptance of the Bomb Plant in their back
yard--they were told pointblank that the plant was killing them and
their children and contributing to the threat of nuclear
holocaust."
          But the "convicts" were jubilant. Not one expressed more than a
shrug of "well, it would have been nice to be acquitted," instead,
conversation went to the impact of the trial. As one defendant later
expressed, "The more I think about it, the more I realize how big we
won. We never really expected to be acquitted, but think of the local
education that occurred! The policemen listening to Dr. Johnson, the
judge, the jury, people who will talk to the jury about what they
heard, the list goes on."
          He concluded, "Maybe next time we will be acquitted as well."
          
            Sue Bowman lives in Columbia, South Carolina and writes
regularly about Southern disarmament activities.
          
        
        
          Populist Revival in Mississippi?
          By Pigott, BradBrad Pigott
          Vol. 6, No. 1, 1984, pp. 12-17
          
          My opponent is not the man whose name will appear on the
ballot. Instead, my opposition is a small group of very wealthy and
very powerful men who are financing the campaign against me. These
bigshots oppose me because they cannot tell me what to do."
--Mississippi Congressman Wayne Dowdy, campaigning for Congress in
1982
          "If we win this campaign, we will be sending a message that
if a politician fights the big power companies, fights the powerful
legislators, and makes these people mad, then the people of
Mississippi will stand up for that politician."
--Mississippi Governor Bill Allain, campaigning for Governor in
1983
          A century devoted to the political subordination of black people in
Mississippi almost silenced biracial aspirations for populist
reform. But with the waning of official racial segregation, there is
evidence that the next era of politics in the most Southern of
Southern states might be distinguished not by the corporate pampering
with which boosters have hailed the latest "New South," but by a
biracial assertion of common dignity through the populist checking of
private power.
          Populist aspirations have themselves been checked for so many
generations in Mississippi by the tragic lessons of the
turn-of-the-century Populist movement's greatest but last hurrah in
the state, the election of 1895. That year, populist gubernatorial
nominee Frank Burkitt was bringing forth a relentless crusade against
the "putrid, putrescent, putrifying political moribund carcass of
bourbon democracy." The Populists had gathered more than a third of
the votes in the previous year's congressional elections, and were on
the rise. Burkitt took to the stump not just with the familiar
Populist proposals for regulating and taxing economic privilege, but
also with advocacy of free public education for both black and white
children, and with attacks on the severe franchise restrictions locked
into the state's 1890 Constitution. (Burkitt as a constitutional
convention delegate had refused to sign the Constitution on account of
those voting restrictions.) The Populist political base in the
relatively white, eastern hill country had been consolidated, and the
conservative white Democratic establishment set about frantically to
find some way to choke the Populist momentum.
          They found their way in smothering the economic aspirations of have
not whites with the rhetoric of white supremacy and solidarity. Their
rallying cry was that a Populist government would tolerate black
political power--portrayed as an appalling threat to every white. The
racist barrage dislodged enough have-not whites from support of the
Populists' economic reform message to assure a solid defeat of Burkitt
and his Populists, who never recovered politically from the stigma of
the Bourbon attacks.
          
            >Twelve Per Cent Democracy
          
          With biracial populist aspirations thus squelched, politics for the
next four generations in Mississippi was the politics of privileged
white men. By the turn of the century the ruling whites were so
pleased with themselves that they saw fit to include, among
"Mississippi Firsts" boasted of in the Official and Statistical
Register of Mississippi for 1904, the following:
          "Mississippi was the first state in the Union to solve the problem
of white supremacy in the South by lawful means. The Constitution of
1890 disfranchises the ignorant and vicious of both races, and places
control of the State in the hands of the virtuous, intelligent
citizens."
          The ballot was regarded by Mississippi law as a prerogative of
racial and economic privilege, to be reserved only for monied white
men. Before the Populist movement had had a decent chance to organize
itself in Mississippi, the 1890 voting bars managed to pull much of
the Populist potential out from under the state's people: By 1892,
black registration had been cut to 5.4% of black adults, and enough
white have-nots had been blocked from the ballot to cut white
registration in half. As a result, during the seventy years following
the 1890 disfranchisement, Mississippi's governors were elected with
votes from an average of only 12% of the 

state's adult (twenty and
over) population. No Mississippi governor during those seventy years
ever received the consent of as much as one-fifth of the adult
population of the state.
          What competition there was for power was generally waged between
the planter-lawyer-merchant class concentrated in the western Delta,
and, when they were permitted to vote at all, the "redneck" farmers
concentrated in the hills. Between the planters and the rednecks,
there was never any dispute about whether the black community was to
be suppressed. There was only dispute about whether to talk about it
openly.
          As if remembering what the "better element" of the Delta had done
to Burkitt and the Populists, politicians who addressed the hill folk
found it necessary to combine their modest spending and reform
proposals with a constant rhetorical attack on the black race. The
brutally racist ridicule offered from the stump first by James
K. Vardaman and then by Theodore G. Bilbo served as a political cover
for their programs of progressive taxation and expanded education for
have-not whites and preempted any charge that they sought to lift
blacks along with their programs to lift have-not whites.
          With the hills' advocates preempting the field of white supremacist
rhetoric, the planters and their allies had little use for open talk
about "the race problem" which they had done so much to create and
sustain. Like their modern successors in the Republican Party, the
planters regarded such public rhetoric as bad manners and as worse
public relations.
          Mississippi politics remained white politics until the decade of
the civil rights movement.
          
            The New Electorate
          
          By 1970, a third force had arrived in Mississippi politics with the
registration of black citizens in legendary numbers under the
protection of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. As recently as 1960, only
5.27% of Mississippi blacks of voting age had been permitted to
register to vote. This pathetic figure had barely changed since the
1890 disfranchisement had shrivelled black registration to 5.4% by
1892. But a remarkable 66% of voting age blacks became registered
voters by 1970, and made up 29% of the Mississippi electorate. The
election of over four hundred black officials to legislative and
municipal offices has kept alive the notion in the black community
that voting can make a difference, and the increasingly intense
competition for such offices among politically talented blacks is
likely to sustain the level of black voter turnout. The first major
party nomination in this century of a black candidate for federal or
statewide office came in 1982.
          "But it is the populist appeal," says Mississippi civil rights
organizer Rev. Ed King, "which alone has been able to bring into the
voting electorate thousands of more fundamentally alienated black
Mississippians. Populism expresses their alienation not just from
privileged whites, but from politically established black leaders as
well. When this extra black electorate has been activated at all in
recent years, which has not been often, it has been through an
informal network which lacks a current name, but which is in fact the
remnant of the old Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party," says King,
who was the MFDP's national committeeman.
          To win a two person, statewide political race in Mississippi
without significant black support would now require over 70% of the
votes of whites. The state's recent political history is a witness to
the political impossibility of such a requirement. Since black
Mississippians became virtually a third of the state's electorate
around 1970, no candidacy has been able to survive mobilization of so
high a portion of the state's electorate against it through open
indulgence in the slogans of racial supremacy and segregation.

          
            The New Bourbon Boosters
          
          Meanwhile, during the very years of black enfranchisement, the
loyalties of the Delta state of mind have been enticed, updated, and
organized by the newly active forces of the Republican Party. To the
usual pretensions of elitist bourbonism, the "New South" Republicans
have added the boosterism of the "new money" metropolitan
suburbs. Like the Delta Boubons of old, the Mississippi Republicans
center their political world around their longing for a social world
that is, above all else, quiet. They are drawn to a political message
which promises for them the quietness within which to pursue the
central mission of their daily lives, their own comfort.
          This "upwardly mobile" world of shopping centers, franchise strips,
and country clubs has claimed 35% to 40% of the active Mississippi
electorate: A 1979 statewide political poll found 39% of likely
Mississippi voters classifying themselves as either Republican (10%)
or Independent (29%). The total in a 1980 statewide poll was 38% (21%
Republican; 17% Independent). A 1981 poll found 33.7% of the
electorate to be made up of either strong Republicans (8.4%), weak
Republicans (11.3%), or Independent Republicans (14%). (Probing by
pollsters of self-classified "independents" in Mississippi has
revealed that, though party realignment toward a Republican identity
has not been completed for this segment of the electorate, their views
are such that they tend predominantly to vote Republican.)
          But a party or a state of mind cannot win elections with 35 to 40
percent of the vote, and indeed no Mississippi Republican has won a
majority of the votes in any statewide election in this
century. Republican Thad Cochran slipped into a US Senate seat in 1978
with a 45% plurality victory over a Democratic constituency split
between an undirected white nominee and a strong black independent
candidacy. Though the Republican nominee for governor in 1975 had
gathered 46% of the general election vote, the same Republican
candidate slipped to 39% in 1979. A different, more conservative
Republican nominee received the same 39% in the 1983 race for
governor. 1981 saw the Republicans lose Mississippi's fourth
congressional district seat, based around the Jackson metropolitan
area and the lower Mississippi river counties, which they had held
since 1972. The predictable Republican share of the statewide vote in
Mississippi seems, at least for now, to have peaked.
          Like their planter-merchant predecessors from the segregation
years, the new Republicans are rendered uneasy by the sound of
outright public and explicit racial combat. Their uneasiness lies not
in any preference for racial justice, but in the fact that the
tensions and embarrassments surrounding open talk about race tend to
disturb the quietness of what has become the Republican state of
mind. Thus Mississippi Republicans are attracted to both elements in
any call to "put race behind us" and to get on about the business of
nourishing and preserving a "good business climate" suitable for the
quiet pursuit of comfort. Outright mention of race risks an
extraordinary intrusion into this state of mind, for the Republican
strongholds of comfort in the metropolitan areas of Jackson and the
Gulf Coast are easily the most racially segregated zones of
Mississippi life.
          Yet the Mississippi Republican Party, in further imitation of its
Delta-Bourbon heritage, has proven itself quick to exploit racial
prejudice through indirection and innuendo where necessary to thwart
the prospect of a biracial coalition against it. Republican Cochran
won his 1978 plurality Senate victory in part with the charge that
Aaron Henry, the veteran NAACP state President who had endorsed! the
white Democratic nominee against Cochran, would have "a rope around
[the Democrat's] neck" if the latter were to go to Washington as
Senator. Republican Webb Franklin in 1982 narrowly won the Delta's
congressional district seat from black Democratic nominee Robert Clark
with the Republican campaign slogan, "A Congressman for Us." Though
the Republican congressional nominee in the fourth district had
learned by 1982 not to boost black voter turnout by repeated reference
to his opposition to the Voting Rights Act, his campaign did see fit
to saturate the district with half-page newpaper advertisements
centered around a distorted drawing of his white Democratic opponent's
face, complete with noticeably African features. The white Democratic
opponent, Congressman Wayne Dowdy, had voted the previous year not
only for extension of the Voting Rights Act but also against every
amendment aimed at weakening the Act's effectiveness. Dowdy went on to
win reelection in 1982 despite official Republican Party placement at
predominantly black precincts of hired white "guards" and posters
featuring multiple references to the word "jail" as the promised
punishment for noncompliance with registration technicalities.
          
            The Transformed Political World of Have-Not Whites
          
          The Republican innuendo of white solidarity reflects the virtual
desperation of the state's privileged whites in the face of a subtle
transformation by the most complex force in Mississippi politics, the
white have-nots. Those whites who perceive themselves as on the
outside of the circle of power and comfort in Mississippi life now in
fact hold the balance of electoral power as the swing group in the
state's politics.
          There are, for one thing, more have-not whites participating in the
electorate than could ever have participated during
disfranchisement. In silent vindication of the old Populists' 1890
warning that official disfranchisement was aimed at have-not whites as
well as at blacks, whites in Mississippi have been able to double the
total number of whites registered to vote since enactment of the
Voting Rights Act of 1965.
          But the real transformation is taking place within the minds of
have-not whites. The choices they have begun to make do not include
outright abandonment of racial bigotry; Mississippi life is still too
richly tragic to allow for that. The question is instead whether the
salience of racial polarization has submerged enough in their lives to
permit the emergence now of economic consciousness as the central
focus of their political choices.
          Some powerful evidence has emerged for the declining significance
of racial polarization as the centerpiece of the political lives of
have-not whites. By significant majorities, white Mississippians with
annual family incomes of less than ten thousand dollars responded that
white students "should go to the same schools" as black students, and
that -whites have no "right to keep blacks from moving into their
neighborhoods if they want to," when a representative 

statewide sample
was asked in a 1981 academic poll. Half of non-retired whites making
annual incomes under $25,000. asserted in the course of a 1981 poll of
Wayne Dowdy's fourth congressional district that it would not "make
any difference" in their voting decision if a congressional candidate
were "strongly supported by local black leaders." Only 36% responded
that they would be "less inclined" to support such a candidate.
          Within days following the mid-1981 special election in which Dowdy
was first elected to Congress, a Republican Party pollster asked a
representative sampling of the district's voters to isolate an issue
"of particular concern to you personally" in making their voting
decisions. That Dowdy was the first major white candidate in
Mississippi ever to endorse retention of a strong Voting Rights Act
had been during the campaign the focus of repeated and highly visible
attention by all sides and by the media. Yet the white respondents who
had voted against Dowdy did not even mention his voting rights stand
as a factor in their voting decision. The economic issues of social
security and Reaganomics dominated the white voters' responses, with
the Voting Rights Act being mentioned only by black Dowdy
supporters. In short, his decisive stand for the continuation of
federal supervision of black voting rights added to, and did not
detract from, Dowdy's successful populist coalition. (Nor was Dowdy's
congressional voting record in fulfillment of his voting rights pledge
an issue in his 1982 re-election campaign, which he won handily with
the help of the populist slogan, "Don't let the big shots call the
shots.")
          The decline of racial polarization as an effective political weapon
has brought a decline also in the political potency of what were once
conventional verbal codes for a message of white unity. The ability of
the code word "conservative" to galvanize whites, for instance, has
apparently been dissolved with the withdrawal of explicit racial
combat from the center stage of politics. Though the state's
journalists continue to churn out the conventional wisdom that
Mississippi has a "conservative" electorate, a 1981 statewide academic
survey finds a slightly lower proportion of the Mississippi electorate
willing to accept the "conservative" label (27.8%) than was the case
in the country as a whole (28.3%, from a 1980 national survey). A
separate 1980 statewide poll found only 33% of likely Mississippi
voters accepting the "conservative" label, while only 27% of Dowdy's
congressional district electorate was found to be made up of white
"conservatives" in 1982. The old "conservative" catch-all code simply
rings hollow now for a majority even of white Mississippi voters.
          What can be seen as emerging to overshadow racial resentments in
the political focus of have-not whites in Mississippi is a
preoccupation with economic issues, which now dominate the responses
to every survey question calling for "our most important public
problem." And what has every chance of shaping those economic issues
for have" not whites is an old Southern peculiarity which is just now
being let loose for full political expression: a sense of
psychological distance from a privileged circle of absentee
power-holders who are insulated both from the consequences of their
own power and from the traditional reciprocities of folk values. This
is the stuff of populism.
          There is first the essential estrangement from the flow of affairs
as run by the powerful. A representative, statewide sample of
Mississippi voters was asked this question in a 1980 poll: "Generally
speaking, do you feel things are going in the right direction in
Mississippi today, or do you feel that they have gotten pretty
seriously off on the wrong track?" Among white non-retirees with
family incomes under fifteen-thousand dollars, significantly more
answered "wrong track" (44%) than answered "right direction"
(36%). The responses of these less privileged whites were remarkably
similar to the responses of black participants in the same survey, who
responded "wrong track" (46%) more often than "right direction"
(40%). But the responses of non-retiree whites making over
$25,000. were fundamentally different from those of both blacks and
less privileged whites, with only 28% responding "wrong track" and
with fully 58% responding "right direction." A 1982 poll asked of
likely voters in Mississippi's fourth congressional district an
otherwise identical question aimed at "things in the nation" rather
than in the state. Among blue collar whites, 49% saw the nation as
having "gotten pretty seriously off on the wrong track," while only
35% saw a "right direction." The responses among non-retired whites
with incomes of at least $25,000. reflected the reverse of the blue
collar white responses: 55% of these privileged whites saw a "right
direction" in the nation while only 38% sensed a "wrong track."
          It is by now an item of conventional political wisdom that the
growth of governmental bureaucracies, themselves oversized and
stifling, has provided a new target for the old populist
sentiment. But in fact an attack from the right on such governmental
targets has little chance of attracting a political majority now in
Mississippi, when compared with the biracial attraction to reforms
aimed at private privilege. Any message of attack against the public
bureaucracies would first forfeit the support of most black
Mississippians, who know racial bigotry when they see it in the form
of wholesale attacks upon the organizational vehicle for administering
public policies of compassion. But any "rightwing populism" would also
leave untouched some of the deeper populist values of many less
privileged Mississippi whites. Among non-retired whites with family
incomes 

below $25,000. who responded to a 1982 poll of Dowdy's fourth
congressional district, for instance, the most favored route to
cutting the federal budget deficit was not "cuts in social programs."
It was, instead, "the elimination of tax cuts to business." About half
of those white respondents further indicated that if they understood a
candidate to be "supported by big Jackson businessmen," they would be
inclined to vote against that candidate based on that one fact
alone. The emerging language of populist candidacies in Mississippi
has indeed been directed almost exclusively at the state's own
business elite, concentrated in Jackson.
          Have-not Mississippi whites know that they are prepared to live
their own lives by shared folk rules like frugality, humility,
simplicity and informality. But they know also that the reward these
days for abiding by these old rules is next to nothing. And they can
increasingly sense that the bulky private institutions of the rich, in
exempting themselves from and snubbing the old values, are rewarded
immensely, regardless of their performance.
          
            Early Rumblings of a Populist Resurgence?
          
          It was by no coincidence that the first major Mississippi
gubernatorial candidate in contemporary times to abandon the rhetoric
of segregation was also the first such candidate to invoke the
language of the populist heritage. Bill Waller was elected governor in
1971 on the force of his pledge to check the power of what he cited as
"the Capitol Street Gang" of privileged private institutions centered
around Jackson's principal commercial street. Maverick Cliff Finch
drew entirely on populist symbolism, with a lunchpail as his chosen
campaign symbol, in winning the right to succeed Waller as governor in
1975. But these early rumblings of a biracial populist resurgence
suffered some frustration at the hands of the purported champions of
the revived populist heritage, Waller and Finch. For lack of
ideological sincerity they were unwilling, and for lack of governing
skills they were unable, to transform their symbolism into deeds of
populist reform. (As one black political strategist has said of Finch
in particular, "that lunchpail turned out to be empty.")
          William Winter as Governor sought to draw on a potent deed of
populist reform with his 1982 legislative proposal to raise the oil
and gas severance tax in order to finance a package of authentic
reforms in the state's otherwise dismal public education system. But
for reasons of political style and personal demeanor Winter was
unwilling to draw the symbolism of the populist heritage to the aid of
his tax proposal, which proceeded to die under the pressure of state
and national oil lobbyists and their friends at the top of the
Mississippi Legislature. The painfully regressive sales tax, to which
those legislators are prone to turn for their answer to every new
revenue need, was once again hiked in order to finance the Winter
education reforms. (Mississippi was already imposing, for instance,
the highest sales tax on food, in the country.)
          Only with the just-completed race to succeed Winter did there
emerge in a major statewide candidacy, for the first time in this
century, an apparent unity between the words and the deeds of biracial
populist reform. His court victories in landmark cases against the
rulers of the state's utilities, utility regulatory commission, and
even the Legislature, were at the center of Mississippi Attorney
General Bill Allain's successful campaign for the governorship in
1983. He protested the holding of closed-door official meetings by
walking out of them, and personally boycotted the posh private clubs
populated by the business elite which runs so much of the state from
Jackson.
          Allain even dared to file and to win a lawsuit insisting that the
State's standpat legislative rulers must abide by the state's
constitutional separation-of-powers provision, which prohibited the
nevertheless pervasive membership of legislators on executive agency
boards. He argued as attorney general before the Mississippi Supreme
Court that if the state is to have a right to ask the average person
to obey the Constitution, "then we must have the right to ask the
richest person, the most powerful person in the state, to do no
less."
          But Allain's central focus has been as an unflappable critic, both
in and out of court, of what was until recently a silent attack by the
state's electric utilities on the old values of frugality and
lawfulness. Here is Allain on the blank-` check rate base
traditionally accorded to Mississippi's larger utilities: "I have seen
their books. . .you are paying those $150,000 and $200,000-a-year
salaries, you are paying their country club dues, and you are paying
when they go up there in that twenty-story building and eat and drink
all that imported wine." As black activist and political scientist
Leslie McLemore puts it, Allain's call for checks on utility spending
reflected "an issue that had an impact on pocketbooks. It transcended
race and class, although it was strongest among people of poorer
socio-economic backgrounds."
          
            Populist Prospects
          
          The electoral possibilities of the revived populist heritage in
Mississippi are dependent on the continuing emergence of a rare and
resourceful breed of populist politician, and therein lies populism's
chief vulnerability. To bring and hold have-not whites and blacks
together after so many generations of bitter hostility still requires
extraordinarily subtle political leadership. It is the uncommon
politician who brings to the task both the necessary political agility
and the necessary psychic detachment for sustaining the wrath of the
privileged which is certain to be released privately against any
populist politician. For such a maverick figure to have access to the
awesome amount of money required to run a modern political campaign is
more uncommon still, and tends to require that the politician have
personal wealth.
          A still more painful hindrance to the emergence of 

biracial
populist leadership is the prospect that white have-nots are not yet
ready to be led by black populist advocates. As long as even the most
talented black politicians are deprived of highly visible offices from
which to act out roles as majoritarian decision-makers, calls by black
politicians for economic fairness will too often be dismissed by
have-not whites as calls limited to the black community alone. That
black politicians are now relatively handicapped in bearing the banner
of a populist movement aimed at biracial justice is but one more
tragic reminder of the legacy of racism handicapping populism
itself.
          Even for the rare political figure able to survive such hurdles to
be elected, the profound fragmentation of state governmental power
offers an abundance of veto points from which privileged interests can
and do quietly obstruct populist policies.
          Yet there has also emerged a certain amount of institutional and
cultural glue available to the uncommon politician who sets out
through electoral politics to bring together the populist constituency
in Mississippi. The formal Democratic Party organization in the state
has just begun to generate for itself the money and technology with
which to sustain a network of loyalities capable of biracial political
organizing. And voter identity with the Democratic Party has itself
stabilized as a potent for reconciliation: the portion of the
Mississippi electorate volunteering identification with the
Democractic Party in statewide polls has been 51% in 1979, 53% in
1980, and 55.3% in 1981.
          The state's relatively small organized labor movement, whose
leadership stood firm with biracial backing of the civil rights
movement in its toughtest days, has now found political vindication in
its ability to offer populist candidates a ready-made network of black
and white political organizers. Longtime Mississippi AFL-CIO President
Claude Ramsay even says that "the labor movement provided the glue for
Dowdy's" congressional wins, which Ramsay sees as "a pay-off for work
over many years" in holding together a biracial organized labor
movement.
          A hard-won astuteness among black voters about the necessities of
coalition building is another source of glue capable of holding
together biracial populist majorities. Black independent candidacies
for Congress in 1982 and for governor in 1983 failed to win more than
one-tenth of the votes of black Mississippians. Such failures have
just now put the state's Republican strategists on notice that an
earlier Republican scheme of sponsoring black independent candidacies
can no longer be counted on to split the Democratic vote and produce a
Republican plurality. Mississippi's white Democratic governor and
congressmen made an overdue attempt at reciprocity in 1982 by publicly
campaigning for the election of black Democratic primary winner Robert
Clark in Mississippi's new Delta congressional district. (Though the
votes of about 13% of white voters and a lower-than-expected black
turnout caused Clark a very narrow loss in 1982, he has announced his
candidacy for the same seat in 1984 and has at least an even chance of
becoming this year the first black Mississippi congressman in this
century.)
          Whenever the populist ingredients bubbling in Mississippi's
political culture can manage to come across just the right maverick
advocate, populism will continue to have a decent chance of winning
elections in the state for the foreseeable future. The old
recalcitrance in the face of absentee power, having been drawn on and
abused for so long by the segregationists' clamor against "outsiders"
and federal "intervention," can now be turned against the pretensions
of private powerholders whose isolation comes from exclusive devotion
to their own comfort."
          In moving to check the prerogatives of private power, Mississippi
populism has a chance to claim an anchoring of politics in a moral
purpose: authentic racial reconciliation. Populism can direct the
political attention of have-not white Mississippians away from the
preoccupations with racial bigotry, bringing them instead under the
same banner, in defense of the same values, as the state's black
community. And, through populism, black Mississippians can join in a
majority coalition with whites without evading any of the central
economic purposes on the black political agenda. Populism's attempt at
this historical reconciliation, so long feared by Mississippi's inner
circle of monied whites, need not concede any of the raw, redemptive
power behind a movement rooted in the values of simple justice.
          
            Brad Pigott is a native of McComb, Mississippi who now
lives and practices law in Jackson. His political apprenticeship came
in 1976 77 as issues director of the final gubernatorial campaign of
Virginia populist Henry Howell. In 1982 he managed the reelection
campaign of Congressman Wayne Dowdy.
          
        
        
          "Covering History as it Broke"  John N. Popham
          
            
              Ashmore, HarryHarry Ashmore
            
          
          Vol. 6, No. 1, 1984, pp. 17-19
          
          In 1947, when he first stopped in at my office at the Charlotte
News, John Popham was the only newspaper correspondent assigned to a
beat that stretched from the Potomac to Eagle Pass. His one-man bureau
in Chattanooga was the first the New York Times had ever established
in the continental United States outside of Washington. To these
unique distinctions he added two of his own that I am reasonably
certain have not been duplicated by any of his talented young
successors: for more than a decade he covered this vast territory
without benefit of air transport or strong drink.
          Sustained only by black coffee, he managed to more than hold his
own in the convivial colloquies that mark any gathering of the working
press--but then he often left early, dispatched by his desk in New
York to some new outbreak of news in Miami, or Dallas, or Louisville,
explaining that he ought to get started since he was
driving. Moreover, he always said he avoided the through highways and
kept to the back roads so he would have a chance to absorb the wisdom
of the ordinary folk he encountered in crossroads stores, smalltown
cafes and rustic pool halls.
          His explanation for his abstemiousness was that his innards had
been ravaged in the course of his wartime service with the Marines in
the Pacific, but I found this dubious. To one who had been there, it
seemed unlikely that a man with a delicate stomach could survive the
cuisine in those backcountry establishments where the overpopulated

flypaper curled down in strips from the ceiling and a prudent man
would limit his order to a hardboiled egg and an orange, and insist on
peeling both.
          It was only after he had left the secondary roads for a more
sedentary assignment as executive managing editor of the Times'
outpost in Chattanooga that Pop joined the rest of us at the bar. On
the sad occasion of Ralph McGill's funeral I first encountered him
with a tall glass of bourbon in his hand, and in my astonishment
exclaimed, "My God, Pop! It may make you garrulous!" But there was in
fact no perceptible change in his delivery, which has been
described--by Claude Sitton, I believe--as resembling sorghum fired
from a Gatling gun. At his retirement party aboard the Wabash
Cannonball in the railyard at Chattanooga the truth was finally
divined by Bill Emerson of Newsweek, who had trailed Pop across the
South in the years of the Troubles: "The sneaky little devil has been
saving up his liver for the golden years."
          Happily, both liver and larynx have remained in fine fettle, and
the mellifluous voice of Popham is still heard in the land--on
platforms wherever worthy causes command his attention, in seminars
where awed academics sit at his feet, 

above all in free-flowing
conversation with old friends and young admirers who know where to
turn when they seek insight into this New/Old South that continues to
baffle all too many of those who write about it.
          When he settled in at Chattanooga in 1947 he brought to his new
assignment the passion of the native returned from exile. His roots
are deep in the Virginia tidewater, but his boyhood was spent trailing
his peripatetic father, a distinguished officer in the U.S. Marine
Corps. His college was Fordham, he apprenticed on a Brooklyn newspaper
before graduating to the Times, and he got his first
whiff of politics covering New York's City Hall.
          But when he came back from his own service as a Marine officer in
World War II a new boss had taken over the newsroom at the
Times, Turner Catledge of the Philadelphia,
Mississippi, Catledges. Instinct told Catledge that the post-war South
was going to be the next great domestic news arena, and he knew where
to find the right man to interpret the impending socio-economic
changes for the parochial readers of the nation's leading
newspaper.
          So Pop began the odyssey that would make him a witness of the
historic confrontations that marked the era of what Ralph McGill
called "guerrilla fighting among the ruins of the segregated society."
He was one of the few who had innocent passage 'across the lines--the
trusted confidant of diehard segregationists and embattled black
leaders, and, above all, a sympathetic audience for the ordinary
citizens of both races who were trying to find somebody who understood
what they were talking about.
          Those were the days when politicians who professed to speak for the
South finally abandoned the fiction that the region's second-class
citizens were a happy, contented lot, and began to talk in terms of
the apocalypse. When the Brown decision came down in 1954 John Bartlow
Martin toured the Southern statehouses and proclaimed in the
Saturday Evening Post: "The South Says Never!" A swarm
of hit-and run national correspondents descended upon the region and
there would have been an even greater multiplication of the ubiquitous
black and white Southern stereotypes had Pop not been available as an
omnipresent oracle wherever there was an outbreak of violence.
          To those who were willing to listen, and some who weren't, Pop
explained that the facts of Southern life were rarely what they seemed
to be, and almost never what the spokesman for an agitated
constituency said they were. There was, God knows, plenty of overt
brutality, but there was also a reservoir of interracial goodwill that
would make it possible to dismantle the old segregated institutions in
reasonably orderly fashion.
          There are still those who believe the great sea change which has
made possible this audience in this hotel was bracketed by the
Montgomery bus boycott and the triumphant march from Selma to the
Alabama capitol, where Martin Luther King proclaimed, "We are on the
move now--no wave of racism can stop us."
          Willie Morris, who once thought he could go north to home, is still
bemused by the high drama of those stirring days now that he has again
taken root in his native Mississippi. Writing of what he found there
upon his return, he dated the recasting of race relations from the day
the FBI dug the bodies of three slain civil rights workers out of an
earthen dam down in Neshoba County:
          "Gradually, almost imperceptibly in the years which followed,
something would begin to stir in the soul of the town. A brooding
introspection, a stricken pride, a complicated and nearly-indefinable
self-irony ... would emerge from its dreadful wounds. A long journey
lay ahead, marked always by new aggrievements and retreats, yet this
mysterious pilgrimage of the spirit would suggest much of the South
and the America of our generation."
          Pop could have told him that the instrospection, the pride, and the
self-irony have been around since the first slave ship, and the first
Popham, landed in the Tidewater. There are the qualities that have
marked his tour of duty below the Mason-Dixon Line--the qualities that
left their imprint upon the blend of the Old and the New that is John
Popham's South.
          And to these he added one more that he demonstrated in remarkable
fashion when he was finally unbound from his desk at the Chattanooga
Times. Once again he hit the road, this time as a commuter, first to
Nashville, then to Atlanta, where he enrolled in law school. I submit
that only an abiding commitment to justice could have motivated the
seventy-three-year old applicant for admission to the Georgia Bar you
welcome tonight as a Life Fellow of the Southern Regional Council.
          
            Remarks by Harry S. Ashmore upon the installation of John
Popham as a Life Fellow of the Southern Regional Council; Peachtree
Plaza Hotel, Atlanta, November 12, 1983.
          
        
        
          Popham: "Avoiding the Hit and Run Press"
          By Cooper, Eleanor MccallieEleanor Mccallie Cooper
          Vol. 6, No. 1, 1984, pp. 19-22
          
          "Just call it as you see it, John, anything that you can see in the
South, the enormous changes that are about to take place. We don't
know, nobody knows how it's going to be this time. We know it's a
different world, and we intend to report it in depth."
          The voice was that of Turner Catledge, the assistant managing
editor of the New York Times and a Mississippian
himself. The year was 1947. He was sending out a young reporter from
the Times, John N. Popham, to be the first regional
correspondent in the Southeast, to cover the South from DC to the
Delta, fifteen states that made up what John later termed "a hundred
Souths."
          Leaving behind New York's multi cultural diversity, the young
reporter found himself with a new beat of well over fifty-thousand
miles a year, covering such divergent regions as the Mountain South,
the Piedmont, the Delta, the Black Belt and the coasts. With
Chattanooga as its headquarters, he made it home only five days a
month for the next eleven years.
          The reasoning behind this assignment, Popham explains, was that the
New York Times was going to try to "stamp the country
on a regional basis." As the largest news 

enterprise in the nation,
its managers decided to tap the news from across the land: "'Let's
put a man in Boston who will take all the New England states; put a
man in Detroit to take the heavy industry, automobile and steel; put
two men in Chicago to take the great wheat world and mid-America; put
a man in L.A. to take Southern California, Arizona, New Mexico, and a
man in San Francisco to take Northern California, Oregon and
Washington, because they go together.' And then I got the whole
South."
          The Southeast bureau was stationed in Chattanooga, because of the
family connection between the Chattanooga Times and the
New York Times. Adolph S. Ochs, a native of Tennessee,
had owned and operated the Chattanooga Times twenty
years prior to acquiring the New York Times in
1896. Because both papers had remained in the Ochs family, Chattanooga
was the natural choice for Popham's headquarters.
          When Popham became managing editor of the Chattanooga
Times in 1958, the Southeast bureau moved to
Atlanta. But in those early days, Popham said, "It didn't make any
difference where it was. The South had not grown that much, and
Atlanta wasn't much different than Chattanooga at that particular
time. No sir, not a whole lot different, just a couple of hotels
downtown and the governor's office."
          A Tidewater Virginian himself, John was no greenhorn to the
South. The Popham family had been in Virginia since the colony was
founded, and his father, like other military officers from Virginia,
had bought a house in Fredericksburg, close to his native
Culpepper. Young John grew up well rooted in the life of the small
town South, the history of the area, and the heritage of his
great-grandfather who was publisher and editor of the Richmond
newspaper, the Southern Intelligencer, and later of
tine' Washington Intelligencer. His sense of history
and his understanding of small town politics served as assets in his
new assignment, as did his forever undimished Tidewater accent.
          After finishing college at Fordham, he had landed in New York in
1930 as a reporter for the Brooklyn Standard Union,
covering all the beats, the courts, the police, the criminal world:
"Here I was with this family background and schooling from a small
town in Virginia, and then suddenly, I end up in New York, thrown into
the midst of the greatest multi-cultural city on the face of the
earth. And it's my job to report it, with all the cultures."
          He learned that world so well that when he returned from service in
the Marine Corps at the end of World War II, he was asked by three
successive New York mayors to be the director of public
relations. Having spent the war in the Pacific, and many summers of
his youth traveling with his father to Latin America and Asia,
intercultural exchange was nothing new to young "Pop": "I was in a
position to make judgments, to see things as I would never have seen
them if I had stayed in the South all of my life, or if I had come
from the North only. I was able to bridge that gap a little better
than the average person would have thought of."
          But he never accepted the offers of Mayors O'Dwyer, Walker or
LaGuardia. Instead, he stayed in the old world of newspaper reporting
where he accumulated no credits, few by-lines and not much salary to
speak of.
          Popham describes the state of the South as he found it in the late
1940's:
          
            In the face of efforts which were under way to broaden the
scope of civil rights for blacks in this country, Southern political
leaders were making their usual response: "We'll handle that, "and "We
have our way of life, "and "We will not adjust or change except on our
terms. " That had been the winning hand for generations and there
wasn't any reason for anybody in high office at that time to see that
there would be anything different.
          
          
            The thinking was that the South was going to be more
industrial, that it had an opportunity to have a larger slice of the
economic pie of the country. Air conditioning had come. It was
pleasant and comfortable.
          
          
            The war had brought literally millions of people into the
South--military people and their families. Many stayed here; some
married Southerners.
          
          
            Our universities were getting larger; they were going from
thirty-five hundred students in the state university to ten-thousand,
and young people from the rest of the country were coming here to
attend classes.
          
          
            There was an excitement, a feeling that the South would
overcome its poverty. It had lived right through the war as the
poorest section of America. Now there was an excitement that the South
could become a much more viable part of the country."
          
          In tapping the stories of fifteen states on the verge of economic
and social upheaval, Johnny Popham was helped by his background, by
his personal drive and by the enormous empathy which made him trust
and be trusted. In conversations lasting long after an event had been
covered and a story had been written, he came to know Southerner's
thoughts, feelings, fears and ambitions. He based his stories on these
insights rather than on the latest opinion polls.
          If, for instance, he were assigned to a conference in New Orleans,
he would get the story then stay around to make contacts:
          
            I would stay the whole week that it lasted, sitting up way
into the nights talking to scores and scores of these people from the
small towns and cities of the South. After that, I would go out of my
way on an assignment, or stop at a town and look that person up and
talk to them, recall that friendship, or maybe find there was a story
in that town, what they were trying to do to make the community a
better place to live. And I might do a little Sunday piece about some
particular effort, get them some local and national attention for
their efforts. I built up a large network like that, and consequently,
I always had an opportunity to know where something was going to take
place.
          
          
            If it was evident from the way things were taking place that
there was going to be a confrontation in a certain city, most of the
newspaper men would respond like a bucket brigade--they'd come in when
the trouble began to break. But I would always call someone, for
example, the governor in that state, and say, "Well, Governor, this is
Popham. Who's a friend of yours in that town? Who do you know?" With
politics it was going to be a feed merchant or a druggist or somebody
down there that handled the patronage for the governor, and he'd say,
"I'll call him, Pop, and tell him you 're coming in. " I'd go in two
or three days in advance; this man would take me out to the country
club for dinner or introduce me to people on the main
street. Consequently, I always knew just about where to stand, where
to be, what place to go to, and later when the press might be the
target of bitterness and anger, I would be excused 
            
            for several
days. People would say, "Oh, that is Mr. Jones' buddy, he's all
right--until they read the New York Times `and then decided that I had
to go too. But it took them a long time to get the
Times in there.
          
          In a car with little, or no, air conditioning, over roads with
little, or no, pavement, usually alone and often at night, Popham
covered fifty, sixty, seventy thousand miles a year. His salvation
was, as he said. "I don't bore myself." In fact, the long hours on the
road served to his advantage in a way that jet age telecommunications
do not allow:
          
            If I had to come back to Chattanooga from New Orleans or
from Jacksonville or Dallas, I'd drive three or four days, stopping
off at different places. What I wanted to write would be filtering
though my mind. I'd be pretty well prepared to sit down and knock out
the Sunday piece or the interpretive piece that this event called for
a few days later. I think that some of the success that I had in that
period resulted from the fact that I could contemplate what I wanted
to do and put it in a good frame. I didn't think about that at the
time, but as I look back, I think it helped a lot.
          
          The first task for Popham was to find the sages, the vital and
vibrant figures who had some wisdom about what was happening around
them, the people who "could envision the future and worked behind the
scenes to solve a great many problems." Once he found them, he
cultivated them, respected them, and took time to build trust.
          These people were all over the South. He found them as governors,
workers, newsmen, lawyers, sociologists and teachers. People such as
Ralph McGill, Hodding Carter, Howard Odum, Rupert Vance, Charles
Johnson. A. T. Walden, Gerald Johnson, George Mitchell, Harold
Fleming, Virginius Dabney, and Alf Minders became his sources of
knowledge and wisdom. But more than just the leaders, he found endless
numbers of people throughout the South who cared and worked
quietly:
          
            They were all over the South. There were many wonderful
people who had been silenced in many ways, and they accepted that, but
they didn't stop working! There was an enormous number of people that
were doing good things in the South, but if you came from outside,
they were not going to show their hand.
          
          
            If you just came pouring in from out of the region and stuck
a mike in somebody's face and said, "Well, how do you feel about
desegregation?" the first thing that was on his mind was his family
and his job, and he'd say, "Well, I can 't see it. " He was protecting
himself. You might find if you sat down and talked to him about
yourself that he felt there was a trustworthiness and he's begin to
open up too. But he was not about to disclose that world to an
outsider who asked in a manner dangerous to him at that
time.
          
          This Southerner that Popham's late night divulgences uncovered was
not the Southerner publicized across the 

country. As Popham says, "We
lived so long with our own myths. There were hundreds and hundreds of
Southerners who didn't think that way but who were trapped at the
moment." Later, they were able to "come out and declare themselves."
Today, Popham observes, "there's no such thing as a serious candidate
running for statewide office in the entire South on a racial
ticket. It's gone."
          The other Southerner that the "hit and run" press missed was the
black leader, often quiet, also trapped by circumstances, but just as
silently laying the foundations. Popham sought out these leaders and
found them in the black universities and churches.
          If a black university, for example, invited a speaker, the local
press would arrive, cover the speech and leave. However, Popham stayed
on, lingered around the punch bowl long after the microphones and
cameras had left and learned a great deal more:
          
            You'd have a story about what the man said; he had come to
the South to bring a message and you'd write that story. And yet there
were scores of things that were going to take place, and all of the
leads were available that evening at the party; going to somebody's
house afterwards, a group of professors would come and maybe one or
two bright students and sit and talk until midnight. By ten o'clock at
night, he'd open up his heart about what he really thought and
felt. That makes for better reporting. Then I'd go back to my motel. I
could always call on him afterward.
          
          In 1948, John married Frances Evans of Nashville who settled in
Chattanooga and raised John IV and Hillary while John traveled in the
family's only car. After a decade on the road, John, in 1958, chose to
stay closer to his family and accepted the position of managing editor
of the Chattanooga Times. John's third career in the
newspaper world came to a close nineteen years later. Only in looking
back over the entire spectrum could he see the preparation he had had
and the role that he had played in the South.
          
            You have to leave the South to see it. If you stay here, you
think it is this way everywhere. I owe so much to those trips overseas
with my father, to my years as a Marine--you can 't underestimate the
influence of military experience upon the South--and to the
multicultural experience of New York. Those were golden years of
print, before television, when all of these critics went through the
press. We were prepared to respond to eruptions, to converse with
people and to cover many, many issues. Other people did it better than
I in New York; I was a junior reporter. But it prepared me for my role
in the South. Only later could I see what I had done.
          
          
            Eleanor McCallie Cooper lives in Chattanooga, Tenn.
Thanks to the Chattanooga-Hamilton County Bicentennial Library for
permission to excerpt the interview with John Popham conducted on
August24, 1983, by Norman Bradley for the Chattanooga Oral History
Project.
          
        
        
          John Egerton. Generations: An American
Family. University Press of Kentucky, 1983.
          By Campbell, Will D.Will D. Campbell
          Vol. 6, No. 1, 1984, pp. 23-24
          
          For too long we have cataloged, systematized and categorized the
places and ways of learning. And too often we neglect, ignore or fail
to see resources near at hand.
          I sometimes spy on the Steeples by riding around in one city or
another surveying what the outside billboards and electronic marquees
are promoting. Aerobic dancing, weight watchers clubs, and Mother's
day out programs have been big the past few years. A few of them, the
better ones I suppose, announce that the Koreans also worship there,
though at a different time. (I saw one with the words: TEMPORARY
WORSHIP CENTER. I guess I knew what it meant but it seemed sort of
funny.) The other day I was riding from Fancy Gap, Virginia to
Mt. Juliet, Tennessee and asked my friend and driver to get off the
big highway and drive through one of the cities between Fancy Gap and
Mt. Juliet so I could do my research on the billboards in church
yards. "Marriage Enrichment Seminar" was the winner. Two were
announcing a series of lectures on Human Sexuality, to be given by
someone with several degrees behind his name, the most of which I
didn't recognize. I kept wondering where they got their material, who
the experts in those fields are.
          I have never been invited to conduct a seminar on marriage
enrichment nor give a lecture on human sexuality. It is highly
doubtful that I ever will. But if I should I would not begin by
researching the materials listed in the latest cataloging of those
subjects. I would begin by reading a passage from a book I have just
finished. Generations: An American Family, by John
Egerton, a man no more known for his expertise in those areas than
I. His words I would read are of a passionate love scene. Two lovers
are lying in bed, lying close together. It is a balmy Kentucky evening
and the room is dark and quiet. Suddenly the woman speaks.
          
            
              "Burnam, are you awake? I love you.
              
              There was no answer. Addie spoke louder: "Burnam? I said I love you."
              
              "Huh? What'd you say?"
              
              "You can't hear thunder! I SAID I LOVE YOU! I never did love anyone but you."
              
              After a pause, Burnam replied, "I love you too, Addie. I must have
loved you right from the first. You're the only one I ever did ask to
marry me."
            
          
          I would read those words because this marriage must have been
enriched from the beginning or gained enrichment somewhere along the
way for it had lasted seventy-nine years. The groom was 106 years old
and the bride ninety-eight. And certainly it was not devoid of romance
and sexuality. What could be more romantic than a wedding the day
after the first flying machine was launched at Kitty Hawk? And by the
time their thirteenth child was born one would begin to assume that a
healthy and conjunctional sexuality was part of the union.
          In the Seminar I would lead the participants back over the years as
Egerton does, across peaceful Bluegrass landscapes and hostile
mountains and rivers, out of the Yadkin Valley in North Carolina, over
the Cumberland Gap and on into Cranks Creek in what is now Harlan
County, Kentucky where the marriage began and never ended. For though
the clinicians. finally declared one of the lovers dead it is not
within their power to say the marriage is over. To Addie, Burnam is
still "my husband." Not "late" nor "departed." Present Tense. These
two knew what it meant to be "married." John Egerton has written it
down and I would use it in my seminar on Marriage Enrichment as
genuine, unscientific reality.
          Or "Death and Dying." That's big these days and appeared on one of
the churchyard signs. Discussions groups gather. Theological schools
offer courses on it and preachers preach on it.
          
            
              "Everyone has told me how sick you've been, " I said to
him. "I'm glad you're better. It's a good sign that you're able to sit
up."
              
              He shook his head. "Uh-uhm. I'm not going to get well. It's time
for me to go home now, John. I 'm ready to go. I feel like I've done
all I can do in this world. I thank God for letting me keep my mind
right up to the end, but I don't want to stay any longer. I 'm getting
out of life now, before I get old and lose my mind."
            
          
          A 106-year-old man is grateful that he will never be old, knowing
that the mind is the core and compass of age and life itself. John
Egerton is not the detached and objective journalist. He has come to
love these two as he loves his own flesh and blood. He tries to
redirect his friend's thoughts. They talk of other things, tell funny
stories and look at the finished book John has brought him, a book two
lives spent more than a century in writing. All that time Burnam has
resisted death when it threatened, clinging tenaciously to life and
living, missing none of it, winning out over diseases, pestilence,
tragedy and misfortune of many kinds. Now a nurse comes into the room,
smiling, humoring, trying gently to win his acceptance of the pills
she has brought him, pills gladly accepted in other years and
times.
          
            
              "No more medicine! he exclaimed. "I won't take any more! No
more pills! I'm done with pills! They've been a curse to me! I'm
trying to die and go home! You tell that doctor not to send me any
more medicine."
            
          
          His tone is neither hostile nor maudlin. But emphatic, final and
convincing. He continues to talk to his friend and scribe when the
nurse is gone.

          
            
              "I said to her, 'Addie, I'm ready to go home, ready to
die. Are you ready to go with me?' She said she wasn't. So I asked
her, 'If I go on ahead and then call you to join me, will you come?'
And she told me she would. That put my mind at ease. I feel a lot
better now, just knowing that she would come if I sent for
her."
            
          
          That was almost a year ago and Burnam has not yet sell for his
beloved Addie. But we know that it won't be long.
          "Death and Dying." A course offered by Burnam and Addie
Ledford. I'm glad I signed up for it Genuine, unscientific reality.
          Despite all that, to suggest that Generations is a
book about Marriage Enrichment, Human Sexuality or Death and Dying
would be to deceive you. It is not. Yet if we have ears to hear and
eyes to see all those things are there.
          And a lot more. Egerton started out to write a simple story of a
little known American family. He has left us with a complex, detailed
and compelling history of the nation. While about it he learned that
the history of America is not the story of generals and admirals,
famous battles in big and little wars, assassinated Presidents, Monroe
Doctrines, Louisiana Purchases, invasions of Grenada. It is the
stories of the Ledfords of the land.
          But more than history. Sociology and Anthropology. Theology and
Geography. Conflict Resolution and Inter-group Relations. Civics and
Republican Politics. Philosophy and Folk Lore. None of those things
show up in the table of contents or index. It is not the kind of book
that needs an index. For it is a Romance.
          Read it aloud to someone you love if you like to see her laugh. But
don't read it aloud to someone you love if it bothers you to see him
cry. There is a lot of both in this good book.
          
            Will D. Campbell live in Mt. Juliet, Tennessee. He is the
author of Brother to a Dragonfly and The Glad
River.
          
        
        
          Voting for the "Covert" War
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 6, No. 1, 1984, p. 4
          
          On two occasions during the past year, most of the Southern
representatives in the US House voted to endorse the Reagan
Administration's war on Nicaragua. In the voting records shown below,
column #1 shows the vote on the Boland-Zablocki amendment to the 1983
Intelligence Authorization Act (7/28/83). Column #2 shows the vote on
the Boland amendment to the 1984 intelligence authorization bill
(10/20/83). A "+" signifies a vote to stop funds for covert operations
in Nicaragua; a "-" signifies a vote not to stop these funds. An "A"
signifies absence.
          
            
               
              
                ALABAMA            
                1
                2
              
              
                Bevill (D) 
                -           
                -
              
              
                Dickinson (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Edwards (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Erdreich (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Flippo (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Nichols (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Shelby (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                ARKANSAS 
              
              
                Alexander (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Anthony (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Bethune (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Hammerschmidt (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                FLORIDA 
              
              
                Bennett (D) 
                +           
                +
              
              
                Bilirakis (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Chappell (D)
                -           
                -
              
              
                Fascell (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Fuqua (D)
                -           
                -
              
              
                Gibbons (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Hutto (D)
                -           
                -
              
              
                Ireland (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Lehman, W (D)
                +           
                +
              
              
                Lewis, T (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                MacKay (D)
                +           
                +
              
              
                Mack (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                McCollum (R)
                -           
                -
              
              
                Mica (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Nelson (D)
                -           
                -
              
              
                Pepper (D) 
                +
                A
              
              
                Shaw (R)
                -           
                -
              
              
                Smith, L (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Young, C (R)
                -           
                -
              
              
                GEORGIA 
              
              
                Barnard (D) 
                -           
                -
              
              
                Fowler (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Gingrich (R)
                -           
                -
              
              
                Hatcher (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Jenkins (D)
                -           
                -
              
              
                Levitas (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                McDonald (D)
                -           
                -
              
              
                Ray (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Rowland (D)
                -           
                -
              
              
                Thomas, L (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                LOUISIANA 
              
              
                Boggs (D) 		 
                +
                +
              
              
                Breaux (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Huckaby (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Livingston (R)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Long, G (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Moore (R)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Roemer (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Tauzin (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                MISSISSIPPI 
              
              
                Dowdy (D) 
                A            
                -
              
              
                Franklin (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Lott (R)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Montgomery (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Whitten (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                NORTH CAROLINA 
              
              
                Andrews (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Britt (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                Broyhill (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Clarke (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                Hefner (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Jones, W (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                Martin, J (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Neal (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                Rose (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Valentine (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                Whitley (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                SOUTH CAROLINA 
              
              
                Campbell (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Derrick (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                Hartnett (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Spence (R)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Spratt (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Tallon (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                TENNESSEE 
              
              
                Boner (D) 
                -            
                -
              
              
                Cooper (R) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Duncan (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Ford (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Gore (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                Jones, E (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Lloyd (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Quillen (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Sundquist (R)
                -            
                -
              
              
                TEXAS 
              
              
                Andrews (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Archer (R)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Bartlett (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Brooks (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                Bryant (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Coleman (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                de la Garza (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Fields (R)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Frost (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Gonzalez (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                Gramm (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Hall, R (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Hall, S (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Hance (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Hightower (D) 
                -
                A
              
              
                Kazen (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Leath (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Leland (D)
                +            
                +
              
              
                Loeffler (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Ortiz (D)
                +            
                -
              
              
                Patman (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Paul (R)
                -            
                A
              
              
                Pickle (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Stenholm (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Vandergriff (D) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Wilson (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Wright (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                VIRGINIA 
              
              
                Bateman (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Bliley (R)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Boucher (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Daniel (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Olin (D) 
                +
                +
              
              
                Parris (R)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Robinson (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Sisisky (D)
                -            
                -
              
              
                Whitehurst (R) 
                -
                -
              
              
                Wolf (R)
                -            
                -
              
            
          
        
      
    
  