
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 6, Number 4,
	       1984
        
          Emelle, Alabama Toxic Waste Cadillac
          By Gunter, BoothBooth Gunter and Williams,  Mike Mike Williams
          Vol. 6, No. 4, 1984, pp. 1-7
          
          Down in the Heart of Dixie, in the gently rolling hills of the
Black Belt, lie gigantic pits--twice as wide as football fields are
long--filled to the brim with an alphabet soup mix of dangerous
chemicals.
          Silver and maroon tanker trucks wind down a narrow blacktop,
bringing the deadly leftovers from a chemical industry reluctant to
change its wasteful ways. Against a white, moonlike landscape hailed
as the Selma Chalk, the workers perform their duty. Into the
150-foot-deep pits go thousands of drums per day of foul-smelling
chemical wastes. The trucks come and go. Workers stationed in the
burial pits use tractors to make mud pies out of liquid chemicals and
cement dust--because federal regulations require chemical wastes to be
"solidified" before burial.
          This is Emelle, Alabama, located three miles from the 

Mississippi
border. This is home to what many call the largest hazardous waste
dump in the United States, some say the world. In 1983, the dump
accepted about 288,000 tons of hazardous wastes. It is the permanent
residence for hundreds of thousands--perhaps millions--of gallons of
toxic chemicals brought from around the country since the landfill
opened in 1977.
          This is Sumter County, a sparsely populated area, speckled with
cattle ranches, farm ponds, ramshackle houses. About seventy percent
of the seventeen thousand people living in the county are
black. Almost all of the white children go to private schools; all
black children go to the public schools, which are consistently ranked
among the state's worst. Unemployment for blacks is a way of life. Per
capita income was $6,362 in 1982, about $2,300 below the state
average.
          Owners of the dump, Chemical Waste Management Inc.--the largest
handler of hazardous wastes in the country--claim the "secure
landfill" is the safest anywhere, that five hundred to seven-hundred
feet of the highly impermeable Selma Chalk would prevent any leakage
of poisonous chemicals for at least ten thousand years. Underneath the
dump, some seven hundred feet down, lies the Eutaw Aquifer, a major
source of drinking water for people of west and central Alabama.
          Country neighbors of the dump--farmers, ranchers and poor
blacks--have noticed the foul stench emanating from the dump for
several years. But only recently have citizens across Alabama
encountered the questionable origins and politics that accompanied the
landfill's evolution. And only recently have Alabamians discovered the
lackadaisical manner in which state and federal regulators have
monitored the dump for safety.
          For years, operators of the dump maintained a close arrangement
with state officials. That arrangement included a country barbeque
thrown by the company for regulators. The state Health Department
officer who signed the dump's permit even bought stock in the company
that owns the dump, and sold it after a three-for-one stock split.
          It appears, though, that the close relationship has come to a
grinding halt--after a barrage of newspaper stories, fervent action by
environmental groups and interference by an Environmental Protection
Agency whistleblower.
          
            ******
          
          The origins of the dump are cloudy--state incorporation records do
not accurately reflect the original owners. In 1977, a group of men
from a Tennessee engineering firm enlisted the help of James Parsons,
who happened to be the son-in-law of Alabama Governor George
C. Wallace, then serving his third term in office. With little public
participation, the state Health Department, which had jurisdiction
over hazardous waste disposal at the time, granted a permit to the
group, called Resource Industries of Alabama. Shortly after the permit
was issued, the company--which had retained a prominent local
attorney, who was also a key Wallace campaign supporter--sold the
then-340 acre landfill to Chemical Waste Management, a subsidiary of
the billion-dollar, multi-national disposal giant, Waste Management,
Inc.
          The attorney, Drayton Pruitt, helped the company acquire about two
thousand more acres, giving the landfill an anticipated lifespan of
one-hundred years. Pruitt had been a local kingpin for years in
Livingston, the Sumter County seat. He was mayor for twelve years. He
was county attorney until recently when blacks finally won control of
county government. His father had been a state legislator for about
thirty years and a staunch Wallace supporter. Wendell Paris, chairman
of the Minority Peoples Council in the county, describes the
socio-economic setting in Sumter as little more than a modern feudal
system, with Pruitt as the liege lord.
          "The white people in Sumter County are as afraid of Dray on Pruitt
as I am of a rattlesnake," Paris says. "He's a kingpin in several
groups, where nothing comes in unless he says so."
          In 1982, Pruitt bought 229 acres from a state legislator who
sponsored a law that gave Chemical Waste Management a monopoly on
commercial hazardous waste disposal in Alabama. The law--called the
Minus Act, after former Representative Preston "Mann" Minus--said
the legislature had to approve of any new hazardous waste landfills in
the 

state. After adverse press reports, Minus insisted that the
Alabama Ethics Commission investigate his land deal with Pruitt. He
was cleared by the subsequent investigation.
          Since Chemical Waste Management took over operation of the site,
the landfill has grown into a waste importer, drawing toxic shipments
from forty-five states, Puerto Rico and Canada. The site accepts
pesticides, industrial solvents, lubricants, industrial sludges, and
highly toxic, suspected carcinogens such as DDT and PCBs.
          But the company claims the 2,400-acre facility is the "Cadillac" of
hazardous waste landfills. The Selma Chalk, company spokesmen say, is
perhaps the most secure geological setting in the country for landfill
disposal of toxic waste, because the impermeable character of the
formation slows the movement of liquids to a snail's pace. Scientists
such as Dr. Kirk Brown of Texas A & M University, however, point
out that more studies are needed on the reaction of toxic wastes with
materials typically used to line hazardous waste disposal
trenches. Tests on materials other than the Selma Chalk have shown
rates of movement up to one-hundred times greater than initial
estimates when toxic substances are put into contact with liner
materials. A University of Alabama engineering professor is currently
conducting more research in the area, and plans to test the Selma
Chalk.
          The chalk is also marked by geologic faults, which can act as a
conduit to the flow of liquids into subsurface layers. A consulting
firm hired by Chemical Waste Management claims the faults at Emelle
have "healed," or closed themselves to the flow of liquids. The US
Geological Survey, however, has proposed more research on the faults,
but as yet has not obtained funding to carry out the work.
          
            ******
          
          Alabamians have only recently awakened to the fact that perhaps the
largest hazardous waste landfill in the nation is busily burying what
may be a time bomb in the rolling Sumter County countryside.
          Linda Munoz, a quiet-spoken, part-time nurse who lives about twenty
miles from the landfill in the town of Cuba, says most Sumter County
residents never knew what went on at the Emelle site until years after
the facility opened.
          "Until I left some information at her house, one woman thought the
place was a fertilizer factory," she laughed. "It's not that people
here are ignorant, it's just that there has been so little about it in
the local papers."
          Ms. Munoz and a band of half a dozen others have been busy since
this spring organizing a homegrown environmental group, which they
call ACE, for Alabamians for a Clean Environment. They say their
eventual goal is to close down the Emelle site, although at this early
stage, they admit the struggle is an uphill battle.
          "People are very fond of the money that comes from the landfill, so
they won't speak out," said Ms. Munoz, referring to the high-paying
jobs at the landfill and the $1.4 million in fees paid by the company
to the county last year. The money is divided among county agencies,
and helps fund everything from highway maintenance to the-historic
preservation society.
          "But the money is nothing compared to the risks," says
Ms. Munoz. "Groundwater is one of Alabama's most important resources,
and we're appalled at how we've jeopardized our groundwater by
allowing the landfill."
          The fact of the matter is that few of Sumter County's citizens had
any say at all in "allowing" the landfill to locate at Emelle--except,
of course, for a handful of powerful white men like Drayton
Pruitt. For years, Pruitt has run the county like an empire, and with
the appearance of Chemical Waste Management, has simply taken his
backwoods power-brokering several notches up the scale of intensity
and profitability.
          But Pruitt's story is a familiar one, and, because of the Selma
Chalk, it may be more familiar to those who live in the 250-mile long
swatch of the Black Belt, where the formation located is located, than
to people in any other part of the country.
          Ted Lingham, mayor of the tiny Lowndes County village of
Lowndesboro for "the past eight or ten years--I really can't remember
exactly how long"--was out in his pasture one day checking his cattle
when he saw a drilling crew hard at work in a neighboring pasture.
          "I asked them what they were doing and they wouldn't answer for
awhile, and then they told me they were drilling for oil," said
Lingham, who lives about fifteen miles southwest of Montgomery.
          "Now I know you don't drill for oil with a little bitty old
gasoline-powered rig," he said.
          Lingham soon learned that the crew was drilling core samples for
the nation's second-largest hazardous waste disposal firm,
Browning-Ferris Industries, Inc., which later purchased an option to
buy two-thousand acres of land for a hazardous waste landfill not two
miles from Lingham's ranch. The option was sold by Lowndes County
Probate Judge Harrell Hammonds, who, since the sale, "hasn't been the
most popular man in the county," as one observer puts it.
          When Lingham learned of the plan, he quickly mobilized his
neighbors and headed a crowd of five hundred citizens who attended a
meeting with company representatives.

          "We raised such a stink the company has slacked off its plans,"
said Lingham.
          Browning-Ferris was also shut out of Lowndes County by the Minus
Act, but not before enlisting the aid of state Rep. Nelson Starkey of
Florence, who tried unsuccessfully to convince lawmakers to repeal the
act.
          Chemical Waste Management has also attempted to expand its
exploitation of the Selma Chalk by purchasing an option to buy 564
acres of land in the rural east Mississippi County of Noxubee--a site
not twenty-five miles from Emelle, as the crow flies. The company
moved into the area with little fanfare, and proceeded to locate a
local powerbroker of sorts, purchasing an option from A.T. Evans, a
member of the Board of Aldermen in the tiny town of Shuqualak, located
about two miles from the proposed dump site. The Board of Aldermen in
1983 unanimously passed a resolution supporting the location of the
landfill in the largely black county.
          But other residents didn't give Chemical Waste Management the
chance to sneak into Noxubee County un-announced. Bill Thomas, a local
lumber company executive, organized a drive that netted 3,500
signatures on a petition opposing the landfill--in a county with a
total population that Thomas estimates at between eight thousand and
ten-thousand.
          "Every landfill eventually leaks," Thomas says. "We're sitting
right on top of the water we drink, and if we pollute that, then all
of us are going to have to leave--even Chemical Waste Management."
          Thomas doesn't trust the company, either, citing a list of problems
encountered at Chemical Waste Management sites in Colorado, Kansas,
Illinois and Ohio.
          "The past performance of the company has been terrible," he
said. "They have flagrantly violated EPA rules on PCB storage at
Emelle. We don't have confidence in them to operate a toxic waste
site."
          
            ******
          
          Thomas' reference to PCBs at Emelle strikes at the heart of what
has become a roiling controversy in Alabama in the past six months, a
controversy that stretches from Waste Management headquarters in Oak
Brook, Illinois, to the halls of EPA in Washington, to the offices of
state legislators and regulators in Montgomery and finally to the
homes of concerned residents in Sumter County and in Chickasaw, a
small industrial port city near Mobile. The story of Chemical Waste
Management and its "problem" with PCBs stored a Emelle has attracted
nation-wide attention.
          PCBs, an oil-based substance used to insulate electrical equipment
such as transformers, were banned by EPA in 1977 after studies
indicated they might cause cancer. So persistent are the constituent
elements of the substance that federal laws prohibit the landfill
disposal of PCBs in concentrations greater than five hundred parts per
million. Such waste must be incinerated, and on land, incinerators
must have expensive scrubbers to trap residues that might otherwise go
up the incinerator's stack and contaminate the air.
          In the early 1970's, several European companies pioneered the
technology of adapting hazardous waste incinerators to ocean-going
ships. The ships provided a clear advantage over land-based
incinerators for two reasons: far out at sea, the fumes and unburned
particles coming up the incinerator stack are deposited miles from
populated areas. Also, depending on the regulations in force,
incineration ships are not necessarily required to install scrubbers,
which provides a competitive edge over land-based incineration.
          Although several incineration ships operated out of European and
Asian ports throughout the 1970's, in the United States, EPA failed to
write rules for regulating ocean. incineration, despite the urging of
several congressional committees. Sailing in an unregulatd sea,
Chemical Waste Management in 1980 bought a Dutch incineration vessel
and in 1983 commissioned construction of a second toxic-waste burning
ship. The vessels were christened the Vulcanus I and II.
          EPA officials encouraged the company's plans by granting 

two
research permits that allowed the company to burn several hundred
thousand gallons of PCBs and other waste in a specially-designated
burn site located 190 miles off the coast of Brownsville, Texas. To
load the ships, the company leased a docking slip in Chickasaw,
Alabama.
          Even though federal ocean incineration regulations still had not
been adopted, EPA in 1983 appeared well on its way to issuing a permit
that would have allowed the company to burn almost eighty million
gallons of PCBs and other chlorinated wastes off
Brownsville. Anticipating a prompt receipt of the permits, the company
had been stockpiling PCBs from across the country at Emelle, which is
located just 150 miles north of Chickasaw.
          The company's plans, however--and EPA's cooperation--ran into a
storm of protest in late 1983 when thousands showed up at public
hearings in Brownsville and Mobile to protest the burns, as well as
EPA's handling of the permit.
          Collette King, a thirty-six-year-old homemaker and mother of three,
galvanized citizens in Chickasaw to oppose the company's plans. They
first drew battle with the company in March 1983 over its plans to
build two large hazardous-waste storage tanks at the port facility to
hold the waste until it could be loaded onto the ships. At that time,
the only public hearings on ocean incineration had been held in
Brownsville.
          "We had to organize a letter-writing campaign," says Ms. King. "EPA
was going to make a decision for Alabama based on public hearings in
Texas. And the loading facility for the thing is here in
Chickasaw."
          Stung by the public outcry, EPA scheduled a public hearing in
Mobile for November, 1983. Gulf Coast residents and environmentalists
turned out en masse to express their anger and opposition at the
company's plans.
          In February 1984, Ms. King's group convinced the Chickasaw City
Council to pass a tough ordinance restricting the hauling of hazardous
waste through the town. The ordinance said such trucks traveling to
the port could take only one route through town, a route which passed
over a narrow, winding railroad viaduct bridge with a weight limit of
fifteen tons. Company spokesmen said the waste trucks weighed nearly
that much empty, and the company in April went to court to fight the
ordinance. The case is still pending, but events in the meantime may
make the suit unnecessary.
          One significant event came in February when EPA whistleblower Hugh
Kaufman--whose revelations about inside dealings at Reagan's EPA led
to the scandal that rocked the agency last year and culminated in the
resignation of administrator Anne Burford--claimed in an interagency
memorandum that Chemical Waste Management was trying to "blackmail"
EPA into granting the Vulcanus permits by storing PCBs at Emelle
longer than federal rules allow. The rules call for the incineration
of high-concentration PCBs within one year of the date they are
accepted at disposal facilities.
          Kaufman's allegations were prompted by a proposed consent agreement
between EPA and Chemical Waste Management, which called for the
company to dispose of the PCBs at Emelle upon receipt of a permit to
operate the Vulcanus ships. The agreement set a $100,000 fine for the
storage upon the company's compliance. If the company did not receive
the ocean incineration permits within one year of the date of the
agreement, it would have to submit a schedule for disposal of the
PCBs--which would have to be burned at one of only three land-based
PCB incinerators licensed by EPA, all operated by Chemical Waste
Management competitors. So confident had the company been of EPA's
commitment to ocean incineration that it had put all its eggs in the
Vulcanus basket--and did not apply for permits to build its own
land-based incinerator.
          Chemical Waste Management's fortunes in Alabama took a turn for the
worse in March, when Montgomery County District Attorney Jimmy Evans
announced he would soon begin an investigation into waste-handling
practices at Emelle. Evans lacked direct jurisdiction over the Emelle
facility, but said he would examine reports the company was required
to file with state officials headquartered in Montgomery. In June,
Evans convened a grand jury, saying the panel might meet for months in
its effort to uncover the entire story at the landfill--a facility
that Evans claimed was turning Alabama into "the toilet bowl of the
nation." Evans has said the grand jury is investigating allegations
that Chemical Waste Management improperly accepted such deadly wastes
as dioxin at Emelle--without informing the state.
          During a five-month period beginning in March, when almost daily
press reports in the Mobile, Birmingham and Montgomery newspapers
chronicled the fastest chapters in the Vulcanus/Emelle saga, state
politicians began to take notice. Alabama's attorney general filed a
motion with EPA officials to intervene in the consent agreement
between EPA and the company, saying he would not rest until fines were
levied for the PCB violations at Emelle. Other politicians hopped on
what some were calling the hazardous waste bandwagon, and a spate of
bills dealing with financial 

disclosure by owners of hazardous waste
disposal firms and other issues was introduced. By the time the
session ended in May, the Legislature had passed one bill calling for
a permanent three-person technical monitoring team stationed at
Emelle, and had created a joint interim committee to investigate the
hazardous waste industry in Alabama.
          Meanwhile, on the national scene, in April EPA hearing officer
Steven Schatzow, who conducted the public hearings at Mobile and
Brownsville on the proposed Vulcanus permits, recommended to EPA
assistant administrator for water Jack Ravan that Chemical Waste
Management be allowed to conduct "test" burns to destroy 3.3 millions
gallons of PCBs aboard the ships. The company had publicly estimated
the total amount of high concentration PCBs at Emelle at 2.8 million
gallons, and critics immediately cried foul over the close coincidence
of Schatzow's recommendation and the company's pressing needs. They
also noted that the company had applied only for the eighty million
gallon operating permit--and not for the test burn permits Schatzow
was recommending. Shortly after announcing his recommendations,
Schatzow was transferred to the office of pesticides as part of what
EPA Administrator William Ruckelshaus said was an innovative
agency-wide program designed to infuse new blood at EPA's top levels
by giving career executives the chance to face new challenges by
moving to new areas of the agency. No other transfers have since been
announced under the program.
          In May, however, Ravan assuaged critics and environmentalists by
denying Chemical Waste Management any permits--research or
operating--for the ships. Ravan said the EPA must first adopt
ocean-incineration regulations before issuing more permits, and he
called for additional scientific studies by the agency on the need for
and efficiency of the technology. He did not, however, close the door
on future permits.
          Chemical Waste Management, though, was stuck without an incinerator
for disposal of the Emelle PCBs. The EPA seemed content to allow the
company to continue holding the waste in Alabama under the terms of
the consent agreement, but, strangely, the agreement had never been
formally adopted--perhaps because the agency was waiting for the
Vulcanus permit decision. The lack of final approval left the door
cracked for Alabama authorities, and in May an EPA administrative law
judge ruled that the Alabama attorney general be made a party to the
agreement. Graddick repeated his vows to push for heavy fines and
rapid disposal of the PCBs.
          In the meantime, though, the Alabama Department of Environmental
Management entered the fray by issuing an April 16 directive ordering
the company to stop taking PCBs at Emelle until the illegally-stored
waste was removed from the site. ADEM gave the company a month to
submit a disposal plan, but the company retaliated by filing suit in
federal district court in Birmingham, claiming the state had no
authority to issue the order because federal PCB laws preempted such
an order.
          U.S. District Judge J. Foy Guin granted the company a preliminary
injunction on May 24, and issued a blistering opinion that scored
state officials for impeding "the national goal of safe, uniform and
effective PCB storage and disposal."
          Relieved but perhaps sated on PCBs, the company ceased accepting
all but the low-concentration PCBs, which regulations allow it to bury
at Emelle. ADEM, however, went back to its legal drawing board and on
July 22 returned with a, new, proposed order that would impose a
strict disposal schedule on the company, backed by a fine that would
total $6.9 million if the company missed a series of deadlines called
for in the order. Responding to the company's claim that the April 16
order deprived it of due process, ADEM said the order would become
final only after a July 24 meeting with the company to discuss the
proposed schedule and fine.
          The company claimed the order conflicted with Guin's May ruling,
but otherwise made no initial response. Observers expected the company
to file suit again in federal court.
          
            ******
          
          Although no one has said that the Emelle landfill leaks toxic
chemicals, the attention focused on the dump in recent months has
caused state officials to scrutinize the operation as never before. In
July, ADEM officials announced they had determined that the
groundwater monitoring system used since 1981 at the landfill was
inadequate for several reasons, even though it complies with federal
regulations.
          "In that site, and in these formations, the idea of using a
deep-aquifer monitoring well is not a prudent thing to do," said Buddy
Cox, chief of ADEM's hazardous waste section. "By the time the
material traversed that distance, if it were to happen, you would have
a significant problem on your hands--so significant that it would be
difficult, it not impossible to correct."
          Monitoring wells drilled at the site reach all the way into the
Eutaw aquifer. The well will not detect leaks from the landfill's
disposal trenches until too late, Cox says--only 

after the aquifer has
been contaminated.
          Cox stated publicly in July that he would soon require the company
to drill shallow wells around each disposal trench on the site, wells
that would angle under the trenches and detect leaks before pollutants
reach the aquifer.
          
            ******
          
          Presently, state and federal laws provide that materials contained
in hazardous waste landfills become the property of the state
following what is known as a "post-closure period"--usually a period
of 30 years. Having learned that when companies like Chemical Waste
Management finish their years of making profits from a site like
Emelle, they can eventually wipe their hands and walk away clean from
any liability for future problems, Alabamians are becoming more aware,
and more outspoken, on the potential time bomb that may be ticking
away in the Sumter County hills.
          The feelings of many are summed up by Collette King, who says she
has become active fighting the company for four very specific reasons:
"my three children and this community."
          "They haven't got enough money in the Superfund to buy this house,"
she says.
          
            Booth Gunter and Mike Williams are staff writers for the
Montgomery Advertiser. Gunter worked as a political and general
assignments reporter for the daily Huntsville (Texas) Item until 1983,
writing, among other issues, about the Texas prison system and capital
punishment. Williams, a native of Tuscaloosa, has written about the
history of industrial workers in Birmingham as part of a project
supported by a National Endowment for the Humanities Youth grant.
            Environmental policy in the Reagan Administration has encouraged
industrial producers of hazardous waste to resume, or continue,
long-practiced, devil-may-care ways. Anxious to dispose of toxic waste
as cheaply as possible, many commercial waste companies have headed
South. These companies say they have c~ me to take advantage of the
region's geology and to handle Southern-generated waste. They rarely
mention that other attractions include the low level of environmental
awareness among many Southerners, the laxity of state environmental
laws, inadequate funding for regulatory agencies in most Southern
states, and the willingness of many state and local politicians to
assist the companies in their efforts to purchase land discreetly and
to speedily obtain the necessary permits.
            Ecological awareness among Southerners has grown in recent years as
local groups have sprung up in opposition to particular sites and as
reports of leaky landfills and questionable disposal practices have
spilled into the press. Among the community activists stirs a growing
conviction that toxic waste dumping in the South must be stopped
before it becomes another chapter in an old story--the story of
outsiders, aided by the greed and dishonesty of some of the region's
own politicians, taking advantage of the South's resources for
profit.
          
        
        
          Hazardous Waste in Georgia
          By Breman, VickiVicki Breman
          Vol. 6, No. 4, 1984, pp. 7-12
          
          If you are poor, black and live in the South, you are much more
likely to live near a hazardous waste landfill than if you are white
and middle class. How much more likely? Well, it seems that no one
knows for sure and until recently, no one has tried very hard to find
out.
          If you drive out Georgia Highway 49, near Powersville, you will
find the now-closed Peach County Sanitary Landfill. Rural Peach County
lies near the center of the state. It has a black population of
fifty-one percent. Over twenty-percent of the families in the county
have incomes below the 1980 poverty level.
          Only thirty feet from the Peach County Landfill stands the Lizzie
Chapel Baptist Church, founded in the 1880s by black tenant
farmers. Because it was contaminated with pesticide residue, the well
which once furnished water for Lizzie Chapel was closed by the Georgia
Environmental Protection Division (EPD) in June of 1983. Today the
twenty-five members of the Lizzie Chapel congregation carry their own
water to choir practice. Contamination of the wells of the five
families who live just down the hill from the chapel seems inevitable
as more of the toxic residue, the leachate, moves
into the water supply.
          Both the Georgia EPD (which manages the state's hazardous waste
program), and the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA--which
administers the federal Superfund program for clean-up of abandoned
toxic dumps) have put the Peach County Landfill on the current list to
be considered for clean-up using Superfund money. The Peach County
officials who ran the landfill until it was closed in 1978 are not
particularly concerned. Tom Franklin, the county administrator, said
he "didn't even know the church was up there 'til I saw their new
sign."
          The dumping of "empty" pesticide bags and floor sweepings from the
Woolfolk Chemical Works (of Fort Valley, Georgia) contaminated the
Peach County Landfill. Begun in 1925 by a local family, Woolfolk
currently employs 125 people and is one of the biggest chemical
manufacturers in the state. Peach County officials allowed Woolfolk to
use the landfill from the early 1960s until its closing. Woolfolk
dumped such known carcinogens as lindane, dieldrin, benzene
hexachloride and several others listed on EPA's Toxic Substances
Control Inventory. Supposedly, Woolfolk's dumping was restricted to a
special section of the landfill, but monitoring by Georgia's
Environmental Protection Division indicates that dumping actually
occurred over the entire site.
          The Powersville landfill is only one of over 525 sites in Georgia
on a current Environmental Protection Agency inventory list. The EPA
inventory gives the names of all sites for which the state of Georgia
either knows that hazardous wastes are being currently generated,
treated or disposed of (supposedly lawfully and carefully)--or where
there exists the possibility of some contamination on sites used years
ago and now closed or abandoned.
          A 1981 study Hazardous Waste Generation in Georgia,
by Dr. James E. Kundell and S. Wesley Woolf at the University of
Georgia Institute of Government, estimated that industries in
seventy-two counties of Georgia produce over 3.5 million tons of
hazardous waste annually. This amount has surely risen in Georgia
since 1981. It may even have been an underestimate at the time--if
viewed in light of recently released EPA estimates on hazardous waste
generation nationwide. The Wall Street Journal has
reported that the EPA has revised its latest estimate of waste subject
to federal regulation upwards by seventy-six percent to 264 million
metric tons. This is four times EPA's own preliminary 1982
estimates.
          This latest survey found that only about four percent of the total
identified waste was handled by commercial disposal companies, but
that they receive waste from about eighty-four percent of all
hazardous waste sources nationwide. This means that most of the
hazardous waste generated in this country is treated, stored or
disposed of on-site or on adjoining property that the company has
purchased. These industrial sites are often in or near urban centers
and adjacent to low-income residential areas.
          Although the surface area of a landfill site can look harmless
enough, there may be chemicals buried--either covered-over through
passage of time, or on purpose--that are slowly leaking into the earth
and passing into the groundwater system. It may take years to discover
the damage.
          Much of the waste labelled "hazardous" is composed of chemicals
which are either suspected or known to cause. cancer. While exposure
to some hazardous waste materials causes immediate symptoms of
"poisoning" such as nausea, headaches, or nervous system disorders,
exposure to others produces no visible symptoms. Cancer may develop
long 

after exposure. And, because of the contamination of drinking
water, or of soil, or of the air where people live and work,
individuals often may be unaware that they have even been exposed to
hazardous wastes.
          The placing of hazardous waste disposal facilities in low-income,
minority communities follows the logic of an "economic reality" that
argues that it is cheaper and easier to put hazardous waste sites in
sparsely populated areas where land costs are low and residents have
little political power.
          A 1967 engineering study which led to the site selection for the
non-hazardous Seminole Road Landfill in Georgia's DeKalb County
illustrates that public officials do consider the likely response and
the clout of area residents in choosing among alternative sites. Al
Smith, a resident and participant in the DeKalb County controversy,
points out that ninety-eight percent of the residences surrounding the
chosen area were either black-owned or black-occupied. "Minorities and
low-income folks," says Smith, "are seen as less likely to raise a
fuss and mount an organized opposition."
          Organized community opposition can be powerful and effective. In
late 1977, Georgia's Environmental Protection Division issued a permit
for what was its first and so far, only, commercial hazardous waste
landfill, Gordon Services Company. According to Eugene Zwenig,
technical advisor to Residents Against a Polluted Environment (RAPE),
which successfully closed that landfill, Wilkinson County officials
testified at a federal court hearing in August of 1978 that they had
licensed only a waste oil refinery, a re-cycling industry. The site
was being used to dispose of a variety of hazardous materials from as
far away as Kansas.
          Investigation by Mr. Zwenig's group revealed that the Georgia EPD
had allowed dumping to take place for at least a month before it had
issued a permit and that protection and testing at the disposal site
were inadequate. The state had issued this permit in disregard of
existing federal guidelines under the 1976 Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA) and the 1977 EPA Guidelines for State
Officials.
          Under public pressure from residents of the town of Gordon, who
maintained an observation post at the entrance to the site around the
clock for two months, the Director of Georgia's EPD, Leonard
Ledbetter, commissioned a- task force of five members, (three from his
own staff, one from the EPA and one from the US Geological Survey), to
conduct an "independent technical evaluation" of the site. The task
force recommended suspension of disposal at the site. The task force
recommended suspension of disposal at the site pending further study
and until the operator submitted for approval the procedures to be
used to insure safe operation of the site, information which should
have been considered before issuing a permit.
          The Wilkinson County site has never re-opened. Eugene Zwenig warns
that "it is now a Superfund site of the future." Monitoring wells at
the site are being sampled every six months according to John Taylor,
chief of the Georgia EPD Industrial and Hazardous Waste Management
Program. This recent change from quarterly monitoring is of
questionable wisdom since contamination is more likely to appear with
each passing month that the waste stays in the ground.
          Donny Weaver lives next to the site. He has his own well checked by
the Georgia EPD each time it checks the Wilkinson County site. And,
although the EPD has promised to send him copies of its monitoring
results, he has yet to receive any.
          Lack of a commercial hazardous waste landfill distresses those
state officials and businessmen who believe that Georgia needs one to
entice migrating industry. Some in the state are willing to sit down
at the welcome table with the gleam of the New South in one eye and
the sting of hazardous waste in the other. "Georgia could make up to
twenty-five to thirty-five million dollars a year on hazardous waste
sites," says former Governor George Busbee. Nor does current Governor
Joe Frank Harris disavow this position.
          Not to be deterred, in 1980 state of Georgia officials again tried
to permit a commercial hazardous landfill waste facility--this time in
sparsely populated (7,000) Heard County. The 1979 Georgia Hazardous
Waste Act, passed in response to the Wilkinson County situation and
also in an effort to prevent federal regulation of hazardous waste in
Georgia under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, had stripped
local governments of any control over solid hazardous waste
disposal. No one told Heard County officials that Earth Management,
Incorporated (EMI), a branch of IU Conversion Systems of Pennsylvania,
had an option to buy 

276 acres of land in the county and had begun
preliminary investigations at the site.
          Word got out about Earth Management's plans in Heard County. When
the public hearing was held by the Georgia EPD on the permit
application in October of 1980, community opposition was galvanized. A
group known as Georgia 2000 filed lawsuits to stop the landfill. The
efforts of the Heard County citizens were aided by Eugene Zwenig and
his friends in Wilkinson County. Zwenig, who holds degrees in civil
engineering from Auburn University and the University of Florida, is a
retired researcher from the Tennessee Valley Authority.
          Once again, the state of Georgia's ability to safely manage a
hazardous waste program was challenged. A study from the Center for
Environmental Safety at Georgia Tech found that Earth Management's
proposed facility provided inadequate staff and laboratory ability to
analyze the wastes it intended to dump and, "based on prior landfill
experience, surface and ground water will be contaminated and
uncontrolled reactions between incompatible waste will occur with the
resultant possibility of toxic fumes, fires and explosion."
          Earth Management withdrew its permit application in the hope that
public reaction would subside. It never did. On June 14, 1984, an
unusual agreement was signed between Heard County and IU Conversions
Systems. The county paid the company $350,000 and in return received
ownership of the 276 acres where the dump was to have been placed,
plus a guarantee that the company would never try to put another dump
in Heard County nor within two miles of its borders.
          Given the state of Georgia's poor record at managing hazardous
waste disposal, how have they continued to act so autonomously?
          It was not until 1970 that the US Congress finally recognized that
hazardous waste storage and disposal was "a problem of grave national
concern. " Having acknowledged the problem, it took six more years for
Congress to enact the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA),
designed to regulate hazardous waste from "cradle-to-grave."
Presently, the Reagan Administration's hostility toward protection of
the environment obstructs RCRA's implementation.
          The RCRA defines hazardous waste as "solid waste,
or a combination of solid wastes, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics
may--cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality of
an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible,
illness; or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed." This law
deals only with waste, not non-waste activities in which toxic
materials are used--such as leaking tanks, spills in loading areas,
leaking underground pipes, or leaking manufacturing equipment.
          The Resource Conservation and Recovery Act required hazardous waste
facility owners to obtain a permit. Because a number of facilities
were already operating when the RCRA became law, a mechanism was
included in the law to allow facilities in operation on November 19,
1980 to continue under "interim status" until a final hazardous waste
permit was issued. All that was required to continue business as usual
was for a facility to report to the EPA that: 1) the facility handles
hazardous waste and, 2) the name, location and identification of what
hazardous materials were to be handled and in what manner.
          If the Peach County Landfill near Powersville had still been
operating in November, 1980, it could have received "interim status"
and operated until its monitoring well showed contamination--which
occurred last spring. The EPA was to have developed permit and
management regulations within eighteen months of the passage of
RCRA. Instead of meeting that deadline, it issued "minimum standards"
for management of facilities under interim status.
          Although final regulations have been in effect since January 1983,
they will need to be strengthened for years to come. The current
regulations have no meaningful applicability since so few final
permits have been issued (only thirty-five in EPA's Region
IV--Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina,
South Carolina, Tennessee--as of the summer of 1984). Any new
facilities are subject to the final regulations. The EPA estimates
that it will be 1989 or 1990 before all facilities either have been
issued final permits or have been closed by denial of a final
permit.
          Georgia manages its own program, as do most states (state
implementation is encouraged by EPA), and claims to be moving quickly
to issue final permits. Up until the end of this April, according to
EPA records, Georgia had issued the fewest final permits of any state
in Region IV. Abruptly, 

in May, the situation changed. Since May of
1984, the Industrial and Hazardous Waste Management Program of the
Georgia EPD has been considering final permits at the rate of
approximately one a week. It has not however, publicized the fact that
it is moving so quickly to grant permits to these sites nor has the
EPD encouraged citizens to participate in the permitting process.
          The present method of advising the public is to print a public
notice in the legal section of the Atlanta
Journal-Constitution and in the local paper of the
county in which the hazardous waste operation is taking or will take
place. This notice gives the name and address of the company, the
activities to be permitted and the locations where the draft permits
can be inspected for comments. The notice also provides that persons
may request a public hearing to comment on the permit application and
ask questions about the proposed activities.
          The Legal Environmental Assistance Foundation (LEAF, the South's
only regional, public interest environmental law firm, see
Southern Changes March/April, 1984) is currently
seeking financial support for a Southern regional monitoring project
to review these draft permits, make comments, and to notify and
educate citizens near the proposed sites to enable them to participate
in these decisions that bear upon their lives.
          Although it sounds technical, such review is not difficult for
citizens. There are four main areas of concern: does the permit meet
the requirements of the federal regulation in 40 Code of Federal
Regulations Section 264 for groundwater monitoring? Are the closure
and post-closure plans adequate? Are container requirements
sufficiently protective? Are the provisions for financial
responsibility stringent enough so that if the facility has a
contamination problem in the future, the state and its taxpayers are
not left responsible after the company has left with its profits?
          Georgia could have established more stringent rules and regulations
than the bare minimum required to obtain EPA approval for its
program. Although some states in the US have strengthened their own
rules, Georgia and most other Southern states have not. Instead, the
state has simply incorporated as its own the federal RCRA
regulations--with their many weaknesses and dangers: inadequate
groundwater protection standards, no requirements for closing
facilities until leaks are found and corrected, and no financial
assurance for corrective action on leaking sites.
          Worst of all, the federal law which Georgia adopted exempts those
who produce one ton or less of hazardous waste a month. "This small
generator exemption is very scary," says Georgia Representative Denny
Dobbs, formerly with the Emergency Response Branch of EPA in Region
IV. Dobbs favors closing this loophole which has been estimated as
allowing up to twelve-million metric tons of hazardous waste
nationwide to be sent to ordinary municipal landfills such as the
Peach County site. There are fifty municipal landfills on the
Superfund inventory for Georgia, the majority of which may well
require a clean-up in the future.
          The state of Florida has moved to close this "small generator
loophole" by recently amending its Hazardous Waste Management Program
to apply to all waste generators in excess of one-hundred pounds per
month. Florida has also instituted a program to enable small
businesses, households and other small generators of hazardous wastes
(used electric batteries, containers for business machine chemicals,
paint cans, household poison containers) to safely dispose of them
during "amnesty days" established by the legislature for several
locations around the state.
          The US Congress is considering measures to deal with the problem
nationwide. Hazardous waste from small quantity generators is now
covered by the Solid Waste Disposal Act and amendments to RCRA now
pending before Congress would reduce the small generator exemption in
that law to one-hundred pounds per month.
          As currently written, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
appears unlikely to prevent the sites it regulates from becoming major
clean-up problems in the future. A staff memorandum from the
Congressional Office of Technology Assessment points out that "no
matter what may be done to limit land disposal in the future, the
interim-status facilities have already received billions of tons of
hazardous waste over several decades."
          Lastly, RCRA merely tracks hazardous wastes and assumes that they
will be properly disposed of, but gives no incentive to industry to
recycle or to select alternative methods of disposal. RCRA encourages
landfilling as long as it is cheap. And landfilling is likely to
remain cheap until more stringent and protective regulations are in
place. As Eugene Zwenig notes, "The need exists to remove industry
from the burial habit toward full conservation and recovery
practices." To do this, we must "attack the problem at its root."
Total cost should be borne by the generator of hazardous waste with
rewards for successful reclaiming and recycling projects.
          The magnitude of the abandoned hazardous waste site problem finally
led Congress, in 1980, to enact the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act, known popularly as
Superfund. Through taxes on manufacturers, producers, exporters and
importers of oil and forty-two chemical substances, a trust fund of
$1.6 billion was created. This fund was combined with the National
Contingency Plan established in 1968 to respond to emergency oil
spills and releases of hazardous substances in navigable
waters--funded through the Clean Water Act.
          Superfund money, which is reimbursable to the govern-

ment by the
party responsible for the pollution, is available for three kinds of
situations:
          Immediate Removals--where prompt action is needed to
protect public health or the environment. These include such things as
protecting drinking water supply, averting fires or explosions and
preventing exposure to highly toxic substances. These actions must be
taken within six months and at a cost of less than one million
dollars.
          Planned Removals--for quick, but not emergency
response actions. They are designed to minimize risks and are subject
to the same time and cost restrictions as emergency removals.
          Remedial Actions--long-term, more expensive actions
directed to permanent clean-up. Only sites that go through a rigorous
investigation and priority ranking process are eligible for remedial
action, since money is limited and cleanup expensive.
          Every attempt is made to find the parties responsible for the
pollution and require that they pay at least part of the clean-up The
Powersville site in Peach County is currently being considered for
designation as a National Priority Site; a decision is expected in
October. If Powersville is selected, a funding formula for clean-up
will have to be devised.
          Superfund operates on the premise that responsible parties are
liable for the situations they have created. If they can be found and
are not bankrupt, they will pay a large share of the cleanup costs. If
no responsible party can be found, Superfund pays one-hundred percent
for immediate or planned removals. For remedial actions, ninety
percent of privately owned sites or fifty percent of municipally owned
sites are paid for by federal money with the state left to pay the
difference. That local governments have to bear such a. large amount
of clean-up costs in their own jurisdictions tends to make them less
than eager to discover hazardous sites.
          At this point in the Peach County case, for example, Woolfolk
Chemical Works denies any responsibility because they "didn't break
any laws" and such liability, Woolfolk claims, would force it out of
business. Because the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act was not
in force at the time, technically, Woolfolk did not break any
laws. But, as Leonard Ledbetter, Director of Georgia's Environmental
Protection Division has stated, "In no way does Superfund legislation
have any language that forgives the source for having created an
environmental problem." Even if Superfund money is available, Woolfolk
should pay.
          What will happen if Powersville is not selected for Superfund
and/or Woolfolk is not found liable for the contamination at the site?
Then, as much as the full cost of clean-up will fall to the
municipality (as owners of the landfill) and to the state of
Georgia. Georgia has its own Superfund statute as part of its
Hazardous Waste Management Act, which created a Hazardous Waste Trust
Fund. The Trust Fund's only sources of money are bond forfeitures (of
which there have been none), state assessed fees and surcharges, and
civil penalties. The fund presently contains only $141,000 according
to John Taylor of EDP's Industrial and Hazardous Waste Management
Program. That amount is meaningless given the costs involved. The
Luminous Processes site, the only one in Georgia to be cleaned up
under Superfund, cost $750,000 to remove 1,800 cubic feet of
radiation-contaminated soil from a one-acre area and transport it to a
secured disposal site.
          The actions at Powersville would be different, and would be
directed at protecting the water supply--possibly by curtaining-off
the underlying groundwater from the contaminated site and assuring an
alternative water supply for those with contaminated wells. It would
be very expensive.
          Georgia has over 525 sites on the Superfund inventory, yet only a
total of five have been considered for Superfund. When asked why this
was so, John Taylor responded, "Georgia is not a very industrialized
state, especially compared with areas in the Midwest and Northeast, so
it is unlikely that we have many hazardous waste sites that would be
eligible for Superfund." In all likelihood, Taylor's assumption is
erroneous. It is also dangerous. Even one Times Beach or Love Canal
situation in Georgia would be catastrophic.
          Because of lack of money, EPD only began to assess some of its
potential Superfund sites in January 1984. This action was made
possible by a federal grant which is limited to preliminary
assessments and site inspections; it is neither sufficient, nor
intended for cleanup.
          Georgia needs a state superfund with adequate financing to both
encourage the state to assess abandoned sites for possible clean-up
and to have sufficient funds to do a thorough clean-up if needed. The
Conference on Alternative State and Local Policies in its publication
The Toxics Crisis: What the States Should Do,
recommends the adoption of independent and stable funding mechanisms,
based on fees levied both on the generation and disposal of hazardous
waste. As the report emphasizes, this dual approach discourages
on-site production of hazardous waste by the generator tax and
prevents imported waste from escaping taxation.
          The report also suggests that states designate some of their
superfund money for litigation expenses to investigate and pursue
illegal dumpers. Money recovered could then be returned to the
superfund making it partially self-supporting.
          Most of the Southern states do have their own
superfunds (Alabama and Arkansas do not) but although some have better
funding mechanisms than others, given their caps of three-million to
six-million dollars and the costs of clean ups, only South Carolina is
ever likely to have an adequate amount to clean up more than one or
two sites.
          The Georgia office of the Legal Environmental Assistance Foundation
(LEAF) is currently preparing a report on the current status of
abandoned waste sites in Georgia, outlining the need for sufficient
funds to take care of the problems that are sure to be found. This
report will be distributed to Georgia legislators and will be
available to the general public.
          The other major problem the citizens of Georgia face is their
government's current insistence upon a hazardous waste landfill in the
state. According to the EPA, ninety-percent of the hazardous waste
generated today can be disposed of safely without landfilling. "Land
burial and deep well injection are absolute last resorts," says Denny
Dobbs. His order of priority is waste reduction, recycling and waste
exchange, treatment (biological and chemical) and incineration.
          Among Southern states, Florida already has banned hazardous waste
landfills and is beginning a program to promote resource recovery,
recycling, re-use and treatment. 

In order to eliminate its landfills
and encourage alternatives, Georgia needs to assess exactly what
hazardous wastes are being generated, determine the state-of-the-art
disposal method for each and decide the proper kind of disposal
facility and state needs. Even the best alternative methods will need
close monitoring.
          Some alternatives to landfills are more expensive in the short
term. But the costs of living with hazardous waste landfills--measured
by the inevitable clean-up bill and the damage to human health for
generations to come--is considerable and ultimately unacceptable.
          
            Vicki Breman is an attorney with the Georgia office of
the Legal Environmental Assistance Foundation.
          
        
        
          Blues for Mr. President
          By Rankin, TomTom Rankin
          Vol. 6, No. 4, 1984, pp. 12-13
          
          
            MR. PRESIDENT
          
          
            Oh, went down to the employment office this
morning
            
            Lord, didn't have a thing for poor
me
          
          
            Went down to the employment office this
morning
            
            Lord, didn't have a thing for poor
me
          
          
            Went down to the welfare
            
            Lord, the reply was the same
          
          
            Mr. President
            
            see the
poor people out there in line
          
          
            Mr. President
            
            see the
poor people out there in line
          
          
            Lord, they trying to find a job
            
            and a job so hard to find
          
          
            Now Mr. President, DEAR Mr. President:
          
          
            Whole fifty states writing you now 
            
            Trying to let you know their condition, people is
suffering
            
            People being put out of doors
            
            People is sitting on the streets, losing their
homes
            
            Ain't got money to pay off their
mortgage
            
            Banks going broke
            
            Little businesses shut down
            
            People suffering everywhere Mr. President
            
            I know you say that things is progressing a little
            
            But the poor man is suffering
            
            You cut the poor a whole lot; the blind, the cripple, the
lame
            
            Come live with me a little while
            
            Find out how the situation is here
            
            Then you'll reconsider a little bit
            
            Go live with the blind man
            
            Go
live with the cripple man
          
          
            Yours truly, 
            
            Whole fifty
states
          
          
            Mr. President
            
            please give
the people something to do
          
          
            Mr. President, oh man
            
            give these people something to do
          
          
            People everywhere is singing
            
            singing the no job blues
          
          
            Please Mr. President
          
          Words and Music Copyright 1983 by Richard Henry. All rights
reserved.
          Born in Beaufort on the coast of North Carolina in 1921, Richard
"Big Boy" Henry grew up working odd jobs in town and on the farm,
trying to supplement his parents' income. When he wasn't delivering
groceries or helping his mother wash clothes for white townspeople,
Big Boy would listen to the intinerant bluesmen on the streets of
Beaufort and New Bern. In 1933, he met Fred Miller, a guitar player
from Sumter, South Carolina who was traveling the eastern seaboard. "I
would sing for him and he would play," he remembers. "At that time I
was just trying to learn how to play. Of course, around the age of
fourteen I started to play, but before then I'd do all his singing for
him. And we'd go around on the streets and the corners and different
houses, and we'd pick up, maybe, twenty-five, thirty, fifty cents here
and twenty-five, thirty, fifty cents there." As Fred Miller and Big
Boy played music as a team, Big Boy learned new songs from the more
experienced bluesmen, but also began to improvise and compose his own
lyrics.
          By the mid-forties Big Boy Henry was providing for his wife and
children partly through his music. When he wasn't off the coast of
Mississippi or Texas pulling nets on menhaden boats, he was playing
music at a neighborhood house party or cafe. Often, he would return
from a fishing 

trip on Thursday or Friday and catch a bus to New York
City where he would spend the weekend playing the blues' "Long about
the middle of the forties, early fifties Fred and I would catch a
weekend bus to New York. We'd play on the streets, in the beer joints,
went up on Thompson Street in Brooklyn. We could make more money up
there than we could down here." Often he would return with eighty or
ninety dollars. In the mid-fifties, however, Big Boy exchanged his
blues guitar for the pulpit and began preaching in a church in New
Bern, North Carolina. At one time he pastored two churches, although
he never used preaching as his main source of income: "Religion is a
thing no man should just sit down and live off." He continued to work
as a commerical fisherman on the menhaden boats while also fishing his
own nets in the Neuse River. For nearly thirty years he continued
preaching and fishing, playing no blues until 1980 when he once again
picked up his guitar and began singing and composing songs.
          A gentle and articulate man, Big Boy Henry now composes regularly,
borrowing lines and chords from traditional blues repertoires as he
comments on the world around him. One August night in Durham while
opening for a John Lee Hooker concert, Big Boy began to improvise on a
talking blues. "That was August 22 of 1982 and suddenly I thought
about a whole lot of things," he explains. "Mostly when I'm singing in
places like that, everything I sing's new. So I thought about
"Mr. President" and it went over big there."
          The song he calls "Mr. President" tells of hard times
brought on by Reagan Administration policy. "What made me think of it,
I was talking a little bit, joking about how hard things is, so it
come to me and I said I believe I'll sing some of it. Wherever I would
go, wherever I would sing, people I would entertain, and then on the
news, people be sitting outdoors losing their homes, have no rent to
pay. I think not only Reagan, I think the whole country should have
more compassion than that."
          Unlike many of the songs he sings which speak more subtly of social
problems, "Mr. President" addresses politics
candidly. The song, he feels, reflects the opinion of many blacks and
whites who have suffered from the economic and social policies brought
on by Reagan and his team. "I think that he don't have the feeling
towards us like he should," Big Boy says of Reagan's lack of concern
for blacks. "I don't think it's through hate or anything, but I reckon
he "rowed up that way."
          Today Richard "Big Boy" Henry lives in a two-story farm house in
Beaufort with his wife, Ann, and seven children. He performs in
Beaufort and Greenville often, and occasionally travels to Durham and
Winston-Salem to appear at festivals. "Mr. President" his
first record, was recorded on the label and is available from Audio
Arts Recording Company, Route 1, Box 59, in Greenville, North Carolina
27834, (919) 758-2240.
          
            Tom Rankin is a folklorist and photographer now living in
Jackson, Mississippi. An exhibit of his photographs opens Oct. 12 at
Vanderbilt University.
          
        
        
          Southern Electric Cooperatives Still Segregated
          By Pace, DavidDavid Pace
          Vol. 6, No. 4, 1984, pp. 15-16
          
          Only two percent of the board members of rural electric
cooperatives in twelve Southern states are black, even though the
population of the areas served by those cooperatives is about
twenty-four percent black.
          That's one of the findings of a two-year study of Southern electric
cooperatives by the Southern Regional Council.
          "Electric cooperatives were born from the magnificent notion that
they would be grassroots democratic organizations that serve all their
members," said Steve Suitts, executive director of the Council. "But
over time in the South, they have grown to be the very opposite of the
concept that gave them birth."
          Suitts said the Council's Co-op Democracy and Development Project,
which is at least six months away from publishing its findings and
recommendations, found under-representation of blacks on the boards of
electric cooperatives throughout the South.
          Relying on documents the electric cooperatives filed with the
federal government between 1981 and 1983, Suitts said the project
found that out of a total of 3,035 board members in twelve Southern
states, only sixty-one were black.
          In Mississippi, for example, cooperatives provide electricity to
areas where the population is thirty-seven percent black. But Suitts
said no black ever has served on a co-op board in Mississippi.
          The Southern state with the best representation of blacks on co-op
boards, according to the SRC's findings, was South Carolina, where
five percent of the 221 board members were black.
          Suitts said board members of Southern electric cooperatives have
been able to perpetuate themselves in office by turning their annual
meetings--those required by law for the election of board
members--into more of an entertainment event or picnic for the
community than a democratic election.
          In addition, he said Council researchers have turned up evidence
that board members use a variety of other tactics to keep themselves
in office, including:
          --Using co-op employees to solicit proxy votes for incumbent board
members when they are reading meters or collecting bills, while at the
same time denying potential challengers to board members access to
lists of the cooperative's customer-members.
          --Scheduling annual meetings at times when most members cannot
attend, and abruptly adjourning such meetings when it appears
incumbent board members might lose their reelection bids.
          Mattie Olson, a spokeswoman for the National Rural Electric
Cooperative Association in Washington, said her organization would
have no comment on the SRC's study until it is published and the
association has time to analyze its findings.
          Electric Cooperatives in the South were set up in the 1930s and
1940s under a New Deal program designed to turn on the lights in rural
America. They were created by local citizens using model legislation
enacted by the various Southern legislatures.
          Because that model legislation provided that cooperatives would be
democratically controlled by their customers, only two Southern
states--Arkansas and Virginia--have given their public service
commissions the authority to regulate the rates charged by electric
cooperatives.
          
            
              Racial makeup of Southern rural electric cooperatives
              
                 state
                Black Population in Areas Served by
Co-op
                 Total Number Co-op Board Members
                Number Black Co-op Board Members
               
                  
                    Alabama 
                     21% 
                     192
                     4 
                  
                  
                    Arkansas
                     17% 
                     178 
                     3 
                  
                  
                    Florida 
                     10% 
                     158
                     2 
                  
                  
                    Georgia
                     26% 
                     399 
                     11 
                  
                  
                    Kentucky 
                     14% 
                     186
                     1
                  
                  
                    Louisiana
                     28% 
                     197 
                     1 
                  
                  
                    Mississippi 
                     37% 
                     201
                     0 
                  
                  
                    North Carolina
                     22% 
                     304 
                     13 
                  
                  
                    South Carolina 
                     24% 
                    221 
                     11 
                  
                  
                    Tennessee
                     14% 
                     205 
                     2 
                  
                  
                    Texas 
                     16% 
                     645
                     8 
                  
                  
                    Virginia
                     26% 
                     149 
                     6 
                  
         
            
          
          Source: Southern Regional Council
          Based on documents co-ops filed with the federal government between
1981-1983.
          In one state where co-op electric rates are not
regulated

--Mississippi--Suitts said a study by a legislative committee
found that cooperatives had the lowest operating costs of any provider
of electricity in the state, but they also had the highest rates.
          "If they were entirely government institutions, there would be much
more strict scrutiny of their conduct, and there would be much easier
ways to get at their nonresponsiveness to customers.
          "As it is, they sit right between government and the private sector
and get the benefit of the worst abuses of both," he said.
          
            David Pace writes for the Associated Press.
          
        
        
          The Electric Valley
          Reviewed by Whisnant, DavidDavid E. Whisnant
          Vol. 6, No. 4, 1984, pp. 18-22
          
          The Electric Valley. Directed and produced by
Ross Spears, music by Kenton Coe, narration by Wilma Dykeman, research
and writing by Richard Couto, cinematography by Anthony Forma. Funding
provided by the National Endowment for the Arts, the National
Endowment for the Humanities and the American Film
Institute. Knoxville: James Agee Film Product, 1983. 90 mins., 16mm
color, videotape available.
          TVA was "part of my life," Nashville Tennessean
publisher John Siegenthaler says as The Electric Valley
opens; it was like "oatmeal in the mornings . . . and it was good."
What the film presents, however, is not so much TVA's goodness, but
its conflicted history. When he returns to the camera at the end of
the film, Siegenthaler admits that confidence in TVA has been "badly
shaken" during its first fifty years. But there is hope, he insists:
"institutions can be renewed." Some valley citizens are not so
sure. "It was kind of like waitin' to die," says one whose land was
taken and whose home was bulldozed for the controversial Tellico
project; "I learned how temporary we are here on this earth," says
another.
          The story of TVA is not just about dams and phosphate fertilizer
and cheap electric power, but about some of the fundamental tensions
in our national life: private property vs. the common good; private
preference vs. public policy; centralized planning vs. organic drift;
individuals vs. institutions; tangible goods vs. intangible values;
tradition vs. change and "progress"; family and community vs. the
state. Few other institutions in our national life have so
consistently focused arguments on both sides of these
questions. Partly because it articulates and dramatizes these
oppositions, The Electric Valley is by far the best
film ever made about TVA--and there have been a God's plenty of
them.
          The film follows TVA's history in a simple chronological sequence
of well-marked segments: the birth of the idea through the christening
of the first dam (Norris) on the 

Clinch River; the early valley
electrification program; initial opposition from private power
companies; the conflict between directors David Lilienthal and Arthur
E. Morgan, and Morgan's departure in 1938; the World War II period
during which TVA supplied power for the Manhattan Project at Oak Ridge
("We thank God that it has come to us, rather than to our enemies,"
President Truman says of the bomb); the shift to coal-fired steam
power during and after the war; opposition to TVA by political
conservatives during the 1950s, and the Dixon-Yates scandal; the
economic and environmental impact of TVA's stripmined coal purchases,
especially in connection with its steam plant at Paradise
("Mr. Peabody's coal train has done hauled it away"), Kentucky; the
agency's subsequent commitment to nuclear power, and the near disaster
at Brown's Ferry; the Tellico/snail darter controversy; and the recent
cancellation of TVA's partially completed Hartsville nuclear
installation.
          The Electric Valley gets much of its force through the skillful use
of archival film footage, interviews with early TVA officials and
partisans, and interviews with ordinary citizens who have felt the
negative effects of some TVA programs. Each has been used before in
TVA films, but they have never been blended so effectively.
          Some of the early dam-construction and rural electrification
footage is almost too familiar from TVA's own public relations films,
but other segments are fresh and unfamiliar enough to fan the coals of
the old idealism (and the old controversies) briefly into flame again:
Norris Village residents working in shop and cannery; FDR opening the
gates of Norris Dam; director Lilienthal presenting a $44 million
private power company buyout check to Commonwealth and Southern
president Wendell Willkie ("Good luck, Dave," says Willkie); opponents
Lilienthal and Morgan before Congressional committees; an
under-the-big-top TVA promotion of electrical appliances, with a
robotized refrigerator that hypes itself to the assembled crowd, and a
voice-of-God narrator who promises "a way of life that is physically
gratifying and spiritually uplifting"; Eisenhower at a press
conference, linking TVA to "creeping socialism"; Walter Cronkite on
the CBS Evening News, announcing TVA's victory over the Cherokees and
the snail darter at Tellico.
          A number of important early TVA officials are interviewed in the
film: Lilienthal, engineer Harry Wiersma, chief engineer George Palo
(who praises GE's "turnkey" nuclear plants), Eisenhower-appointed
director General Herbert Vogel ("TVA meant nothing to me, really");
director Aubrey Wagner, who presided over TVA's entry into what he
calls "the new world of the atomic age," and who blandly assures us
that the Brown's Ferry incident was "not serious"; recent director
David Freeman struggling with a forty-year legacy of policy
contradictions. Taken together, these cameo appearances telegraph
TVA's history: early idealism and achievement, persistent liberal
hopes and conservative opposition, hydro-coal-nuclear technological
drift, corporate co-optation, perennial struggles with high social
costs.
          Some of TVA's contradictions emerge most forcefully in interviews
with lower-level TVA employees, and with local citizens who felt the
agency's impact most keenly. Since part of TVA's early employment
policy was to hire locally, the two groups overlap
substantially. Norris Dam worker Curt Stiner talks of "a whole passer"
of Clinch River Stiners 

who worked on TVA's first dam; Henry Clark,
the featured test-demonstration farmer in TVA's early 1940s film
The Valley of the Tennessee, tells of his experiences
with the agriculture program. Clark and Stiner are older now, but look
prosperous and peaceful, having benefitted (we seem urged to conclude)
from the TVA experiment.
          But others have not. In one of the more moving sequences, a man who
was forcibly relocated from the Norris area tells of having bought
forty acres of ancestral land from his father, logging his own timber,
and building "a good barn, a good crib, and a good smokehouse." "I dug
me a good well and ever-thing," he says, but he got to live on the
place only a year before TVA bought him out and moved him off. A
similar sequence introduces a black Fortana worker who recalls that
racism in the area was so intense that black workers had to be guarded
at night (Lilienthal's "seamless web" still had a ravelling seam or
two), and that TVA, needing the black workers (white workers "couldn't
get no [concrete] buckets down there and back"), acquiesced to the
extent of building a Jim Crow wing on the mess hall.
          Decade after decade, such costs and contradictions
accumulate. Coal-fired steam power brings acid-laden fly ash that
filters into the clothing and beds and takes the paint off the
automobile of the Smith family who live near the Paradise steam plant
("Pardon Our Progress," says a billboard on the fence). Before finally
forcing them to leave, TVA offers free car washes. Similarly at
Tellico: the Ritchie family loses their 119 acre farm because TVA
wants three acres of it.
          One thing films can offer better than any other medium is efficient
and powerfully compressed narration. Thus one can learn more TVA
history from watching The Electric Valley than could be
learned in any other way in a comparable amount of time. Some
excellent research, writing, shooting, and editing have given us
images that linger, words that echo, issues that won't go away.
          And yet efficiency and compression come at a price. That price can
be raised by poor research and editing--as it too frequently is in
documentaries--or lowered by insight and skill, as here. But the price
is there in The Electric Valley, nevertheless, and one has to assess
it. Consider two brief examples.
          One searches TVA's own documentary films in vain for Arthur
E. Morgan. He has been banished, non-personed, by the TVA commissars;
it is as if he never was. But he is present in The Electric
Valley; the temperamental and ideological differences between
him and Lilienthal are at least sketched, and we are asked to consider
the cost of his firing by President Roosevelt in 1938. Morgan emerges
as a humane and creative public servant sacrificed to TVA
expediency. That much is to the film's credit. And yet the available
books, articles, and congressional hearings tell a more complicated
story than that: Morgan was also naive in some ways, an impractical dreamer in others, a cultural elitist in
still others. And at last his own worst enemy. So the dialectic is too
stark in the film; it lacks subtlety, and to the extent that it does,
it misleads.
          My second example is less familiar than Morgan. Test-demonstration
farmer Henry Clark appears here for perhaps a minute or two, and
sounds not very much different from the younger Henry Clark of The
Valley of the Tennessee: TVA worked for him; he signed on the dotted
line, deferred his gratifications, bought the phosphate, contoured his
fields, raised the best crop of tobacco ever seen in the county, and
tooled smilingly by his dumbstruck neighbors on his new tractor.
          And yet when I located and spent several days with Henry Clark in
1980, preparing to write an article on the earlier film, I found him a
complex and surprisingly conservative man who (like General Vogel)
never really had much use for TVA. Through five or six hours of taped
interviews (some of it done while we watched The Valley of the
Tennessee together at a local high school) I heard him
(echoing Wendell Willkie) express grave doubts about TVA-style
"socialism." He told me he had made a lot of money in Knoxville real
estate, and I came away feeling that he had "played" TVA in the same
way he played the real estate market. Ronald Reagan, he told me, was
his candidate. Did 

Clark not say those things to Ross Spears'
interviewers? Did they not talk to him long enough to ask? I don't
know. But in any case, The Electric Valley does not in
this instance carry us far beyond The Valley of the
Tennessee--with its dumb hillbilly caricatures staring in
grateful awe at the dam builders, like some primitive cargo cult--as
it might, within the limits of compression and
efficiency.
          In a sense, this is the larger problem with the film: for all its
excellence (which is substantial) it does not carry us as far as it
needs to toward new formulations of the
issues. It is still--in this darkening Reagan Age--Morgan
vs. Lilienthal; hydro vs. coal vs. nuclear; fat nuclear construction
workers' paychecks vs. massive cost-overruns, rising electric bills,
and falling demand curves. If Lilienthal and Morgan were
idealistically trying to sell a seamless web, Reagan is shamelessly
hawking a shoddy fabric of the rankest political, cultural, historical
heresy. He and his minions are seducing the public into believing that
"guvmunt" (the media mocked Wallace's and Faubus's speech in order to
question their ethics and analytical powers, why don't they mock his?)
is not us but "them," that unregulated private greed is the shortest
route to public good, that public endeavors are by nature doomed to
failure, that the most radically atomized social order is the
healthiest.
          It would have been unwise for Spears to conceive of this film as an
anti Reagan tract; God willing, TVA will still be there after Reagan
is gone. And yet the agency's history might, it seems to me, have been
better used--at least in the case of Morgan and Clark, and perhaps in
others--to raise public dialogue to a new level. Here and there we
catch a glimpse of the possibilities: Decatur, Alabama newspaperman
Barret Shelton, who appeared in the earlier TVA public-relations film
TVA Town, insists that "the federal government belongs
to us," that it is "our
federal government and our people," but the
defense rests there; narrator Dykeman tells us that plan is a "four-letter word" in the Valley (as indeed
it mostly is), but the Henry Clark contradictions are passed too
lightly over, and some of those TVA victims for whom plan is a four-letter word are then presented as
simple martyrs to simple TVA greed and bungling, and exponents of
unconditioned (Reagan-like) private ownership.
          If my own study of TVA has taught me anything, it is that the historical problems of TVA flow both from the context
of political and economic power within which it operates, and from the
conceptual limits of the public dialogue
surrounding the agency. By themselves, films can't do much about
structures of power except to reveal and dramatize them. This film
does that very well indeed: To my knowledge it is the first film on
TVA even to attempt to do so in a serious way. Had it followed its own
logic a bit further, however, it might have made an even more
substantial contribution to sharpening the terms in which future
public dialogue is to be carried on concerning one of our greatest--if
nevertheless deeply flawed--efforts to address the question of the
common good directly and courageously. 

The need is urgent as the
chilly winds of Reaganisrn continue to corrupt the very terms of
public discourse and--to borrow Siegenthaler's metaphor--cool the
oatmeal.
          
            David E. Whisnant is professor of American Studies at the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County. He is the author of
All That Is Native and Fine: The Politics of Culture in an
American Region (University of North Carolina Press,
1983).
          
        
        
          This Land, This South
          Reviewed by Ayers, Edward L.Edward L. Ayers
          Vol. 6, No. 4, 1984, pp. 22-23
          
          This Land, This South: An Environmental History
by Albert E. Cowdrey. University of Kentucky Press, 1983. 236
pp. $23.00
          The land has always set the stage. Our literature, history, memory,
and experience have always been permeated by the delta, the mountains,
the pinebarrens, the coast. Some students of the South, in fact, have
seen the land and the weather as the basic facts of Southern history,
the reason for slavery and for staple crops, Southern violence and
Southern lassitude. What we've never really understood is that the
land itself has a history. As Albert Cowdrey makes clear in his
evocative, detailed, and impressively researched account, the Southern
landscape has played more than a passive role in shaping Southern
lives.
          Cowdrey's story immediately confronts us with surprises. The corn
which fed so much of the native population of America before the
Europeans and Africans arrived, for example, was the product of
ingenious selective breeding; the plant cannot survive unless humans
separate the kernels from the cob and plant them. "Indians," too,
probably created the South's vast pine forests by burning off older
forests. The apparently natural bounty whites found was not nearly as
natural as they assumed, though the deaths of seventy percent of the
natives who had contact with Europeans and European disease may have
made the continent seem much more empty than it otherwise would.
          Disease played havoc with the new arrivals as well, for the South
has long proved a haven for microbes and insects. Whites and blacks
infected one another with strange maladies, and decade after decade
passed before mortality rates stabilized. But eventually they did, and
the North American slave population--alone of all those in the New
World--survived in numbers sufficient to replace themselves.
          Once the slave population began to grow and cotton emerged as the
foundation of the region's economy a new era began, one in which the
South's resources came under new strains. The region's soils,
generally older and more fragile than those of the North and West,
began to show signs of wearing out even before the slave regime
ended. Yet it remained for the Gilded Age to damage the South the most
brutally. As railroads penetrated the forests, lumber companies began
to strip huge areas throughout the region, taking the best trees and
leaving the worst to strangle the forest. Cowdrey describes the waste
and rapacity with understated passion. The beginnings of conservation
also appeared in the South during the Gilded Age, but not before much
was ruined.
          The history of the Southern environment in the early twentieth
century repeated the same cycle, though those years did witness great
strides against some of the persistent illnesses of the region,
malaria in particular. It was not until the Depression and the New
Deal that attempts to manage the South's resources made much
headway. The Mississippi River, which had long bedeviled planners, was
at least partially tamed. The Tennessee River Valley became the focus
of national attention and an admirable--though uncopied--model. The
Civilian Conservation Corps began to repair some of the damage
inflicted by greed in decades past. Yet even the New Deal had its
costs: the Agricultural Adjustment Administration proved a boon to
large planters and a curse to thousands of tenants, who were driven
from the land and often from the South. The 1930s and the war years
that followed, Cowdrey argues, were probably the most revolutionary
years in the region's environmental history.
          The balanced account of the postwar years will surprise few who
have lived in the South. All can see the effects, good and bad, of
development, commercial reforestation, strip 

mining, oil fields,
suburbanization, landscaping. But to those who read this fine book the
South can never look quite the same again. The signs of centuries of
struggle with and against the land will be easier to see and more
understandable--if no less poignant and tragic.
          
            Edward L. Ayers is associate professor of history at the
University of Virginia. He is author of Vengeance and Justice:
Crime and Punishment in the 19th-Century American South
(Oxford University Press, 1984).
          
        
        
          Southern Progressivism
          Reviewed by Egerton, JohnJohn Egerton
          Vol. 6, No. 4, 1984, pp. 23-24
          
          Southern Progressivism: The Reconciliation of Progress
and Tradition by Dewey W. Grantham. University of Tennessee
Press, 1983. 502 pp.$34.95 cloth, $16.95 paper. paper.
          The Progressive movement that spawned a succession of far-reaching
social reforms in the first quarter of this century is most directly
identified with two maverick northern Republicans--Theodore Roosevelt,
who went to the White House from New York, and Robert M. La Follette,
who went to the U.S. Senate from Wisconsin.
          As the twentieth century began, corrupt political machines and
rapacious corporate giants were stealing the nation blind. In reaction
against those intolerable excesses, many of which were dramatically
exposed by muckraking writers, local and state reform efforts sprang
up and eventually became national in scope.
          The catalog of improvements resulting from these efforts was and is
impressive: regulations of railroads and other corporations, more
equitable tax structures (including a federal income tax), correction
of child labor abuses, health and welfare legislation, wage and hour
laws, food and drug standards, conservation of natural resources,
women's suffrage, and a number of election reforms, to name a few.
          We remember Teddy Roosevelt, the raging "Bull Moose," and "Fighting
Bob" La Follette, and perhaps because of them we think of
Progressivism as a northern phenomenon. The West entered the picture
too, and the Midwest, but somehow the South seemed distant and
uninvolved, like a foreign colony--which in truth it was. The South in
the first two decades of this century generally is pictured as an
agricultural backwater infested with poverty, ignorance, racism, and
despair; that Progressivism might have taken root and flourished there
seems as improbable as azaleas blooming in Buffalo, or magnolias in
Madison.
          And yet, as Dewey Grantham shows us in this painstakingly thorough
and comprehensive study, the winds of change that swept from the East
Coast to the West also reached into the farthest corners of the
South. Grantham's masterful synthesis of a voluminous and diverse
record results in a portrait of the South--and of Progressivism--that
is surprising, provocative, complex, and original.
          In the last half of the nineteenth century, the South tried just
about everything--slavery, war, reconstruction, white supremacy, "New
South" myths, "Old South" memories, economic depression, agrarian
populism, urban development. Nothing worked very well. By 1900, still
traumatized and preoccupied by the indefensible evils in its racial
history, the region was struggling desperately to create yet another
"final solution": legalized segregation of blacks under the guise of
"separate but equal" development.
          In the interest of maintaining firm control over the black
population, southern whites looked first to politics and applied a
series of "social reforms" that included poll taxes, literacy tests,
white primaries, and other measures aimed at disfranchisement of
blacks. This, they reasoned, would reduce "irresponsible" behavior by
the former slave class and bring stability, peace, and progress for
both races. A similar argument was sometimes used in the field of
education: reformers contended that schooling for the white masses
would make them more tolerant of blacks.
          Thus did the South belatedly enter an era of social charge that
resembled what was happening elsewhere in the country. A strange
assortment of conservative reformers and Progressive--demagogues,
racists, religious fundamentalists, moralists, social-gospel
Protestants, gentle visionaries, social scientists, club women,
feminists--found a variety of ways in the first twenty years of the
new century to change institutions, laws, practices, beliefs. Some of
what they did only worsened the racial cancer that had afflicted the
South from the beginning of its history, but other reforms inched the
region toward genuine progress and improvement.
          States--and in some cases local governments--entered into the
regulation of railroads (all northern-owned), banks, and insurance
companies; the licensing of lawyers, doctors, teachers, and other
professionals; the reform of prisons; the prohibition of alcoholic
beverages; the passage of child labor laws; establishment of juvenile
courts and reformatories; the spread and improvement of public school
systems; the creation of institutions for mentally and physically
handicapped people; the enfranchisement of women; the modernization of
municipal services and administration; improvements in public health,
occupational conditions, and agriculture; and even some timid and
halting steps toward improving race relations.
          After an absence of fifty years, the South returned with
Virginia-born Woodrow Wilson to an influential role in national
politics. The Wilson years and the First World War stimulated
Progressivism and national unity in the South, 

and the more optimistic
of the region's reformers predicted continued improvement.
          But by 1920, the South was still mired in poverty, trailing ever
farther behind the rest of the rebounding nation. A post-war rash of
violence against blacks--an ominous portent of the bitter decades to
come--overshadowed continued improvement in schools, highways, health,
and economic opportunity. The Great Depression was yet to arrive, but
the South was long since a depressed region, a threadbare stepchild
too poor to maintain a single society of even minimum quality, yet
insanely committed to the myth of separate but equal development for
its two races. And through those crucial years, few leaders outside
the South--including the reformist Progressives--seriously challenged
the region to change its segregational ways. Instead, the nation as a
whole tended to accommodate itself to the South's racism--and to deny
its own de factor afflictions.
          This sprawling, complex story is unfolded with great skill by Dewey
Grantham, who in his thirty year career at Vanderbilt University has
earned a national reputation as an eminent historian of
twentieth-century America, particularly of the South. It would be a
rare scholar who could absorb and blend such a vast body of recorded
material as this book required; it is even rarer when the resulting
synthesis flows smoothly and clearly.
          The southern Progressives, Grantham concludes, "were able to
function both as agents of modernization and as guardians of southern
tradition." They wanted a new order, not to replace the old but to fit
snugly and comfortably around it. It took them another half-century to
learn that such a dream was not only wrong but impossible.
          
            John Egerton's most recent book is Generations: An
American Family (University of Kentucky Press,
1983).
          
        
      
    
  
