
          Gloria Naylor, The Women of Brewster Place. New
York: Viking Press, 1982. Penguin, 1983.
          By Harris, TrudierTrudier Harris
          Vol. 6, No. 2, 1984, pp. 12-13
          
          Gloria Naylor's The Women of Brewster Place is a
volume destined for long life. A collection of nine sections which
together form a unified whole, the volume is powerful and strikingly
well written. It captures the pain, suffering and futile attempts at
happiness of a group of black women transplanted to a northern city's
deadend street known as Brewster Place.
          Most of the women in Brewster Place have their origins in the
South. Mattie Michael, who is the center of the first section, was
born and raised in Tennessee. Sheltered by a father who witnessed the
birth of his only child late in his life, Mattie is suddenly tumbled
by Butch Fuller, the local dandy, into the mire of humanity. The
pregnancy that results from Mattie's one sexual encounter with Butch
causes her to be thrown out of her father's house. In order to save
her father from the murder she knows he will commit she refuses to
name Butch. Instead, she moves to Asheville, North Carolina to live
with her friend Etta Johnson until the baby is born. Although Etta
moves on rather quickly after the birth, Mattie's "temporary" stay
ends more than thirty years later when her own sheltered son skips
bail instead of facing an assault charge, causing Mattie to lose the
house she has put up to ensure his court appearance.
          Mattie's tale forms the backdrop against which the lives of several
of the women of Brewster Place are to be viewed. She moves into
Brewster Place upon her son's abrupt and permanent departure. Mattie's
loss enables her to listen sympathetically to the tales of despair she
hears and to understand the pain she witnesses. She manages to rein in
her own pain consistently enough to offer guidance and comfort to
others.
          Mattie has an expansiveness of human feeling which allows her to
watch patiently as Etta, also in her fifties, chases the ever
illusionary dream of marriage to a respectable man. Etta has spent her
life in "business opportunities" with men but Mattie knows that she is
fast using up her assets. A minister picked for the husband role
consents only to be her gigolo, forcing Etta to see that the only love
and caring she is likely to experience will come from Mattie.
          Other women on Brewster Place, are not so directly tied to
Mattie. One, Cora Lee, fell in love so desperately with dolls as a
child that she began to produce "real babies" as soon as she
discovered where they came from. Another resident, Kiswana Browne, is
a middle-class militant who has moved across town from "Linden Hills"
to help unfortunate black brothers and sisters on Brewster
Place. Saved from anachronism only by her commitment, Kiswana tries to
form the residents of Brewster Place into a tenants union; they plan
to fight in court for the many improvements the complex needs. In her
commitment, Kiswana is just the opposite of the two young women who
are the focus of "The Two." Lesbian in a place which is hostile to
their relationship, their different coping strategies illustrate how
truly isolated they are; Theresa compensates by pretending not to care
about the opinions of the neighbors, while Lorraine is driven to seek
approval.
          In one of the book's most painful and disturbing scenes, Lorraine
is raped repeatedly by the young black toughs of the neighborhood who
have no place for a "dyke." Pushed into insanity and retaliation by
the rape, Lorraine commits murder.
          Naylor's heart-wrenching account of Lorraine has a counterpart in
the tale of Lucielia Louise Turner, the granddaughter of Etta Johnson,
the woman who had befriended Mattie after birth of her child. Ciel
finds herself on Brewster Place in a common-law marriage with Eugene,
for whom she has an abortion when he asserts that all she is good for
is "babies and bills." Several months later, when Eugene declares that
he is leaving, Ciel's claim that she loves him evokes, "that ain't
good enough." While the two are fighting, their five-year old
firstborn child, playing in 

another room, electrocutes herself by
sticking a fork into an outlet. In the face of the rejection she
believes God has shown her, Ciel determines to starve herself.
          The pain, numbness, and death-in-life that define Ciel after her
child's funeral are relieved only when Mattie takes her into her arms
and rocks the damned-up suffering into expression. That scene is a
combination of conversion, renewal, and rebirth in which Mattie serves
as preacher, guide, and sustainer. Indeed, Naylor's description of
Mattie's role evokes that of Jesus in James Weldon Johnson's
"Go Down, Death: A Funeral Sermon," and it can be
compared to the change Avey Johnson experiences on the Caribbean
island in Paule Marshall's Praisesong for the
Widow. Yet, in the writing and in the power of the passage,
Naylor's voice is distinctively unique.
          
            Ciel moaned. Mattie rocked. Propelled by the sound, Mattie
rocked her out of that bed, out of that room, into a blue vastness
just underneath the sun and above time. She rocked her over Aegean
seas so clean they shone like crystal, so clear the fresh blood of
sacrificed babies torn from their mother's arms and given to Neptune
could be seen like pink froth on the water. She rocked her on and on,
past Dachau, where soul-gutted Jewish mothers swept their children 's
entrails off laboratory floors. They flew past the spilled brains of
Senegales infants whose mothers had dashed them on the wooden sides of
slave ships. And she rocked on.
          
          
            She rocked her into her childhood and let her see murdered
dreams. And she rocked her back, back into the womb, to the nadir of
her hurt, and they found it--a slight silver splinter, enbedded just
below the surface of the skin. And Mattie rocked and pulled--and the
splinter gave way, but its roots were deep, gigantic, ragged, and they
tore up flesh with bits of fat muscle tissue clinging to them. They
left a huge hole, which was already starting to pus over, but Mattie
was satisfied. It would heal.
          
          Naylor's presentations of human emotions ring so true that we sing
our "Amens" from the knots in our stomachs or the tears in our
eyes. There is verisimiltude in characters who are in their twenties
as well as those who are in their fifties and older. In one scene
between Kiswana Browne and her mother, who insists upon calling her
newly remained daughter Melanie, Naylor astutely presents the clash of
generations and the games parents and children knowingly play. In this
instance, neither mother nor daughter win out; instead, both realize
that they can learn from, and must allow respect for, each other.
          Throughout, Naylor maintains a narrative style suffused with images
that cause us to pause. She writes of the boys who attack Lorraine:
"When they stood with their black skin, ninth-grade diplomas, and
fifty-word vocabularies in front of the mirror that the world had
erected and saw nothing, those other pairs of tight jeans, suede
sneakers, and tinted sunglasses imaged nearby proved that they were
alive", and of the possible death of Brewster Place: "No one cries
when a street dies. There's no line of mourners to walk behind the
coffin wheeled on the axis of the earth and ridded by the sky."
          But Brewster Place is not dying. Women like Mattie resist its
demise as spiritedly as the images used to describe it. It is a
testament to Naylor's large talent that, in this her first novel, she
handles the task so well.
          
            Trudier Harris teaches literature and folklore in the
English Department at the University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill.
          
        
