
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 7, Number 1,
	       1985
        
          The Civil Rights Act After Twenty Years:  Part One: Where We've
Been and Where We Are
          By Ashmore, Harry S.Harry S. Ashmore
          Vol. 7, No. 1, 1985, pp. 8-10
          
          One of the things that disturbs me when people look back at the
history we've lived through--some of us have lived through a good deal
more of it than you younger ones--is that we tend to forget its
contemporary context. A great deal has happened since 1964 and the
passage of the Civil Rights Act. But a great deal had to happen before
Congress could be persuaded even to put civil rights on its
agenda. There was the long, lonely effort of NMCP lawyers in the
federal courts that finally ended the white primary and gave blacks
the ballot. And, of course, ten years before the Civil Rights Act
there was the Brown decision by the United States Supreme Court
ordering desegregation in the public schools. But Brown did a great
deal more than that.
          
            Precedents and Pressure
          
          The Brown decision dealt not only with the
specific matter of public education but also, for the first time since
Reconstruction, threw the full weight of the federal government behind
enforcement of the civil rights of black individuals. It did that by
reversing the old states' rights doctrine that had let the states of
the South pursue whatever kind of restrictive policies they cared to
impose upon their black citizens.
          Those of you who are old enough to remember what the South was like
thirty years ago when Brown came down will recall that it was
virtually as segregated a society as the one that exists in South
Africa today. There was no public intermingling of the races. There
was no permissible social contact between the races. Blacks and whites
were separated in the schools. Blacks, denied the ballot, effectively
had no voice in public affairs, and had little opportunity to move
toward their own economic advancement.

          The practical results of Brown followed when black Southerners
began to understand the implications of that decision. White
Southerners did not choose to carry out the desegregation mandates of
the courts--that would take years--but blacks began to realize that they
now would have the support of the federal government if they chose to
take their case into the streets and defy recalcitrant whites situated
in the courthouses and the state houses of the Southern states.
          And so began what came to be called the Civil Rights Movement--the
mass protest in which for the first time in our history blacks were
moving under their own leadership and in their own right to demand
simple justice. They began to get results. They had mounted political
pressure that had to be recognized.
          First, then, came precedents set by the federal courts with their
relative independence from the popular vote. Then came pressure
brought by blacks and their white supporters--the protest marches that
provided the high drama we all remember. It took all that to move a
reluctant Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act.
          
            From Civil Liberties to Civil Rights
          
          Also, I think we need to remember that it required further action
by the courts to implement the Civil Rights Act and the measures that
followed. Simply declaring that blacks had a right to attend any
school that was maintained with public funds didn't result in any real
change. What came to be called affirmative action was adopted when the
Supreme Court recognized that decrees ordering the Southern school
districts to integrate their separate schools into single systems were
being accepted only in theory. As long as the courts held that the
test would only be whether the schools were moving in good faith
toward compliance, there was no real movement except in the border
states and a few of the upcountry Southern districts with small black
populations.
          Real compliance began when the judges--I think reluctantly--had to
assume the assignment powers of local school districts and establish a
qualitative test of racial balance to affirm good faith. Once they did
that the barriers began to crumble.
          Following the courts' lead, Congress was persuaded to move in other
fields where something more than a court decision was required to
insure that black citizens were entitled to rights previously reserved
for whites in housing, education and employment. This marked the
transition from the traditional concept of civil liberties to civil
rights. The main instrument for enforcement was the withholding of
federal benefits.
          
            Mr. Reagan's Arrant Nonsense
          
          Now affirmative action these days--in some strange and remarkable
way--has become a negative term. I suppose we have to recognize that
one of the results of the last election was to affirm the position of
the Reagan Administration, which at the outset proclaimed that
affirmative action is not only unnecessary--since economic growth
will take care of all discrimination problems--but is actually a
violation of the professed purposes of this sovereign nation.
          Mr. Reagan and his neo-conservatives supporters go so far as to
contend that the results of the programs which were put into place
following the declaration of a War on Poverty during the
Kennedy-Johnson years not only were wrong in principle as well as
being practical failures, but actually proved to be a handicap that
delayed black progress.
          I find this astonishing.
          In Los Angeles a few weeks ago I took part in a session held on the
thirtieth anniversary of the Brown decision. One of the people on the
panel with me was Linda Chavez, staff director of the US Commission on
Civil Rights. I listened in disbelief to her argument that all the
positive changes that have taken place over the last thirty years took
lace despite federal programs, not because of them, that blacks and
other minorities would have been better off had none of these programs
existed. Now for anybody who has lived through these years, whether in
the South or outside it, this has to be considered arrant nonsense.
          Certainly, many federal programs fell short of what we hoped for
them. We had reason to be critical of some, then and now. But T find
the argument that the federal government has no affirmative role in
the slow and agonizing process of bringing minorities into the
mainstream is about 

as shocking as anything I've heard in covering
politics for fifty years--yet that is the position of the Reagan
Administration.
          
            Where We Are
          
          When the Reaganites talk about a new federalism what they really
mean is the old federalism. They would repeal the Brown decision and
go back to Plessy--contending that the states
should have the final word on all these matters, and that it's no
concern of the federal government if black citizens are deprived of
their declared constitutional rights.
          I don't think that this Administration is going to get away with
the repeal of Brown, but we are certainly going
to see--as we've already seen in the last four years--the emphasis
continue to shift away from the pursuit of affirmative action on
behalf of civil rights for minorities.
          When we look around today we can agree that certainly there has
been a great deal of progress. People in this room know that as well
as anybody. The black middle class--which is about a third of the
black population--has more or less been accepted by the white middle
class on more or less equal terms. The working poor-another third of
the black population-benefited for a considerable time from the
affirmative efforts of government. Now, they're suffering heavy
penalties through the cutbacks in federal programs under the Reagan
Administration.
          Then there's the last third--what's now called the underclass--the
people below the poverty line. This group includes about a third of
all blacks and about ten percent of the whites. Their situation is
about what it was before there was a Civil Rights Act. In many cases
it is probably worse. The programs that were intended to help them to
move out of poverty are the ones that have been abandoned or are being
condemned today by the Reaganites--the people who say that this is a
problem that is beyond the reach and scope of the federal government
and, if it really exists, should be left to state and local
government.
          I think anybody who knows our history knows what the results of
that would be.
          So this is where we are. I don't think the Reagan
Aministration is going to completely undo the progress
we've made in these twenty years; but certainly effective movement
toward guaranteeing equality of opportunity for all Americans has been
halted.
          
            During the fortieth anniversary meeting of the Southern
Regional Council, held in Atlanta this past November, Pulitzer Prize
winning journalist Harry Ashmore, Julius L. Chambers-director of the
NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and former SRG executive director Harold
Fleming reflected upon the status of civil rights twenty years after
the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. An additional comment was
offered by Paul Gaston, professor of history at the University of
Virginia and current president of the Southern Regional Council. In
the following pages, we present the perspectives of these long-time
observers of, and participants in, Southern changes.
            Harry S. Ashmore's most recent book is Hearts and Minds: A History
of Racism from Roosevelt to Reagan (McGraw-Hill), winner of the
Southern Regional Council's Lillian Smith Award in 1982.
          
        
        
          The Civil Rights Act After Twenty Years.  Part Two: The
Collapse of Enforcement
          By Chambers, Julius L.Julius L. Chambers
          Vol. 7, No. 1, 1985, pp. 10-13
          
          During the past week I have attended four meetings where we were
discussing the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the 1984 election. It has
been a very depressing week.
          At a meeting last night, for example, we were addressing the
question of whether we should continue with affirmative
action. Several very strong advocates of civil rights who were present
were talking about ways to compromise affirmative action.
          I attended another meeting this week where we were talking about
poverty. Some very strong advocates of civil rights suggested ways
that we could compromise some of the advocacy that we were pursuing in
order to make our position more palatable to our opponents.
          Then I attended a meeting in Cleveland with black educators and
heard opposition to school desegregation. I heard advocacy for the
development for black institutions because those institutions were
needed in order to protect and preserve the interest of
blacks. Reflecting on what has happened over the twenty years since
the passage of the Civil Rights Act, one can begin to appreciate why
the current pessimism exists. A brief review of the history of the
Act's provisions regarding employment discrimination (Title VII) is
instructive.
          
            Proving Employment Discrimination
          
          In 1971, the US Supreme Court held in Griggs
v. Duke Power Company that an employer did not have to intend to
discriminate to be in violation of Title VII. It was sufficient to
show that the employer used practices which had an adverse or
disproportionate impact on a group or class 

covered under Title VII,
and that such practices were not necessary to determine or to predict
successful job performance. This was the legal theory of disparate
impact.
          In 1977,in US v. Teamsters the Court discussed
the method of proof which had developed in Title VII litigation. In
addition to disparate impact, there existed the legal theory of
disparate treatment (i.e., intentional discrimination). Thus, in
employment discrimination cases, one proves a claim either by
disparate treatment or disparate impact. The problem with Teamsters is the emphasis the Court placed on proof
of intent which is required in disparate treatment cases. At best,
proof of intent is difficult to establish. The emphasis placed on
intent in Teamsters has led some lower courts to require practically
impossible standards on proof.
          During the past four years, the US Department of Justice has been
moving toward a point where disparate impact will not be valid proof
of employment discrimination. It will be necessary to establish
disparate treatment in every instance.
          Recently, this theory was laid out in the Justice Depart meet's
brief in Williams v. City of New Orleans, one of
our (Legal Defense Fund) cases which involves the exclusion of blacks
from employment in New Orleans' police department. The Department
argued that the affirmative action incorporated in a consent decree
was "reverse discrimination," in violation of Title VII. The
Department maintained that one had to be an established victim of
discrimination in order to be eligible for affirmative relief. As a
practical matter, this would rule out affirmative action in class
actions.
          In another case, Memphis Firefighters Local Union,
No. 1784 v. Stotts, the Supreme Court overturned a lower court
ruling that protected from layoff black workers hired under an
affirmative action plan. The Justice Department asserts that under
Stotts, one must be a victim of intentional discrimination in order to
be provided affirmative relief, a position which would, in fact,
abolish affirmative action.
          Under these standards of proof, nobody will be able to prove
employment discrimination. Let me give you an example:
          Three or four years ago in North Carolina, we tried Anderson v. Bessemer City, which involved a black
woman who applied to head the Bessemer City recreation department. Her
qualifications were superior. She was rejected by everyone except the
sole woman on an otherwise all-male board. A federal district court
agreed that we had proved intentional discrimination. The city
appealed.
          The Fourth Circuit sided with the city. It held that if the men on
the board employed women in other capacities, or if their wives
worked, then they obviously could not intentionally discriminate
against this particular woman. If one analyzes this rationale, one
could never prove intentional discrimination.
          Take, for instance, the case of a qualified black person who is
denied a promotion by a white employer and seeks to show
discrimination. Under the standard set by the Fourth Circuit in
Anderson v. Bessemer City, if the white employer had ever promoted a
black person, a claim by any other black employee of intentional
discrimination would not be considered. Fortunately, after hearing
oral arguments this past fall, the US Supreme Court has overturned
(March, 1985) the Fourth Circuit's decision; the earlier finding of
discrimination has been reinstated.
          Between 1965 and 1977 it was possible for a plaintiff to establish
a violation of Title VII through disparate impact, and even disparate
treatment. The proof required was a showing that one was treated
differently. Courts did not emphasize proof of intent. But, in 1977,
Teamsters changed all of that. And today, with respect to enforcement
of Title VII, plaintiffs in many instances are being denied effective
remedies.
          
            The Point of No Relief?
          
          There is another aspect of Title VII relief that has undergone
significant change. For example, previously, if one accomplished the
near-impossible and proved intentional discrimination, the courts
directed broad relief. Today, we get much less. Even when an
individual is entitled to affirmative relief, he or she is not, in the
language of the law, "made whole." Again, let me give you an
example.
          If it is proven that an individual was denied a promotion because
of race or sex, the person does not automatically move to the new
position and bump the incumbent. He or she must wait for another
vacancy to occur. In the interim, the victim is given "front pay" to
compensate for the loss, and is given preference to fill a comparable
vacancy when--or if--it occurs.
          But does that "make whole" the person who has suffered
discrimination? What about interest on the lost wages? What happens
when no vacancy occurs within a certain amount of time? Should the
employer be required to find a comparable slot and, if appropriate,
train the individual to fill it? These are pressing questions, but I,
for one, do not anticipate that courts today will deal with them.
          Another example of the difficult problems that are encountered in
Title VII litigation. We filed an employment discrimination case in
1974 on behalf of a class of four hundred black workers in a large
paper mill in North Carolina. The case, Albemarle Paper Company
v. Moody, has been to the US Supreme Court, back to the lower courts,
and through numerous legal proceedings. Despite eleven years of
litigation and over $400,000 in costs, only one hundred black workers
have moved from low-paying, dead-end jobs in the woodyard to machine
operator's jobs inside the mill. One cannot but conclude, after
examining the data, that most of the black workers have not moved up
because 

they are not able to operate the machines. Is the lack of
capability their fault? Is it the fault of the employer for not
providing training? Is it the fault of the state for not ensuring that
individuals are offered equal skills in order to enter the job market?
What kind of relief do those three hundred black workers need?
          Which leads me to mention that civil rights groups today may be
focusing too much on the problems of middle-class blacks. It is time
that all of us begin to address the needs of the two thirds of the
black population who constitute the "underclass" and the working
poor--those individuals who are not necessarily benefitting from the
advances in civil rights law of the Past twenty years.
          
            Title VII-A Dead Statute?
          
          To return to Title VII. A third problem is the question of who is
responsible for enforcement of the law. Over five thousand employment
discrimination cases were filed in 1983. The federal Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (EEOC), which has the authority to bring Title
VII lawsuits, was involved in less than one-third of them. Most were
brought by private litigators--at extraordinary cost. It used to be
possible to litigate an individual case for $5,000 to $10,000. Today,
one case will will cost $50,000 to $70,000. A class action
that used to cost $50,000 to $100,000, now costs between $300,000 and
$500,000. I have been involved in a case for four years that was
brought on behalf of a relatively small class--about twenty-four
individuals. To date, it has cost over $400,000. The defendant has
spent over $3.2 million. If we win everything to which our plaintiffs
are entitled, the monetary relief would total approximately
$100,000--and this to obtain rights we believe are spelled out in Title
VII.
          But that is where we are today. In my visits to LDF's cooperating
attorneys around the country, I am told by most that they do not want
to litigate any more Title VII cases. It costs too much. It takes too
long for them to recover costs. And, the courts are not favorably
disposed. Even if successful, the relief is too limited and the amount
recovered in attorney fees is much too little for the time, effort and
risk that these cases entail.
          If the private bar is not going to enforce Title VII, if the
Justice Department is not going to enforce Title VII, if EEOC is not
going to do more in terms of litigating these cases--is Title VII not
going to become a dead statute?
          To summarize: Initially the courts interpreted
Title VII liberally--procedurally, substantively and with respect to
relief. Despite reluctance by the Department of Justice and the
inability of EEOC to become involved, an active private bar brought a
number of cases--most often without adequate compensation. Today,
courts are interpreting Title VII more strictly, limiting what can be
obtained in relief, and deterring individuals who want to bring
cases.
          
            Title VII and Education
          
          It is also worthwhile to discuss here the status of school
desegregation. Since 1964, I have been involved in legal efforts to
desegregate the Charlotte-Mecklenburg [NC] public school
system. Eventually, through our lawsuit, Swann
v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education, and others, we moved
the Supreme Court from a limited interpretation of Brown to a position that effective desegregation
required affirmative steps.
          Within the Charlotte community, we have moved from al reluctance to
accept desegregation, to active support. During a pre-election visit
to Charlotte, President Reagan criticized court ordered busing,
calling it a "failure." The Charlotte Observer responded with an
editorial, "You Were Wrong Mr. President." All of us are proud of what
has been accomplished with Charlotte Mecklenburg's desegregation plan,
which includes busing.
          Many other communities have had problems in desegregating their
school systems. Those are communities in which the Southern Regional
Council, indeed all of us, must be available to help.
          Then there are communities that remain untouched by desegregation
efforts. I refer to majority black school districts in urban areas. A
recent report stated that over sixty-eight percent of the black
students in Harlem drop out of school. Many schools in urban areas are
as bad as the segregated school I attended before Brown.
          Are we devoting as much attention as we should to what goes on in
urban public schools--whether or not they are desegregated? Why are
black students not performing well on standard exams? On SAT's? Why
are more black students not entering college, graduate programs,
professional schools?
          Black high school graduates do enter college at about the same rate
as whites. But although the enrollment of black students has increased
in undergraduate schools, black enrollment in graduate and
professional schools has decreased. Our future well-being depends on
our ability to address these issues and find answers to the problems
they present.
          This must be done within the constraints of the realities we face
today. Despite lack of support from the federal government, we must
work to reinstate the approach to implementation of Title VI and other
sections of the Civil Rights Act, and to the enforcement of Brown, that we had several years ago.
          
            Deja Vu at Chapel Hill
          
          Before the November election, I returned to the University of North
Carolina campus at Chapel Hill. I was disturbed by 

what I saw. The
attitude of white students reminded me of the 1950s when I was a
student in the law school. For those three years, even as
editor-in-chief of the law review, I could not attend the school's
social functions because they were held at a segregated
establishment. This year I saw some of that same attitude among white
students. That ought to bother all of us. I could not help but wonder
whether Mr. Reagan was contributing to this attitude.
          Despite such pessimistic observations, I remain an "optimist. Even
as one considers the plight of the underclass, of minorities, of
women, it is possible to take some solace if we contrast today's
reality with the mood of the country in the 1940s and '50s. It took a
lot of work, a lot of litigation and legislation to change things. We
cannot quit now. We must press ahead.
          In the 1930s and '40s, few people would have predicted that by
1954, the Supreme Court would decide Brown v. Board of
Education the way it did. Today we can develop similar efforts to
urge the courts to consider new interpretations of the Fourteenth
Amendment, perhaps the establishment of poverty or economic status as
a protected classification. I agree that moving the Court that far
will be difficult. We can, however, begin to lay the groundwork.
          Other issues which must be considered by the Southern Regional
Council include the seventy-five vacancies on the federal
courts. President Reagan will have these, and perhaps several
vacancies on the Supreme Court, to fill during the next four
years. The Council should be prepared when appointments to the federal
courts are made. With respect to Supreme Court and other federal
judicial nominees, we should raise our concerns where necessary and
appropriate. Even the Senate may listen if it hears a unified
voice.
          Some candidates who have been advanced for appointment to the
federal bench lack qualifications. A recent nominee for the Fourth
Circuit had never practiced law a day in his life. By forming
alliances we can provide the Senate with information it needs to
investigate the qualifications of candidates for federal
judgeships.
          It has occurred to me also that we ought to focus more on the
potential for progress in civil rights at state and local levels. The
Council has been effective in helping good people get elected to state
government, state legislatures and city councils. The Voting Rights
Act has been a major and significant tool in this effort. In North
Carolina, after reapportionment, a few more blacks were elected to the
state legislature. Throughout the states, despite Mr. Reagan's
victory, we have elected legislators who are responsive to our
concerns.
          Is it not possible for us to work through the Council and other
organizations to push states and municipalities to enact laws similar
to the Civil Rights Act of 1964? This might enable us to build support
at state and local levels that will influence what happens at the
federal level.
          We have means today that we did not have years ago. We have new
attitudes among blacks and some whites that will surely result in
speeding the change we seek. The Council has a role in mobilizing
these groups and working with them to advance our agenda. We must be
more assertive in using news media outlets to present our viewpoint as
a counterbalance to the conservative "think tanks" and fundamentalist
religious groups who oppose a fully integrated society.
          As we observe the evolution of equal rights and opportunities
during the past twenty years, we can point to progress. Some of the
old obstacles have been removed, but new ones have taken their
places. But that should not and must not deter us from trying to make
this a world of equality and justice for all.
          
            During the fortieth anniversary meeting of the Southern
Regional Council, held in Atlanta this past November, Pulitzer Prize
winning journalist Harry Ashmore, Julius L. Chambers-director of the
NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and former SRG executive director Harold
Fleming reflected upon the status of civil rights twenty years after
the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. An additional comment was
offered by Paul Gaston, professor of history at the University of
Virginia and current president of the Southern Regional Council. In
the following pages, we present the perspectives of these long-time
observers of, and participants in, Southern changes.
             Julius Chambers, a past president of the Southern Regional
Council, is director of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund.
          
        
        
          The Civil Rights Act After Twenty Years. Part Three:
Comments
          ByFleming, HaroldHarold Fleming
          Vol. 7, No. 1, 1985, pp. 13-14
          
          I'm want to footnote some of the things said in the excellent
statements that Harry and Julius have just made. And I'm going to try
not to celebrate the problem anymore than I can help.
          Among the many anniversaries we're having here, I'm having my
thirty-seventh anniversary of association with the Southern Regional
Council. Things do look bleak now and it's very disturbing, but I do
get a little comfort by casting my mind back four decades and thinking
how really hopeless things looked then.
          I want to second what Julius has said about emulating some of the
efforts of the past. There is a similarity in the situation now and
the situation leading up to the passage of the Civil Rights Act. What
was happening then was an effort to destroy a race mythology in the
South and the nation. That effort required a great deal of work of
different kinds by different people: the litigation, the student
protest, the work of groups seeking to educate public opinion, the
work to get the ballot and make it effective.
          Parts of that mythology are enjoying a resurgence today. I'm sad to
say that we haven't had enough advocates and forceful speakers, enough
people of persuasion and prestige on our side to offset the constant
stream of simplistic statements which say that blacks and other
minorities would be better off today if there had never been such a
thing as affirmative action, if there had never been the court 

rulings
and the legislation, the supportive federal programs. When people hear
this enough--especially people who didn't live through that history-it
begins to sound very plausible. They begin to nod yes and say "That's
right." Especially when they hear it from some blacks who, incredibly
enough, seem to have persuaded themselves--although some of them would
not be where they are today were it not for those programs and for
affirmative action--that ability is enough and is always rewarded.
          I think the job before us now--just as an agenda was created during
the 1940s and the 1950s that led to the Civil Rights Act of 1964--is to
build a new agenda that is designed to expose and to counteract the
body of racial mythology in its present form. I think what we need is
not so much another Civil Rights Act, as we need enforcement of what
we've got at all levels of government. We need voices who will explain
to people why its in the self-interest of this society and country to
have all its citizens well educated, well housed, and treated without
discrimination. We must win this battle for public opinion in this
country which we've been losing badly.
          I think some of us have to reexamine some of our strategies, to see
how unintentionally, in the effort to accent how acute many of our
problems still are, it becomes fashionable not only to say that things
are bad but that nothing has been accomplished--that blacks and
minorities are worse off today than they were twenty years ago. Well,
of course this is not true. To say it plays into the hands of the
makers of the new mythology, into the hands of those who falsely
proclaim that nothing helps, that the programs don't work, that the
people don't respond, so why throw all this money uselessly at
problems.
          We have to go back and show again that these many efforts, these
maligned programs do produce results, and these results are seen in
the achievements of millions of black and minority Americans who never
had any chance in the old days.
          Many of the things in Southern Regional Council's history are very
well suited to the debunking of the neoconservative mythology and to
the building of a new agenda. That's what the Southern Regional
Council was started to do and what it's been all about for all these
years. We've always recognized that you've got to win some of the
battles in the public argument; that you've got to be out there at the
state and local level--worrying about what people are, hearing, about
what they're feeling and about what they're thinking, about what kind
of facts they're getting. We helped do it before, we can help do it
again.
          
            During the fortieth anniversary meeting of the Southern
Regional Council, held in Atlanta this past November, Pulitzer Prize
winning journalist Harry Ashmore, Julius L. Chambers-director of the
NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and former SRG executive director Harold
Fleming reflected upon the status of civil rights twenty years after
the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. An additional comment was
offered by Paul Gaston, professor of history at the University of
Virginia and current president of the Southern Regional Council. In
the following pages, we present the perspectives of these long-time
observers of, and participants in, Southern changes.
             Harold Fleming, director of the Potomac Institute, is a former
executive director of the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          The Civil Rights Act After Twenty Years Later.
[Response]
          By Gaston, PaulPaul Gaston
          Vol. 7, No. 1, 1985, pp. 14-15
          
          Prompted by Harold and Harry's discussion of the new mythology--and
particularly by Julius' recollection of his student days at Chapel
Hill and his recent return visit--I would like to tell a brief anecdote
about my own teaching at the University of Virginia.
          It seems to me that I see among white students in my Southern
history class greater evidence of this conservative wave of recent
years, and it's been extremely troubling.
          About the time I started to teach Southern history I read an
article that James Baldwin published in Harpers'--this was in 1958. He
said that for white people in the South to watch segregation taken
apart and dismantled was going to be to watch an entire way of life of
being discredited and that was going to be an enormously painful
experience for them.
          It was about that time that some of my students started dubbing my
course in Southern history "Pain Infliction 102."
          Well, this pain infliction course was a great joy to teach because
increasingly larger numbers of Southern students would shift from a
belligerent attitude of open hostility to one of more open
inquiry. Then, during the 1960s, a large number became converts and
they wanted to join the movement and see that Southern history was
made whole.
          This year, the course in pain infliction continues to be
taught. The students are required to read--among other books--Dan
Carter's book about Scottsboro, and we spent a long time on Richard
Kluger's monumental study, Simple Justice, which is an absolutely
brillant and moving account of how the Brown
decision came to be written. 
          There's a significant group of white students in this class who, it
seems to me, typify what's happened. They don't deny that all of the
achievements that we've made are good, but these students are
unreachable. A group of eight of them led a discussion of sixty
students last week. Their subject was Kluger's book and the origins of
the Brown decision.
          They were logical. They didn't say anything offensive. They were
coherent in their analysis. They discussed the move from Gaines to Sweat vs. Painter to
 Brown vs. Board of Education, and they weren't
touched by one bit of it.
          After awhile I couldn't stand it anymore. About fifteen minutes
before the end of the class I got up and said, "You know you're
reading one of the most . . . you're reading a magisterial
work. You're not likely to read many books like this in your
lifetime. And it's a book about one of the great movements for human
liberation that you've never experienced. Where is the feeling? Where
are the guts? Where are . . ."
          Well, there was great silence.

          I'm not sure that they were touched. They know that I have these
periodic outbursts. But I present them as evidence of this growing
sense of conservatism-the teflon-coated group that can't be reached,
but they're going to say the right thing.
          The happy part of the story is that there are still some white
students in the class who are on my side, but more importantly there
are some black students in the class now and they, more than 1, make
it uncomfortable for those students simply to pass this off as another
work of history that you have to memorize and pass a test on. I came
out of this a born-again historian.
          
            During the fortieth anniversary meeting of the Southern
Regional Council, held in Atlanta this past November, Pulitzer Prize
winning journalist Harry Ashmore, Julius L. Chambers-director of the
NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and former SRG executive director Harold
Fleming reflected upon the status of civil rights twenty years after
the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. An additional comment was
offered by Paul Gaston, professor of history at the University of
Virginia and current president of the Southern Regional Council. In
the following pages, we present the perspectives of these long-time
observers of, and participants in, Southern changes.
             Paul Gaston, professor of history at the University of Virginia,
is president of the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          The Rising Tide of Poverty
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 7, No. 1, 1985, pp. 5-8
          
          "A rising tide lifts all boats," President Reagan explained four
years ago when asked how his administration's policies would affect
the poor. l hose were the days when Admini-

stration officials declared
poverty no longer existed in the United States. Today, Census Bureau
data and independent reports tell that since 1980 the number of poor
has increased by nine million in the nation and 2 1/2 million in the
South. And, in February of this year, the Physician Task Force on
Hunger concluded that hunger is now a national epidemic.
          From their sinking perspective, the poor may rightfully conclude,
as did the defeated Walter Mondale, that in the Reagan Administration
a "rising tide lifts only yachts."
          Abandoning its attempt to abolish poverty by declaration, the
Administration now argues that poverty is the result of past programs
of big government which have maintained the poor in a state of
dependency and wiped away their incentive to work. "We tried to
provide more for the poor and produced more poor instead," writes
Charles Murray, the author of the Reaganites' new bible on the
subject, Losing Ground: American Social Policy,
1950-1980. "We tried to remove the barriers to escape from
poverty and inadvertently build a trap."
          These curious words rely especially upon the fact that in the late
1970s budgets for poverty programs expanded, but the number of poor in
the nation began to increase. Their analysis of this event does not
look at developments since 1980, nor does it recognize that government
assistance to the poor is only one of three major areas of policy
which fundamentally change the status and numbers of poor. Poverty has
been influenced largely in past decades by three factors: changes in
government assistance, the rates and duration of unemployment, and
underemployment (low wages and short work weeks).
          No matter how much it tries to ignore the present, the Reagan
Administration must share much of the responsibility for influencing
each of these and should take the blame for the unparalleled rise in
poverty and hunger since 1980. With the rise in the rate and number of
poor have come unprecedented reductions of people from poverty
programs in the South and the nation.
          Reviewing, in 1981, President Reagan's proposed changes in
assistance to the poor, a report of the Southern Regional Council
concluded that, if adopted, the policies would "transform the war on
poverty to a war on the poor." Our most recent report analyzing the
actual developments of the last four years, Public Assistance and
Poverty (March, 1985), documents this horrific conclusion. Since 1980
almost 1 1/2) million recipients of four major poverty programs have
been removed in the eleven Southern states. The substantial majority
of these recipients were cut from the food stamp program although
reductions occurred in each of the three other programs, Medicaid, Aid
to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), and Supplemental Social
Security (SSI).
          The elimination of more than a million recipients from the food
stamp program in the South probably has affected the working poor more
than any other group. Yet, the study clearly indicates that a majority
of the 1.4 million Southerners losing assistance in all four programs
are children. It is those who are too young to work, to protect
themselves, who may be denied food, clothing, or decent shelter due to
these reductions.
          The people--primarily the children--who've been denied further
assistance are only part of those severely affected. In the last four
years the levels of government benefits to those receiving aid have
been reduced or have stagnated. For example, the level of AFDC
assistance given to recipients in Arkansas decreased by eight percent
from 1980 to 1984. In Louisiana, the increase in AFDC payments was a
mere two percent. When compared with the increasing cost of purchasing
non-food items, the real benefits of AFDC recipients were cut by
almost one-third in the South. In other words, due to the flatened
benefits and increasing costs of buying non-food items, "real" AFDC
payments in 1984 were thirty percent less than in 1980.
          The families and individuals who receive both AFDC and food stamps
are primarily the poor who do not work. For these poor, the combined
real value of AFDC payments and food stamps for food, clothing, and
shelter has been cut more than twenty percent during the last four
years. In Tennessee the combined benefits of food stamps and AFDC
payments dropped by two dollars a year from 1980 to 1984. With an
increase in the cost of living during the last four years, food stamps
and AFDC benefits dropped thirty percent.
          The decreased levels of assistance in the last four years have
pushed families deeper into poverty and contributed to increased
hunger. In North Carolina, a family of four depending upon AFDC with
an income that was twenty-five percent below poverty in 1980, now find
that their income has dropped to fifty percent below the poverty
level.
          The immediate effect of these changes in budgets and policies is
tragic, but the consequences over time may come to be devastating. The
past is ample evidence that government assistance has had an important
role in reducing poverty. At times, however, such as in the late
1970s, increases in government assistance alone were not enough to
override changes in unemployment and underemployment. Yet, at no time
in the last twenty years have we had policies of the federal
government in public assistance that pushed substantial numbers of
people deeper into poverty. If public assistance has not always
reduced poverty over time, the policies have at least maintained the
general status quo of the poor. Today, and over the last four years,
the Reagan Administration has pushed millions of Southerners and poor
across the nation deeper into poverty.

          A clear recognition of the failures of the Administration should
not obscure the importance of government policies that affect
unemployment and underemployment. Most people, ranging from bleeding
heart liberals to heartless conservatives, carry around misconceptions
about the poor and the role of poverty programs. These mistaken
notions often limit our view of what causes poverty and what are
remedies that reduce it.
          In Patterns of Poverty, released in December of
1984, the Southern Regional Council found that most of the benefits of
AFDC, Food Stamps, Medicaid, and other government assistance go to
families headed by the elderly or by one female parent with children
at home. On average, almost eight out of ten of all families receiving
benefits in the South in 1982 were confined to households headed by
someone sixty-five years or older or by single, female parents with
children.
          These statistics tell us that public assistance in the South is
going largely to people who need it and who are least able to
work. Under the circumstances, it is difficult to understand the
criticism that government benefits are offering the poor an
opportunity to evade work. In fact, the benefits are going largely to
households headed by persons who cannot work, should not work, or are
least able to work by circumstances.
          Despite the myths, the fact is that a majority of the poor families
are working. In 1982, almost two out of three of all poor families
across the nation had at least one person who worked part-time or
full-time. When families headed by females with children or persons
sixty-four years or older are excluded, approximately three out of
four of all poor families in the United States probably had someone
working part-time or full-time in the 1980's. The data suggests
strongly that poor families in our society today, like most American
families, are working families.
          These facts tell us that the influences on poverty go beyond the
level of public assistance and reach to government and private
policies concerning wages and the workplace. Policies that shape
peoples' wages and the available jobs also determine whether the
government is conducting a war on poverty or a war on the poor.
          Although the Council has not finished its analysis of the recent
effects of unemployment and underemployment on poverty in the South,
the US Conference of Catholic Bishops is one important group who has
come to understand the 

inextricable link between economic policies and
levels of poverty. Last November, in a draft pastoral letter, the
Catholic bishops stated that government has an obligation to its
people to assure that its economy does not maintain high rates of
unemployment and low earnings. The bishops raise the proper concern,
especially as the economies of the South and the nation radically
change the nature and duration of jobs. Yet, they have not-nor has
anyone else--marshalled enough public debate on the economic policies
that can attack poverty.
          The war on poverty, begun twenty years ago, was not an unblemished
success. In its best times, the poverty programs helped to reduce the
number of people whose incomes and benefits did not offer a decent
life. In its worst moments, until 1980, the programs usually offered
the poor enough to sustain their economic status, if not their hope
for better opportunities. Since 1980, policies governing public
assistance have cut hundreds of thousands off and have deepened the
poverty of millions who continue to receive aid. In a prosperous
nation, a prosperous region, these policies have a bankrupt spirit.
          Yet, until we realize that policies governing our economy also
determine, in large part, our poverty rates, we will be unable to
replace harsh criticism of the Reagan Administration with a working
vision of how this prosperous country can undo poverty and how it can
enfl the enlarging economic and spiritual separation between the poor
and the non-poor. In the worst of times, we must begin to chart the
course out of the rising tide of poverty to the best of times.
          
            The Reagan Response
          
          The head of the Reagan Administration's food stamp program, Robert
Leard, responded to the recent SRC report, Public Assistance and
Poverty, by telling the Associated Press that the welfare rolls
shortened during the last four years because employment
increased. "The big reason for your change is quite frankly the
unemployment rate going down," Leard stated. No one has informed the
unemployed or the US Department of Labor of this progress in reducing
unemployment, however. In most Southern states, the unemployment rates
in late 1984 continued to be higher than rates in 1980 or 1981. In
Alabama the 11.5% rate of unemployment in November 1984 was
considerably larger than the 8.8% unemployment rate in 1980. In
Tennessee, where 186,000 food stamp recipients were removed as of late
1984, the rate of unemployment in 1980 was 7.2%. In November 1984 it
was 8.7%. While unemployment rates did not decline in most Southern
states, the number of recipients of public assistance fell by almost 1
1/2 million. Since there was no general decline in rates of
unemployment in the South from 1980 to the end of 1984, this could
hardly cause the reductions in public assistance to the poor. The
Administration has not given up its old practice of proclaiming
problems away.
          
             Steve Suitts is executive director of the Southern
Regional Council. He is the author of the two reports discussed in
this essay. Both are available from the SRC: Patterns of
Poverty (Dec. 1984. $5.00) and Public Assistance and
Poverty (March 1985. $7.50). When ordering these reports,
please add $2.OO for postage and handling. Minimum order$15. Quantity
rates available.
          
        
        
          The South and the World Community
          By Thrasher, SueSue Thrasher
          Vol. 7, No. 1, 1985, pp. 20-1, 23-24
          
          At some moment during the 1950s and '60s, many of us in this room
made a decision about where we were going to work and what we were
going to work for--a decision that made us take a stand for the future
of the South and for what we believed was right. In my own coming of
political age in the 1960s, that was an easy decision. The issues
facing our region in those years were clear-cut.
          I was in school in Nashville at the time and remember very
distinctly when it all came together for me. I was driving from my
hometown in western Tennessee back to Nashville when I heard on the
radio about a church bombing in Birmingham where four young girls had
been killed. All of you remember that particular moment.
          I made a decision then that the people who bombed that church on
behalf of the white South--did not speak for me. They did not
represent me. If I were to be a citizen of this country, and a
Southerner, I had to provide an alternative voice to what those people
were saying.
          Today, in the mid-1980s, I think that where we stand as a country
in our relationship to the rest of the world is similar to where we as
Southerners stood in the 1950s and '60s. Again, we have to make
decisions and personal commitments. I don't intend to let Reagan--or
any of the people who make national policy in this country right
now--speak for me on the issues of Central America and the rest of
this world anymore than I let the voices of the white South speak for
me in the 1960s.
          "Today, where we stand as a country in our relationship to the rest
of the world is similar to where we as Southerners stood in the
1960s."
          Two years ago the organization that I work for, the Highlander
Research and Educational Institute, located in New Market, Tennessee,
celebrated its fiftieth anniversary. In 1932, when Highlander began,
Myles Horton, its founder, said what remains true today "the issue of
the coming decades will be economic democracy."
          Initially, Highlander worked with the labor movement, training many
of the South's labor leaders in the 1930s and '40 . It stood for civil
rights in the 1950s and '60s. Working out of Highlander in the 1950s,
a woman that the Southern Regional Council is honoring this year,
Mrs. Septima Clark, helped establish the citizenship education
schools. Mrs. Clark and these schools helped thousands of people in
the South register to vote.
          In the 1960s and '70s, Highlander turned its attention toward
Appalachia and involvement with the poor peoples' movements in that
region.
          In the 1980s, we've continued our concern with Appalachia, with
labor, with civil rights-with a just society. But today there are new
questions, new issues to be considered.
          In the 1960s it made all the sense in the world to focus our
attention entirely on this region, and to work as much as possible to
focus the attention of the rest of the world on the rural South. Our
task then was to put forth a new vision of what we thought the South
should be. The difference now is that we have to advance a vision of
what we want the world to be, of what kind of world we want to help
create.
          Perhaps it is a mild case of Southern chauvinism that leads me to
believe that because of our own history of struggle for the last
thirty years, we are in a unique position to shape a vision of a just
and equal society that slips over the MasomDixon line and
more/importantly at this particular time in history, slips across our
southern border to our Latin American neighbors.

          At Highlander, we're talking about what our work should be in the
years ahead. And, we have made a commitment to bring an international
perspective whenever we can. Regional institutions should be able to
relate what's going on in the rest of the world directly to our own
work at home. Nor is it hard to find these ways. Let me give a few
examples.
          Last week I saw a work in progress--a film that should be finished
very soon and that all of you should see. You may remember "Babies and
Banners," the film about the women in an historic Detroit auto workers
struggle. One of the women who helped make that, Lorraine Gray, is
finishing a new film called "Women and the Global Assembly Line."
          Lorraine's film shows women around the world in a "global" assembly
line--a line that shifts and moves in search of cheap labor and cheap
raw materials. We previewed the film recently as a work-in-progress,
wondering if we might use it with Appalachian and Southern women as a
springboard for discussion of their own work situations and as a means
of educating them about the particular problems faced by Third World
women.
          The filmmaker was especially concerned to know how women workers in
this country would respond to the film. Would they see the women as
competitors for their jobs and simply blame them for plant closings in
the US? Or would they be able to see the commonalities of all women
workers as the assembly line becomes more global?
          We sent the film back not really knowing the answer to her
questions, with an illustration of something that we have to grapple
with in years to come. How are we going to talk to people in this
country about the fact that a lot of the jobs are leaving? They're not
coming to the so-called Sunbelt anymore, they're going further South,
for much lower wages and, in most cases, for less than human working
conditions.
          "Another thing that is coming South, and being sent further south,
is toxic waste."
          The other thing that's coming South, and going even further south,
is toxic waste. In the past five years we have had numerous workshops
at Highlander in which we bring people together who are organizing
against toxic waste dumps, usually in their communities' backyards. We
have found that people can organize against a toxic waste dump in an
Applachian holler, but the chances are ten to one that if they win,
the toxic waste will be shipped to the Chemwaste pits at Emelle,
Alabama in Sumter County. If the Sumter County people can keep it from
coming there, it will be dumped on someone else.
          The latest plan for doing away with toxic waste, by the way, is to
truck it down the highway to Mobile, put it on a barge and burn it in
Mobile Bay. You can imagine there are a few people in Mobile who are
concerned about that. Will we soon be shipping our toxic waste to
Latin American countries just as we have shipped them pesticides and
drugs that have been banned in this country? Toxic waste is an issue
that faces us in this region but I don't think we can talk about doing
away with it here only to get it shipped somewhere else.
          Another example that illustrates why we need to understand the
international economy came to our attention last year in one of the
Appalachian communities that we've worked with--a West Virginia coal
town called Gary. Nearly a hundred percent of Gary's work force is
employed by the United States Steel Company which runs several mines
and a cleaning plant in the area. About a year and a half ago US Steel
entirely shut down its operations in the Gary holler and ninety
percent of the work force became unemployed.
          When US Steel began to call people back to work, after many weeks
of unemployment, management called the miners into the company offices
one by one. They did not ask to come to a union meeting and talk. The
company told the miners, "If we're going to keep this mine open in
this holler, we have to increase production by ten percent. Otherwise
we close this mine entirely in March."
          Production at Gary increased fourteen percent during the first
month of the mine's reopening. Since then the mine has been kept
partially open. But the significant thing about this situation is
that US Steel began closing down the mines 

in Gary, West Virginia at
the same time it was buying new mines in South Africa. The economic
situation of Gary is directly related to US Steel's ability to seek
cheaper, non-union labor and offer far less safety protection for its
workers.
          Another instance:
          At the Highlander Center we have long been interested in adult
education. Earlier, I mentioned Mrs. Clark's work in the citizenship
schools in the 1950s. Right now one of the best laboratories of adult
education in the world is Latin America. Perhaps you know of the work
of Paulo Freire, the Brazilian who has helped to shape many Latin
American and African educational programs. Two years ago, as we were
talking about an international perspective to our work, we joined with
Freire's organization, the Council for Adult Education in Latin
America (CEAAL), the International Council on Adult Education
(JCAE)--headquartered in Toronto, and the Vice-Ministry of Adult
Education in Nicaragua, to organize an "encuentro"--an exchange
between adult educators in Latin America and adult educators in North
America.
          The week-long conference was held in Managua. In addition to
learning about literacy and education projects throughout Latin
America, we also learned about Nicarauga--its postrevolutionary
reality and its attempts to "reconstruct the country" by providing for
basic food needs, health care and education.
          What we were most impressed by in Nicaragua and what we have kept
close to our hearts since returning, were the adult education projects
and the tremendous efforts to teach "people how to read and
write. Within the first year after the Sandinista revolution the
Nicaraguan government instituted a country-wide program,
Alfabetizacion, an effort that reduced basic illiteracy from over
fifty percent to approximately twelve percent. As in the citizenship
education program at Highlander in the 1950s, the intention in
Nicaragua is not just to teach people how to read and write, but to
teach people how to be good citizens. The adult literacy programs
constitute part and parcel of what it means to be involved, active
citizens in the life of your country.
          We saw several adult literacy sessions at work. In one
building--that served as a school during the day, and an adult
education center at night--there were about eight different classes
going on the evening we were there. I went to a class with twelve to
fifteen people, mainly women in their fifties and sixties. They were
learning how to read and write. Most of these women worked as maids;
there are still upper and middle class people in Managua who have
maids.
          The teacher was a young man who had learned how to read and write
in the literacy program of 1980. He had gone through all five levels
of the adult literacy program and was now teaching people at the first
level. I watched as the older women went go to the blackboard and very
painfully tried to write sentences. From writing and reading, they
went to a session on mathematics, and again, painfully and slowly
attempted to subtract four figures, one from the other.
          There was no shame or embarrassment at any time, but rather a great
deal of pride and dignity in the room. Pride in themselves and in
their ever-increasing abilities and pride in their "new" country, a
country that now included them in its future.
          These women come to that class five nights a week, two hours a
night, to learn how to read and write. By the time they are through
they will have gone, like their teacher, through all five levels of
the adult literacy program.
          In Nicaragua you get a sense of such commitment--not just to teach
people how to read and write--but to truly liberate people so that they
might become active and productive.
          What we saw in those sessions was a process of empowerment. We also
saw the same process at work in the countryside in the health
program. Having seen what is going on in Nicaragua and knowing the
commitment of the people there-people that we made friends with, that
we enjoyed rum and coke with, people with whom we talked about mutual
dreams and commonalities--it is indeed sad to think that the United
States might intervene in the same way that it did in Vietnam.
          US intervention in the internal affairs of Nicaragua--and by that I
mean our current intervention through so-called covert activities, not
some planned military intervention in the future--is interferring with
the process of democratization that we witnessed. For indeed, one of
our strongest impressions was of people finally being able to
participate in the decisions which affect their lives. The spirit was
contagious. Everywhere we went we found Nicarguans
intensively engaged in building their own future and, therefore, their
country's future.
          When we were planning the adult education conference, the
vice-minister of adult education, Ernesto Vallancillos, came to
Highlander and spent a week with us in the mountains of East
Tennessee. He said that he had been in 

this country twice before but
that he had spoken only at big universities where the question that
people had asked him was whether or not he was a communist.
          While he was visiting us, we took him up to Appalshop in eastern
Kentucky, and we took him around in Harlan County-"Bloody Harlan"
where some of the fiercest union battles were fought in the 1930s. He
sat and talked for two hours with a community group that has been
organizing against the polluters of a creek in Middlesboro,
Kentucky. He saw a side of the United States that he never had seen at
Yale University or Stanford.
          As we were driving through the Southern Appalachians he was
absolutely stunned. He said, "I didn't know that you had poverty in
this country. This is not our image of what your country is like."
          Since we returned from Nicaragua, we've maintained ties with the
vice-ministry of education. We're trying to determine our own works in
relationship to what is going on there-not just in supporting a
revolutionary movement in Central America-but with regard to the kinds
of work we're doing and the kind that they are doing. The more people
in Latin America who get to know people in United States communities
who are engaged in struggle, the larger becomes the international
community who share the same understandings and beliefs. I hope that
there will be increasing numbers of people in this country who will
feel that they cannot support the policies that lead to intervention
in Nicaragua.
          There is one more thing that I want to say about international
issues.
          Last summer two other Highlander staff people and I travelled to
Scandinavia where we visited a labor folk high school in Sweden. We
were there during a special summer session for workers and their
families from all over the country. During the week the families met
in small workgroups, to carry out projects around the week's theme:
their fears.
          One group produced a play, another an exhibit, and another prepared
some art work based on fairy tales. On the final day of the week the
groups presented their projects to the entire body. All of these
projects had to do with nuclear war.
          When we asked one of the teachers why this was the only issue that
was being raised, he looked at us as if he couldn't believe what we
were asking. His reply was simple and direct, "We are all afraid
here. You have deployed your cruise missiles all around us and we
stand to lose our lives here." That was the single most educational
moment for us on the visit. Missile deployment for us was another news
item; to the Swedish workers and their families it was an ominous
threat.
          He replied, "You have deployed your cruise missiles all around us
and we stand to lose our lives."
          As we go into the late 1980s and think about what we want the years
beyond to be like, I don't know how our day-to-day work will change,
but I do know that we constantly have to be searching for ways to be
in solidarity with poor and working class people in the rest of the
world--just like poor and working class people here. We have to reach
out and create the future with them. We can't stand alone as a region
or as a nation. Our beloved community--as we called it in the
1960s--must be much broader this time.
          
             Sue Thrasher is on the staff of the Highlander Center,
New Market, Tennessee. She is a contributing editor to Southern
Changes. This essay is a revised version of a talk given to
the Fortieth Annual Meeting of the Southern Regional Council in
Atlanta this past November.
          
        
        
          Crackdown in the Black Belt
          By Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 7, No. 1, 1985, pp. 1-5
          
          In an apparent attempt to intimidate black voters in the rural
South and push back electoral gains made since the passage of the 1965
Voting Rights Act, federal prosecutors in Mobile, Montgomery and
Birmingham, Alabama are currently seeking and obtaining federal grand
jury indictments--on charges of voting fraud--against leading civil
rights activists in the Black Belt.
          The first to be indicted are Albert Turner (a former chief aide to
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.), his wife Evelyn, and co-worker Spencer
Hogue, Jr., all from the town of Marion in Perry County. Essentially,
the Turners and Hogue are charged with changing the absentee ballots
of a number of black voters in the Democratic primary election of
September 4,1984. They face a twenty-nine count indictment handed down
on January 25,1985 by a federal grand jury in Mobile. Punishment upon
conviction carries a maximum of 115 years in prison and $40,000 in
fines. The trial for the Turners and Hogue will be held outside the
Black Belt, in Mobile, and is scheduled to begin June 17.
          Additional indictments of perhaps a dozen or more grassroots black
leaders are expected soon in Greene Sumter, Lowndes and Wilcox
counties. The list of likely defendants includes sheriff John Hulett
of Lowndes, school board chairman Wendell Paris and county commission
employee Adeline Webster of Sumter County, Eutaw city council member
Spiver W. Gordon and retired schooteacher Rosie Carpenter in Greene
County, and Rev. Thomas Threadgill and county commissioner Bobby Joe
Johnson of Wilcox County.
          Since the September 1984 primary, hundreds of persons who voted
absentee have been interviewed by the FBI in Perry, Greene, Sumter,
Lowndes and Wilcox counties. Voters were shown their ballots and asked
if they voted for particular candidates. In October, the FBI raided
the office of Booker T. Cooke, Jr., coordinator of election activities
in Greene County, seizing all his office's voting materials. Cooke is
also on the list of expected indictees.

          On one occasion in the past several weeks FBI agents loaded more
than two dozen subpoenaed black witnesses (many of whom are elderly
citizens who remember all too well the era of segregation) onto buses,
then carried them--with the automobile escort of Alabama State
Troopers--to testify before the federal grand jury convened in Mobile'
In both Mobile and Birmingham, witnesses were photographed,
fingerprinted and required to give handwriting samples.
          Using provisions of the 1965 Voting Rights Act which allow for
federal intervention in instances of alleged state and local election
law violations, the offices of US Attorney for the Southern, Middle
and Northern Districts of Alabama are preparing to prosecute many of
the black community leaders who helped assure the Act's original
passage in Congress and its extension in 1982. "The intent of the
Voting Rights Act has been turned on its head," says Steve Suitts,
executive director of the Southern Regional Council.
          Civil rights and voting rights workers throughout the South see the
impetus for the federal investigations and indictments as coming from
old nemeses among the white power structure in the Black Belt who have
glimpsed encouragement in the Reagan Administration's Department of
Justice. Community organizers in the five southwest Alabama counties
where the investigations are going on also see the hand of Alabama's
Republican US Senator Jeremiah Denton.
          "This whole FBI investigation of absentee voting and the: scheduled
trials," defendant Albert Turner argues, "were set up to stop the
political progress of black people in the Alabama Black Belt. The
power structure wants to turn back the hands of time in Perry County
and throughout west Alabama. I would encourage black people not to let
my indictment stop them or discourage them. We need to vote in even
larger numbers because they are trying to take our right to vote away
again."
          In moving first against Albert Turner, the Federal agents and
attorneys have targeted one of the Black Belt's toughest and most
saavy black political leaders. An experienced and dedicated community
organizer for nearly thirty years, Turner has worked in Perry and
surrounding counties to help black Alabamians gain their rights as
citizens. In the early 1960s, Albert and Evelyn Turner initiated the
lawsuit which first brought federal registrars into Perry County to
assist blacks in getting their names on the voting roles in
significant numbers.
          In 1965, as the Alabama Director of the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference (SCLC), Albert Turner assisted Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr. in the major campaigns of the civil rights movement. "I was
with Dr. King everywhere he went in the 1960s," he recalls. "And I
helped to lead the mule train which brought him to his final resting
place."
          Turner remained as state SCLC director until 1972 when he headed a
Perry County program to assist black students in coping with school
integration. A small farmer and an insurance agent, he has worked with
the Federation of Southern Cooperatives and has been the general
manager of the Southwest Alabama Farmers Cooperatives Association
(SWAFCA).
          Through their community-based organization, the Perry County Civic
League, the Turners and Spencer Hogue, Jr. have pursued the cause of
fair legislative and municipal representation for black citizens in
their home county and in the town of Marion. Over the course of many
local elections, they have mobilized voters to overcome generations of
white minority rule. With its growing success in assisting black
candidates to win local and state offices, the Perry County Civic
League--and other groups like it throughout the Black Belt--have put
the old-guard white elite on the defensive.
          Speaking to a demonstration of some 150 supporters on the steps of
the federal courthouse in Mobile on January 31, the day that the
Turners and Hogue pleaded innocent, Wendell Paris, chairman of the
Sumter County School Board said, "The Alabama Black Belt has made more
progress in the area of voter registration, voter education and
electing black officials than most areas of the nation. This is why
the efforts are being made to stop us. Local powers in Perry, Greene,
Sumter and Lowndes counties have now gotten the support of US Senator
Jeremiah Denton and the Reagan Justice Department in the fight to
undermine the progress we have made in the twenty years since the
passage of the Voting Rights Act."
          At present, the trail leading to Senator Denton remains
circumstantial. His Washington office denies the Senator has had any
involvement with the investigations, and demurs on further comment at
the present time. Denton, a former Vietnam War POW, and Alabama's only
Republican US Senator in the twentieth century, won election in 1980
with solid white support and Ronald Reagan's coattails. Denton's
extremely narrow margin of victory state-wide was 36,000 votes out of
some 1 1/4 million cast. In the Black Belt, Denton lost handily to his
Democratic opponent. As a 

sampler of black voter sentiment in the 1980
election, the nearly all-black voting beat of Boykin, in Wilcox
County, supported Denton's Democratic opponent by a margin of 233 to
zero.
          Since entering the Senate, Denton's voting record and public
pronouncements demonstrate that black Alabamians know who their
friends aren't. With his support for deep cuts in domestic spending
and for large increases in military appropriations, the Senator has
proven himself to be at odds with the aspirations of his home state's
poorest citizens--the residents of the Black Belt.
          As he eyes his re-election prospects for 1986, Denton sees another
strong Democratic challenge as inevitable. This time, however, there
will be no Reagan windfall from a presidential campaign. Clearly,
Denton stands to benefit almost as much as the local white politicos
do from the intimidation of Alabama's black voters that may result
from the persecution-and prosecution-of black community
organizers. Certainly too, the US Attorneys involved in the Black Belt
investigations were appointed by the President upon the advice of the
Republican US Senator from Alabama.
          "We believe that with the re-election of Reagan, old line Black
Belt politicians can go directly to Reagan's Justice Department via
Senator Denton," says Wendell Paris. "The number of incidents and
their timing lead us to believe that this effort at intimidation is
being geared up from Washington itself." How else, Paris wonders, can
one explain the current circumstance in which three separate federal
district attorneys are simultaneously investigating voter fraud in
five Black Belt counties, all of which are predominantly black and all
of which have substantial numbers of black elected officials?
          Alabama State Senator Hank Sanders, whose Selma law firm--along
with Oakland, California civil rights attorney Howard Moore--will
represent the Perry County defendants, also points to the
larger-than-local importance of the current pattern of federal
investigations and indictments. "There are national implications in
this and other investigations of black voting across the South and the
nation," says Sanders. "For the fifteen years, from 1965 until 1980,
the federal government effectively enforced the Voting Rights Act of
1965 which protected the poor and minorities in this county. Now it is
obvious that the government is abusing the provisions of the Act and
is attacking us with sledgehammer blows, to try to kill the few
hard-earned gains we have made."
          That attorney Hank Sanders now sits in the Alabama Senate comes as
a result of years of grassroots efforts pursued by black community
organizers such as the Turners and Hogue. A November, 1983 special
election which enabled Sanders to take his place in the state
legislature followed from a court-ordered redistricting plan that
redressed the discriminatory reapportionment schemes which had helped
white elites in the Black Belt maintain their governmental power. The
federal court's re-drawing of several Alabama senate and house
districts allowed Sanders to run and win election from a new, black
majority district. The boundaries of Sanders' Alabama Senate District
23 includes three majority black state house seats, each of which is
now filled by black state representatives.
          Apparently, the white effort to involve the federal government's
investigative powers and the resulting focus upon absentee voting
began in the aftermath of Sanders' successful 1983 election
campaign.
          Absentee balloting emerged as a matter of serious concern to Black
Belt white elites in the late 1960s, after the possibility of broad
black registration began to become a reality. For at least a decade,
white absentee landowners and former residents who have ties of kin
and friends "down home," but who now live anywhere from Birmingham to

Chicago to New York have continued to vote in Black Belt contests at the request of local white officeholders and candidates. On election nights throughout the early 1970s, white officials found electoral deliverance inside dependable absentee voting boxes filled with lopsided margins. Federal and state authorties took little notice, and obtained no indictments, against any whites on charges of absentee voter fraud despite a series of complaints and lawsuits offered by resident blacks.
          Black community organizers sought to counter white abuse of absentee balloting not only by registering complaints, but by registering a greater number of black absentee voters. They have worked to make the election process easier and more accessible for elderly blacks, for those attending college away from home, and for the many county residents who must commute to jobs across county lines.
          Black Belt counties are the state's poorest. To find jobs, many workers must travel out of their home county every day. Census data for 1980 shows that thirty-one percent of the working population in Perry County (home of the Turners and Hogue) work outside the county. In nearby Lowndes County, the number reaches almost fifty percent. To vote, these commuting workers must miss work or obtain absentee ballots.
          In addition to being impoverished, the Black Belt contains a substantial elderly black population--fifteen percent of Perry County residents are sixty-five years of age or older Like those Perry Countians who work outside their county of residence, the elderly often have difficulty in registering to vote and in getting to the polls on election day.
          Over the past twenty years, blacks in the ten southwest Alabama counties where the federal investigations are now underway have gradually won local elective offices. Prior to 1965, whites controlled all ten county commissions, eleven boards of education and thirty-four town governments. Since the Voting Rights Act, blacks have emerged to fill the majority of the seats on five county commissions and five school boards. Blacks now direct the municipal governments of nine towns, while whites still remain in control of five county governments and thirty-three of forty-two towns, including every county seat.
          One major obstacle to further black electoral success can be found in the local boards of voter registrars, whose members are appointed by the governor of the state, George Wallace. Throughout the counties of the Black belt, the offices of voter registrars and their deputies remain in the hands of whites who are often hostile to black attempts to register. Typically, registrars' offices here are open ten days out of each month. During these days, registration hours

may extend only from 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., minus an hour for
lunch. Unlike the practices now found in such cities as Birmingham or
Montgomery in which, for instance, League of Women Voters' volunteers
register prospective voters at shopping malls, the pathway to
registration and voting remains filled with obstructions in much of
southwest Alabama.
          In 1981, the white legislators in the Black Belt convinced the
Alabama legislature to enact a "reidentification" law. Over the
strongest objections of black citizens, the Justice Department allowed
existing voting roles to be wiped clean in several counties. Persons
who wished to vote were required to appear, identify themselves and
re-register. The predictable effect was the loss of a significant
number of black voters who had registered during the voting drives of
recent years.
          When they began to lose control of the election machinery in the
Black Belt, the white powers-that-be also turned for help to a justice
system in which there are no black district attorneys or circuit
judges. The current investigations and indictments remind many
Alabamians of the 1981 conviction of Maggie Bozeman and Julia Wilder
by an all-white jury in Pickens County on state charges of absentee
voter fraud.
          Although all but one of the black witnesses against Bozeman and
Wilder recanted or changed their testimony, later indicating that they
asked for the women's assistance in voting, the Alabama Supreme Court
upheld their convictions. After serving time in Tutwiler State Prison,
Bozeman and Wilder's conviction was overturned in federal court. Their
case, however, seems to have left the lingering effect of reduced
black voter participation in Pickens County.
          Black absentee voting must be seen in light of present conditions,
customary practices, and the historical context of white power in this
majority black area. The hardships of contending with the Black Belt's
day-to-day political weather underscore the importance of the
journeyman efforts of people such as the Turners and Spencer Hogue,
Jr., and the significance of groups like the Perry County Civic League
which seek to make the ballot accessible to black residents.
          Like the Bozeman-Wilder trial, that of Albert and Evelyn Turner and
Spencer Hogue, Jr.--as well as the other trials which now seem certain
to follow--may come down to little more than swearing contests. Each
side will offer witnesses to substantiate their claims as to whether
absentee ballots were marked in accordance with, or at variance from,
a particular voter's preference, with or without his or her
knowledge. Given the strong-arm methods which have been used to secure
testimony, federal prosecutors may come to find their witnesses
revising their accounts when intimidating circumstances become less
frightening.
          As in the current national political scene with its black
neo-conservatives-and its Reagan apologists on the US Commission on
Civil Rights--a few self-proclaimed community leaders will put their
integrity in the employ of their community's enemies. Yet, for those
who know, and for those who care to learn about the Black Belt's
history, the alleged legal violations which suddenly-zealous FBI
agents and US attorneys are using to form indictments must be
understood in terms of the long revolution through which black
citizens have engaged the pursuit of justice.
        
      
    
  
