
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 7, Number 3-4,
	       1985
        
          Mother Church
          
            
              Campbell, Will D.Will D. Campbell
            
          
          Vol. 7, No. 3, 1985, pp. 37-38
          
          Shortly after the spring thaw of 1573 a woman prayed for her
children.
          
            
              O holy Father, sanctify the children of Thy
handmaiden in Thy truth, and keep them from all unrighteousness, for
Thy holy name's sake. O Almighty Father, I commend them unto You,
since they are Thy creatures; care for them, for they are Thy
handiwork; so that they may walk in Thy paths. Amen.
            
          
          She was a cousin to some of us. Her name was Maeyken Wens, an
Anabaptist woman of Antwerp, who had been arrested a few days earlier
for proclaiming the Gospel of Christ as she understood it from her
personal reading of the Scripture, and from study and discussion of it
with others of her sisters and brothers.
          Cousin Maeyken withstood the inquisition of ecclesiastics and the
bodily torture of those in civil authority. When she would not recant
after six months of imprisonment, and would not promise to cease her
spreading of the Word, she was sentenced on October 5 to
death. Included in the sentence read by the court was the instruction
to the executioner that her tongue should be screwed fast to the roof
of her mouth so that she might not testify along the way to the place
of burning.
          The next day her teen-age son, Adriaen, took his youngest little
brother, three year old Hans Mattheus, and stood on a bench near the
stakes so that her first and last issue might be present at the moment
of her death. When it began Adriaen fainted, and was not able to
witness her parting. But when it was over and the ashes had cooled he
sifted through them and found the screw with which her tongue had been
stilled. Three other women and a man died that day for the same
offense. The remembrance of them makes me exult in my heritage.
          Four hundred and eleven years later, June 13, 1984, many thousands
of Maeyken's spiritual relatives gathered in convention in Kansas City
and resolved that women should not be ordained as ministers.
          
            
               WHEREAS, while Paul commends women and men alike
in other roles of ministry and service (Titus 2:1-10)
he excludes women from pastoral leadership (I  Timothy
2:12) to preserve a submission God requires because the man was first
in Creation and the woman was first in the Edenic fall (I Timothy  2:1 395.)
            
          
          The remembrance of that act brings no exultation to many of us who
wear the Anabaptist alias, Baptist. I have heard of no fifteen year
old sons picking up the paper clips from the discarded resolutions
which recommended the silencing of their mothers. Perhaps it is just
as well. For that resolution will no more stop their mothers and
sisters from declaring the mighty acts of God, with or without the
laying on of human hands, than the tongue screws stopped those
daughters of Sarah in the sixteenth century. Or my Mississippi
grandmother who in 1932, and with no apostolic sanction, stood in the
finest prophetic and priestly tradition and said to an angry band of
men about to beat a black child with a gin belt, "He's fourteen years
old and you ain't gonna beat him." And they didn't. Again, I exult.
          Many, it should be said, deny the kinship between contemporary
Baptists of twentieth century America and that tough and radical
little band of left-wingers called Anabaptists. But increasingly the
scholars acknowledge and affirm the nexus. Among them are William
Estep of the Southwestern Baptist Seminary in Fort Worth, Eric Gritsch
of Lutheran Seminary in Gettysburg, the late Roland Baintain of Yale,
and Donald Armentrout of St. Luke's Episcopal Seminary.
          Last week I sat in a hot and crowded courtroom in Glasgow, Kentucky
and watched the continuing persecution of Maeyken Wens's people. A
young  Swartzentruber Amish 

man was on trial
for not having the state mandated red emblem on his buggy. To do so,
he testified calmly, would be a sin. To him it would be a violation of
the second commandment, and he made it clear that he had no intention
of doing so. He refused the oath, refused to hold his right hand up in
obeisance to a court of human law, declined to say, "Your honor," or
respond in any fashion other than the Biblical yea or nay. There was
no talk of racks, drowning, or burning. But the suspicion of the state
of those who dare to be different was much in evidence. Testimony
showed that the buggy, with the reflective tape designed by the Amish,
could be seen at night for almost six hundred feet. The issue did not
appear to be safety. The issue was Caesar's prescribed emblem. I
observed this tiny vestige of where I came from with gratefulness.
          One week before that courtroom scene 45,000 Baptists convened in
Dallas in an atmosphere of shame and held a four day shouting match
over which faction of the denomination, the conservatives or the
slightly more conservative, should be entrusted with the tattered coat
of Christ. The duly ordained Reverend President was flanked by armed
guards. They were not country dunces riding into the city on their
watermelon trucks to fight over who would get their picture on next
year's Sunday School quarterlies. Baptists are now a middle class and
accepted people. The preachers of the victorious faction, largely
unaware and uncaring of their antecedent, preach from Hebrew and Greek
texts. The laity come from the professional elite, the major
protagonist being a prominent Houston judge. (In the days of Maeyken
Wens he would not have been allowed membership by virtue of being a
magistrate. In 1985 he lobbies on the Phil Donahue Show to take it
over.)
          Though there is considerable opposition to the resolution on the
ordination of women passed by 58 percent of those voting a year ago,
the effort to rescind it did not make it to this year's agenda. To
preserve the spirit of alleged harmony women are still adjudged
unqualified to be ministers because they discovered sin first. One
might think that since they have been at it longer they would be more
competent in identifying and casting it out. But logic has never
carried much weight where mischief and foolishness reign.
          The percentage of women clergy in my holy mother church is less
than one percent. But if those who did not spring from the left wing
of the reformation are looking down their sophisticated noses at
backwater Baptists and are gathering boulders they might first
consider some relevant mote. Among Episcopalians and United Methodists
the ratio is about thirty to one. And among Roman Catholics it is
. . . well, never mind.
          All of us might also hear some words of Kenneth Chafin, a Baptist
seminary professor known for neither toadying to special interests nor
knee jerk liberalism, words of both warning and hope. They should be
heard by Nashville, Rome, Canterbury, and the rest.
          
            
              The best students I have at Southern Seminary are
women. They've got better minds and better backgrounds. They are
better at preparing sermons than anyone else I have in the class. And
yet the most ill-prepared, uncommitted, limited man I have has a
better chance for ministry in our denomination than some of the most
brilliant people I teach. Until the pulpits of this land begin to deal
with that, we are wasting not just half of our gifts, we are wasting
probably sixty percent of our gifts. 
            
          
          There are today almost sixty thousand students involved in some
theological degree program. Twenty-five percent of them are
women. Where will they go? The number being trained is multiples
beyond the number of professional jobs currently open to them.
          Of personal concern to me in all this is that my firstborn daughter
entered Divinity School this fall. I don't want her bruised by
institutionalized tongue screws nor silenced by resoluted bigotry.
          Of concern to the steeples should be some words of St. Paul:
          
            
               . . . and how shall they hear without a
preacher? And how shall they preach, except they be sent?
            
          
          
            The writer was ordained a Baptist preacher in Mississippi
forty-four years ago this month. This essay is reprinted from
Christianity and Crisis.
          
        
        
          Organizing for Empowerment: The National Political Congress of
Black Women
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 7, No. 3, 1985, pp. 5-9
          
          
            Excerpts and Observations
            Shirley Chisolm, president of the National
Political Congress of Black Women: Ever since we started to put this
organization together last August and September we've felt that
Spelman-the oldest black woman's college in this country-was the place
to hold the first assembly of the National Political Congress of Black
Women.
            Black women have decided that the time has now come for our
political empowerment as a group to be reckoned with. We no longer
need and will not accept surrogates speaking for us. As a result of
what happened last year in the Democratic Convention we came to the
realization that even though we have been very involved in all kinds
of alliances and groups, we had no real political clout of our
own. Our sisters came back from that convention and decided, "Never
again."
            Here, in the fiftieth year of the founding of the National Council
of Negro Women, we are founding the National Political Congress of
Black Women. Representatives from twenty-nine states are here,
approximately 450 women in attendance. This Congress is a non-partisan
organization. It is an organization in which to belong you don't have
to come from a certain social class. Today, we see grassroots black
women, the backbone of their communities, here running for the board,
getting up and speaking.
            Mabel Thomas of Atlanta, youngest member of
the Georgia General Assembly, board member of the NPCBW: I think this
organization has come together out of the dissatisfaction felt by
black women at the Democratic National Convention in San
Francisco. During the convention, black women were ignored. Their
votes were not lobbied for or respected. We could not even get Shirley
Chisolm's name put on the floor as a vice-presidential candidate. The
machine that was in place didn't want to look at the issues facing
black women, they just wanted black women to vote with them.
            Hazel Obey, a national boardmember from Austin
Texas: I worked with Jesse Jackson's campaign as field director for
the state of Texas. When we got to the National Democratic Convention
in San Francisco there was a concern there that a woman needed to be
on the ballot. Yet when a vice-presidential was being considered, and
although there were many qualified black women, none were
interviewed. Out of that incident grew the concerns about forming this
organization.
            We have eight delegates here from Austin. Nobody had their way paid
here. Everybody came out of their own pockets.
            Our problems as black women are unique, different from those of
white women. Even though I belong to the National 

Women's Political
Caucus-the "Anglo Caucus"-we need to have a group like this where we
can come together as black women and deal with the problems we
have. It gives us credibility and clout with which to be recognized. I
hope that we can go back home and do some chapter building and some
coalition building.
            C. Delores Tucker, first vice-president NPCBW:
The theme of our assembly this weekend is "Organizing for
Empowerment." Among our several missions is that of making certain
that black women understand how to effectively involve themselves in
the political process, how to run for elective office and how to
achieve their parity within the appointive processes of our political
divisions.
            There are ten million black women of voting age in this
country. Seven million are registered and three million are
unregistered. Over half of these unregistered black women are under
thirty-five. Our mission is to register these unregistered. Sixty
percent of black women voted in 1984, the largest percentage of any
single group voting in that election.
            There is no other national organization of black women that has as
its priority political empowerment. Within the next year we plan to
develop this Congress within twentyfive states. By the year 2000 we
hope will have more than 100,000 members and a thousand
chapters. Building strong chapters of the Congress will provide a
training ground. We will develop a political action committee through
which by the year 2000 we intend to have $10 million.
            We will develop a dialogue with both political parties.
            We will endorse candidates. We intend to provide finance for our
romance with the political system. We intend to develop and encourage
black women to run for office at all levels. Even though we have the
highest percentage of any group that participated last year, we have
only twenty-nine.
            black female mayors, seventy-five state legislators, fourteen state
senators and one member of Congress.
            Eleanor Holmes Norton, professor of law at
Georgetown University and a founder of the NPCBW: I've been counsel to
this Congress during its formation and I am pleased to report that the
black women who have gotten together here have recognized that law is
inferior to substance. We have passed by-laws in a shorter time and
with more gusto than any organization I have ever heard of. We took
only four or five hours to do what organizations usually take weeks to
accomplish. The birth of this Congress signals another crossroads for
black people in a journey through the American political process.
            Carrie Prioleau, teacher, Sumter, South
Carolina: I believe that the goal of the National Political Congress
of Black Women to reach a large number of black women in the United
States is excellent and I am with the organization. After I saw the
list of names of the ladies who were a part of this Congress, knowing
what they stand for, I wanted to become involved and be a part of
moving our people on into political areas.
            I hope to go back to Sumter and help organize a chapter of the
Congress there. So many times we have capable people who want to run
for positions and they do not have the funds to do so. This
organization can help such women and the community.
             Dorothy Height, the president of the National
Council of Negro Women: Mary McLeod Bethune always gave two
messages. One was that we need to work together. And that's what this
Congress is about. And the other was that we have to make our impact
upon the political machinery. It's been a long time coming, but I
think the time is now.
            There are many organizations represented here this weekend. But the
uniqueness of this Congress is that we 

will be able to go directly to
the heart of the political machinery, to endorse candidates, to select
candidates, to promote candidates, to raise funds and to speak for
ourselves.
            I hope the message will go back to the members of the organizations
represented here that we all need to be in this Congress no matter
what else we are. Our power comes not from others, but from
ourselves.
          
          
            Highlights from the NPCB Workshop on Civil Rights 
            Mary Frances Berry , law and history professor
at Howard University, member of US Commission on Civil Rights: Right
now we are in a crisis condition, a hardening of the arteries, on
civil rights issues. Mr. Reagan's election was symptomatic of the
change which has occurred in the country. We have seen the attempt to
give tax exemption to schools that discriminate on the basis of
race--the Bob Jones case. We have seen the change in interpretation of
Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which is the section that
says you can't give federal money to institutions that discriminate on
the basis of race. And on the basis of sex, in Title IX. We have
arrived, in the area of fair housing, at a position in which anyone
who brings a complaint has to prove that not only did people not sell
you a house, but they intended not to sell it to you because you were
black. And in voting rights we had a long struggle to get the Voting
Rights Act re-authorized in 1982. Imagine, having to fight about that
here in the 1980s.
            Mr. William Bradford Reynolds, the assistant attorney general for
civil rights in the Justice Department, is working to see that more
than fifty cities and jurisdictions get rid of their affirmative
action plans under which women and minorities have been hired in jobs
in police and fire departments.
            In the Commission on Civil Rights, we have seen since 1980 the
Commission trashed and demobilized in its effectiveness as an advocate
for justice. I had a dinner one night about two weeks ago with two old
war horses of the civil rights movement in Washington. They were there
in 1957 when Congress passed the Civil Rights Act creating the Civil
Rights Commission. They were telling me that the Commission was set up
to advocate the rights of blacks. They were wondering why everybody
has forgotten that.
            The Civil Rights Commission is no longer an advocate for the cause
of civil rights, but is a mouthpiece, a watchdog, an outhouse for the
White House. The Civil Rights Restoration Act of 1985 still sits
before the Congress. It would restore Title VI and Title IX and Title
IV to what they were before the Reagan Administration succeeded in
having them watered down. Now, as we sit here, institutions can get
federal money and continue to discriminate on the basis of sex and
race. The National Political Congress of Black Women puts itself
behind the passage of this Act.
            The Black Family Plan is advocated by the Black Leadership
Roundtable. This is a proposal that we have private, affirmative
action plans of our own. If the Justice Department isn't going to
enforce affirmative action, then we ought to enforce it ourselves. One
way for us to do that is to go to these companies and corporations and
hotels where we have conventions and to insist that they do something
about the employment of our people if they want to keep our
business. We must monitor them, give them ratings as to how well they
do, then publicize our findings.
            We also put ourselves behind the direct action strategies of the
people in the Free South Africa movement. The example of trying to
change public policy on the issue of apartheid in South Africa shows
that an effective political strategy must involve both electoral
politics and direct action. We also support the passage of the
Anti-apartheid Act of 1985 in the US Congress.
             Angela Davis, board member NPCBW; teacher,
San Francisco State University: Yesterday, when we were trying to get
this workshop on civil rights organized, Dr. Berry feared that it
might not be very well attended since there is such an emphasis at
this meeting as to how to run as a candidate and on the electoral
arena. But when we came in for the first session, the room was packed
and it has remained packed for all three sessions. The fact that this
workshop is so well attended is an indication of our 

awareness of the
need to combine the kind of direct action protests that Mary was
talking about with the electoral strategy. Historically, that is the
only way that black people have ever been able to win any gains. We
have had to get out there and mobilize people, marching,
demonstrating, picketing and boycotting. We understand that it is not
enough to focus simply on getting elected and functioning as elected
officials, however important that may be.
            This is a very dangerous era. We've witnessed in recent years an
intensification of racism that has been instigated by the most racist
and most sexist president in the history of this country. 'We've
already talked about the attack on the Civil Rights Commission--on
Dr. Berry herself--and the attack on affirmative action. There also has
been a concerted assault on working people in general and because
black people--and black women--are in our vast majority workers, we have
received the brunt of the union busting strategy of the Reagan
Administration. We have to realize the absolute importance now of
developing organizing skills. We must talk about the importance of
developing a mass movement. We can want to see a protest movement
reemerge, but it's not going to happen if we do not know how to build
that movement.
            People who do not have the experience of the 1950s and '60s are
sometimes under the impression that that movement just
happened. Somehow black people reached a point where they were fed up
and the whole thing exploded. Well, black people have been fed up for
as long as we have been in this country. I can remember as a child
growing up in Birmingham, Alabama, what our attitude was toward the
segregated buses. We used to sit in the front of the bus. I can even
remember friends that were arrested for doing that. But when Rosa
Parks refused to go to the back of the bus, there was an organization
behind her action.
            Rosa Parks had attended a meeting similar to this one prior to
refusing to sit in the back of the bus. There was a women's political
council in Montgomery, headed by a woman named Jo Ann Robinson. And
there were a lot of unnamed women who organized that bus boycott
movement. They already had a leaflet prepared when Rosa Parks was
arrested.
            I could speak for hours about my own case and how the movement for
my freedom developed. It was very well organized. There were some
two-hundred committees across this country and that's the only reason
I'm free today. People may know my name, but they do not know the
names of those people who called those meetings, who put out the
leaflets, who organized the demonstrations, who developed the petition
campaign. As organized black women we have the potential for making an
absolutely indispensable contribution to this era which lies before
us.
            Dorothy Height: The whole effort to free South
Africa is related to our civil rights. I was the guest of the Black
Women's Federation of South Africa four years ago at their
convention. To show you how the system operates, I have never been on
the front page of a paper. Yet I was on the front page of
Johannesburg's Rand newspaper, in color, leading a discussion group of
the Black Women's Federation. Seeing that you would get the impression
that this was a very liberal, very welcoming climate.
            I can assure you I was treated so well. Friends there said to me,
"You know of course that you will be given the best treatment
because you are here under such observance that you are really an
honorary white."
            Two weeks after I left South Africa, the Federation was banned.
            Now those women had come there against every kind of difficulty,
including the fear of traveling in groups. But every province except
Capetown got there and the Capetown people's bus broke down along the
way. Three hundred women risked their lives and came to that'
meeting. They were really concerned about what is happening to
themselves and their children under apartheid.
            I think black women have to speak out about what the impact of
apartheid is on the whole society. But also its impact on women and
children. On the sixteenth of June we commemorate the massacre at
Soweto, a massacre of children. When we talk about the free South
Africa movement, we're talking about something very closely related to
us, but it is not the same as our civil rights. Those people don't
want to have the privilege of going to the park or sitting anywhere on
the bus. That's not what their fight is about. Theirs is about
governing themselves in a country in which they are a majority. I
think we have a mission to help people, black and white, in our
country to understand this.
            I once heard Benjamin Mays say to a group of YWCA women in the days
before Brown versus Board of Education, "the time is always right
for justice and if you believe in 

justice then your job is to ripen
the time." And we've got to ripen the time.
          
          
            The State of Black Women
            Shirley Chisolm : How exciting it is to stand
before you this morning and recognize that black women in the last
part of this century have come to the realization that our time has
come. I remember a few years ago when I said to several of my black
sisters that it would be very necessary for us to bring ourselves
together and speak out forcefully and assertively on matters of
concern. I remember so vividly how many of our sisters felt at the
time. "Shirley, we cannot move in that direction because certain
elements would begin to question our motivation."
            Now, whenever white women begin to organize them selves, whenever
white men begin to organize themselves, and whenever black men begin
to organize themselves, there is not this kind of concern and this
kind of question as to the motivation. But when black women begin to
organize themselves, everybody sits up wanting to know "What are
you all up to?"
            Upon the basis of my observations and experiences of many years I
sincerely believe that the reason so many persons become visibly
concerned about the potential emergence of the black woman as a
political force is because historically they know that we are
resilient, we are strong, we have the stamina, the audacity, the
courage, the perseverance to change this country.
            Today the black woman deserves nothing less than the full equality
which is supposedly the birthright of every American. As Dr. King has
said, "We are through with tokenism and gradualism and
see-how-far-we've-come-ism." We can't wait any longer.
            For as long as we live, we fight. When the day comes for which
there is nothing to battle, my sisters, that day is the day that you
lay yourselves down and just die. We fight for a living, for a new way
of life, for a spiritual blessing, for hope and strength. We fight for
better health so that we may continue to fight harder. The first
battle we fight is for belief in ourselves and we find that it comes
to us while we are still battling. For we know about the legacy of
starving to death while working for the minimum wage. We know about
the legacy of watching helplessly as our babies were torn from our
breasts. We know about the legacy of grandchildren of the
oppressor. The history is there. The black woman has had to remain a
pillar of strength against insurmountable odds.
            The realities of our time are very difficult to face. Many have no
desire to cope at all. Others are resigned to live only with the
status quo. Well, we black women assembled here in Atlanta have no
intention of living with the status quo.  Some of us have faced the
alienation of our family and our friends. Some of us have given up
certain comforts and pleasures that there for the asking, some have
endured cruel and viscious criticisms.
            Will black woman power in the tradition of our sisters who
proceeded us remain a vital force in current history or are we just
going to sit back in our armchairs, not daring to accept the new
challenges that confront us? Our conscience tells us that we must
act.
            It is our hope that the National Political Congress for Black Women
will become the instrument for gaining the collective clout that we
need in order to become an integral part of the decisions and plans
that affect our lives and the lives of our children. We must be about
the business of talking about the necessity for more day care centers
in this country. Only women will go into the legislative chambers and
not be afraid to stand up and fight for the most important thing that
we have in this country. Fight for the preservation of conservation of
our children.
            The time has come when--in terms of what is happening to us at this
very moment in America--we can no longer sit back and be the quiescent
and complacent.
            Black women should be speaking out more. We should be much more
evident at the many kinds of public hearings that take place in our
cities and in our nation. We must testify about how the military
budget has a deleterious impact on the quality of our lives and the
lives of our families. Our nation has to be brought to new principles
by a new generation of women who are fighters, because the war that is
being waged on our homefront today is truly a war for the elevation of
humanity.
          
          
            Sisters Chapel, Spelman College Campus,
Atlanta. June 7-9,1985.
          
        
        
          The Women of Fairhope.  Women of Fairhope, by
Paul M. Gaston. Mercer University Lamar Memorial Lectures,
No. 25. with foreword by Wayne Mixon. (Athens: University of Georgia
Press, 1984, 143 pages).
          By Fox-Genovese, ElizabethElizabeth Fox-Genovese
          Vol. 7, No. 3, 1985, pp. 38-40
          
          The charm of Paul Gaston's  The Women of Fairhope 
resembles that of treasured stories. Reading it makes you wish that
you could have heard the lectures on which it is based. But whatever
may have been lost in the translation from spoken to written form, the
haunting attraction of the lives of the women he evokes has withstood
the test. The grandson of the founder of the single-tax colony of
Fairhope, Alabama, Professor Gaston knew the community to which they
were bound. His loving tribute to them constitutes his tribute to the
values of Fairhope itself, but his choice of women about whom to write
reflects a historian's self-imposed critical distance on what must be
a very personal legacy.
          For, if in writing of the lives of Nancy Lewis, Marie Howland, and
Marietta Jackson, Professor Gaston is recreating three lives and
telling three touching stories, he is also, very gently--almost too
gently--saying something about the nature, limits, and interweaving of
different women's experiences in the late-nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. None of these women would, in the normal course
of events, be taken as a preeminent historical figure: none, that is,
would be taken to command a place in a standard history of the
period. Yet each was extraordinary 

and significant, each a woman of
courage, determination, imagination.
          Fairhope, founded in 1894, does not figure in the familiar
histories of "utopian" communities in the United States, not least
because of its dates. By the time Fairhope was founded, Americans had
been pouring their reformist impulses into such "mainstream" movements
as populism and the Knights of Labor. And the even broader Progressive
movement, with its attendant movements for social reform, was
underway. Fairhope came too late to fit comfortably into the mold of
utopian settlement typified by the Owenities' New Lanark and John
Humphrey Noyes's Oneida. Perhaps then, it was too practical--too
insufficiently utopian. Professor Gaston is planning to tell the story
of Fairhope itself in another book, and he here he drops only those
portions he deems essential to his story.
          Located on the eastern shore of Mobile Bay, Fairhope embodied "a
plan for justice and equal rights [that] emerged from the same ferment
that spawned new movements in the late nineteenth century for women's
liberation." The plan called for a proper balance between
communitarianism and individualism, including equal rights for women
and men. By the 1920s, among its many other attributes, it boasted a
newspaper, a library, and two schools, one public, one private. Its
women, although entitled to equal access to employment, appear to have
followed the patterns of the larger society they were hoping to reform
by example: only a shade more than one quarter of their adult numbers
worked outside the home. Nor did they inaugurate any "grand domestic
revolution" of the kind favored by radical reformers who sought to
abolish entirely private kitchens and other arenas of women's
isolated, unpaid labor. Rather, most of Fairhope's women appear to
have favored the "social feminism" that was gaining such currency in
the country at large.
          The women's Fairhope that emerges from Professor Gaston's pages
resembles nothing so much as a rarified realization of the dream of
many Progressive, white, middleclass women. And even that modest,
respectable dream required hothouse conditions. The women appear to
have enjoyed the freedom to speak their minds without censure, to
develop their physical and mental capacities, and to participate in
their community as full individuals without the imprisoning dictates
of gender that still curtailed the activities of many middle-class
American women. Even with this freedom, the women--or perhaps the men,
or the community as a whole--still held to conventional gender
divisions. Fairhope offered no Fourieriste utopia of free love. The
women's freedom lay in living with one man and raising his children in
economic security. Nor did these women see their own economic
independence as a prerequisite for the equality they sought, however
much Marie Howland tried to instruct them in its importance. They
delighted in that elusive but persistent American dream of a small
self-sufficient town, inhabited by contented and secure white
families. They even delighted in private property, in conformity with
Henry George's single-tax doctrine, while supporting large community
undertakings. This Progressive dream-down to the fragile balance
between social science and William Morris-has had a tenacious career,
which, as Professor Gaston ruefully avers, excluded blacks (and
although he does not explicitly say so, apparently also excluded
immigrant workers). It was the American dream without the "social" and
"racial" problem.
          Professor Gaston marvelously captures the spirit and dreams of
Marie Howland and Marietta Jackson as part of the essence of
Fairhope. In Fairhope, Howland, born Hannah Marie Stevens in 1836,
ended a career that exemplified American reform and included "Lowell
cotton mills; New York radical and literary salons; an industrial
utopia in France; a rural New Jersey command post of reform agitation
and happy living; a colony in Mexico devoted to 'integral
cooperation."' A passionate, vibrant woman, Howland arrived in
Fairhope with two marriages, varied experiences, a persisting loyalty
to Fourieriste principles, and numerous writings including the novel
Papa's Own Girl (The Familistere in its third edition)
to her credit. Her second marriage to Edward Howland, rather than her
own employment, accounted for her financial resources and the thousand
volumes that she gave to form the core of the Fairhope
library. Fairhope thus crowned her career and, in important respects,
embodied many of the abiding commitments that had informed her forays
into other reform movements. Her experience, talents, and compelling
personality earned her an important position in the colony and regular
access to the pages of the Courier, of which she became associate
editor. Above all, she stimulated the Fairhope women's consciousness
of themselves as women. Under her inspiration, they organized a
panoply of social feminist women's clubs, including the Ladies' Henry
George Club, the Women's Single Tax Club, the Women's Christian
Temperance Union, the Women's Suffrage Society, the Women's Social
Science Club, and more.
          If Fairhope provided the capstone for Marie Howland's career, it
provided the stage and substance for that of Marietta Jackson, who,
born in 1864, arrived from Minnesota in 1902 with her husband and
small son. She had devoted the early part of her adult life to
teaching and, before arriving in Fairhope, had undergone "a
conversion" after reading Nathan Oppenheim's The Development of
the Child. Fairhope provided the ideal climate and setting for
the development and implementation of her passionate commitment to
progressive, "child-centered" education. Not merely did she educate a
significant number of children in her Fairhope private school, but she
established an 

outpost--and garnered important financial support--in
Greenwich, Connecticut as well.
          Firmly convinced that adults existed to serve the child, rather
than the reverse, she held that education should facilitate gently the
unfolding of each child's unique, individual potential. Professor
Gaston makes a strong case for Jackson's integral relation to the
national development of the movement for progressive education. She
lectured throughout the country, frequently to audiences caught in the
spell of her dynamic personality; she trained teachers; and she taught
children. Resoundingly endorsed by John Dewey, among many, her work
attained considerable renown, especially in those middle-class circles
that would foster the development first of progressive education and
later of the study and nurture of the child in general. Like Howland,
she captured an important tendency in the concerns of her generation
throughout the nation. Yet she apparently always understood that,
however broad the interest in her work, Fairhope offered her a
special--perhaps unique--opportunity to do that work as she chose to do
it. Professor Gaston is especially moving in recounting the close of
her career during the Depression of the 1930s: her failing ability to
mobilize resources, her own failing powers, the collapse of her
dream.
          Yet the collapse of her dream--however poignant the individual
case--consists in part in the national tragedy of the depression and in
part in the inescapable individual tragedy of mortality. The collapse
of the dream of Nancy Lewis, with which Professor Gaston begins,
resulted from more precise and, therefore, more painful historical
conflicts. Nancy Lewis never belonged to Fairhope: Fairhope grew on
the ruin of Nancy Lewis's dream. Withal, Nancy Lewis may have, in her
unrecorded life, transcended greater odds and realized, however
fragiley, a more impossible dream than either Howland or Jackson. For
Nancy Lewis, born a slave had, together with her husband, emerged from
slavery to acquire a farm--that ubiquitous but elusive goal of the
exslaves as a group, that unit of private property on which the values
of white Americans rested. And Nancy Lewis had lost that farm to the
founding of Fairhope--that project to perpetuate the values of honest,
individual property holders.
          Credit accrues to Professor Gaston's grandfather for having refused
to repeat that original expropriation when, a few years after the
original founding, he had the opportunity to buy the smaller farm to
which Nancy Lewis, a widow, and her children had retreated. And he
refused even though the parcel was needed to round out the Fairhope
unit. But only God can judge the first expropriation. History is not
good enough, although Professor Gaston evokes it, pointing out that,
in time and place, to include blacks in the Fairhope experiment was
not a real possibility, however decent the values of the
founders. And, after all, Nancy Lewis and her husband had had only
such title to their farm as derived from occupation and the payment of
taxes. Reconstruction southerners were notoriously unenthusiastic
about letting exslaves buy land outright.
          Professor Gaston draws no morals, historical or other. He staunchly
refrains even from the modest temptation to pull these women's lives
together, or to set them explicitly in the context of the lives of the
non-Fairhope women of their generation. Yet he has offered his readers
a small jewel--a series of microcosms of individual women's
experiences. And he has offered those of his readers who so choose all
they need to draw more far-reaching conclusions.
        
        
          Sixty five Years in Eufaula
          By Frost, DavidDavid Frost
          Vol. 7, No. 3, 1985, pp. 30-37
          
          I am DAVID FROST, Jr.
          This is an account of my life in Eufaula, Alabama and my family
struggle for survival.
          This account parallels the struggles of Blacks in the rural south
during this period. It presents a series of my experiences and is
written with the dialect and grammatically terms of the section in
question, and in my own tongue.
          My New Year's resolution for 1977 was to finish writing the story
of my life, and the history of my family tree. I have started to write
several times in the past, but I stopped. Now I plan to write every
time I get a chance.
          I was born January 22, 1917. So I have a long story to write. Maybe
I can get it all in one book. I can remember back to the time I was
three years old.
          It was two things in particular that had lasting effect on my
life.
          No. 1--Watching my parents make moonshine in our back yard in a
washpot, which I will write about later on in this
book. No. 2--Listening to my parents tell the story of 

Willie Jenkins
being lynched here in Barbour County? And how the Peterson boy was
lynched here in Eufaula. My parents would tell it just like it had
just happened.
          However, later on I learned that the Peterson boy had been Lynched
a little before I was born.
          The Hegley girl (colored) worked for some white people on Cherry
Street here in Eufaula. The Peterson boy was her boyfriend. Every
night, the Peterson boy would meet his girl friend and walk her home
from work. The streets were not lit up with lights like they are now
and the Peterson boy would wait out in the street until his girlfriend
get off work and then they would walk home.
          But this particular night, a white girl came out the house. She was
walking straight toward him like his girlfriend had been doing and he
did not know she was white. Thinking that it was his girlfriend, he
said, "Here I am."
          It frightened the white girl because she was not expecting anybody
to be out there. So she screamed, which frightened the Peterson boy
and he ran away.
          The Peterson boy lived on the Bluff on the Chattahoochie River here
in Eufaula. A mob got together, led by Dr. Britt, who- also lived on
Cherry Street and they went to the Peterson's boy's home and took him
away from his parents and sisters and brothers, tied him behind a
wagon, and dragged him through the streets of Eufaula and took him out
near Pleasant Grove Baptist Church. They took him and castrated him
and hanged him on a large oak tree and they shot him to death.
          In those days, when I was young, you could hear talk of white
people lynching a colored person every week. I heard that in 1882
Tuskegee started to keeping records of lynchings in the United
States. I wonder if Tuskegee has the record of the of the Peterson
boy? Of course, I know it was many more lynchings that I did not hear
about.
          Listening to my parents tell about the lynching of the Peterson boy
made me very afraid of white people. My mother taught me never to
touch a white woman.
          We lived five miles out the city of Eufaula on the Old Batesville
Road. Going back and forward to town, we had to go through a place
called Prime Bottom where a white man named Mr. John Brown and his
wife used to run a store. Most of the time we would stop our wagon by
the store and buy some things. One particular time we stopped and my
mother had to hold the mule. She gave me a nickel and a stone jug and
told me to go in the store and get a gallon of kerosene. I went in the
store and the white woman drew the kerosene and went to hand it to me
and her hand almost touched my hand and I dropped the jug of kerosene
and broke it because I did not want that white lady to touch
me. Mrs. Brown got another jug and gave us another gallon of
kerosene. When I got back on the wagon, I got a good scolding from my
mother for breaking the kerosene. I could not understand me being so
afraid of white people and my mother was not.
          My mother, Mary Bishop Frost, and my father, Samuel David Frost,
Sr. married in 1916. In 1918 my parents rented a farm on the Brown
place which joins the Major Frost plantation and when I first remember
myself, my parents had a mule named Ada and a one-horse wagon and my
mother was doing the farming and my father was working at the
sawmill. I haven't been able to figure out how my mother did so much
work and, at the same time, having a baby every year. In 1919, I had
another brother born in October. At that time, I was just beginning to
remember things. My mother would take us to field on a wagon and leave
me and my sister on the wagon in a cotton basket while she picked
cotton.
          After my mother had worked all day and my father had worked all day
at the sawmill, my mother would cook and we would eat and when our
beer was ready to run, which was in a 30 gallon barrel in the closet
in the house, my parents would take it out of the house in the
backyard and cook it in a washpot and run it through a pipe about as
big as my finger and about half as long as I am tall. Sometime they
would work all night and make enough to drink. I would stay awake and
watch as much as I could.
          A little before I was six years old, my parents stopped making
moonshine for a while. My father bought a two horse wagon and by this
time he had two mules, one named Maude and the other one named
Rhodie. My father began to haul lumber for Hicks Lumber Company. I
always got to go with my father.
          We had to go through Eufaula and go through the covered bridge that
reached across the Chattahoochie River to go to the Georgia side. We
would always leave home before day in the morning. When day broke, I
would be up on the lumber hack shelving lumber down to my father for
him to load on the wagon. Every piece of lumber he loaded on that
wagon, I shelved down to him.
          Sometimes it would be so cold and frost all over the ground that
father would make a fire to warm by. My hands 

would be so cold, I
could hardly get down off the lumber hack to warm them. My mother
bought me a little pair of brown gloves which helped a little but that
lumber soon tore them up.
          On my sixth birthday, my mother told my father that she wanted me
to stay home and help her because she wanted to make me a birthday
cake. They had an argument because my father told her he needed me to
help him work. However, my mother won the argument and my father
agreed to let me stay home with mother and she cooked me a birthday
cake and that seemed to be the happiest day of my life. That was the
first time in my life I had got enough cake to eat.
          In February, 1923, my parents started to buying a small farm from
Mr. Ray Irby, who was a very fine man and always helped us. My parents
built a small two-room house of rough green lumber from the
sawmill. Everybody in the community helped and they built the house in
one day, except for the chimney which took a little longer. However,
when that lumber dried, it was cracks in the house everywhere. My
mother solved that problem by getting some paste board boxes and
sealing the house.
          That year my father went up north to Pittsburg to work in the steel
mill. Before my father left, he hired our cousin Charlie Jackson to
work and plow for us while he was away. Charlie was about eleven or
twelve years old at that time.
          We would work on the farm up until Thursday night. On Friday,
Charlie and I would take the mules and wagon and go haul a load of
lumber to the plainer mill at Lugo to get some money to help out. My
father would send money from up north, but it seemed that we would
always be in a tight.
          In 1924, my father went back up north to work for the last time. He
came back before the year was out and started to work for Reeves and
Marshall Wholesale.
          Along about then, a whole lot happened. My father started back to
making moonshine and he bought his first car for $10.00. It was a 1914
Model T Ford.
          We children would get to go to town often after my father got that
car because he would carry us along to help push up those hills and
for us to fix flat tires.
          We had our small moonshine still and we would make moonshine at
night, sometimes a quart, sometimes a half-gallon, and when we started
to make a gallon at the time, we thought we were in big business.
          Along about this time, we were still farming, also cutting and
hauling firewood to town to sell. Also burning and selling
charcoal. Also my mother would raise chickens. Every Saturday, my
mother would carry two fryers to town to sell to Mrs. Hicks for 25
cents each. That was a lot of money. The rest of the people would pay
my mother only 15 cents a chicken.
          It was against the law to have any kind of whiskey. Only the rich
white people could have whiskey and the law would not bother them.
          About the time, a white man bought my father a copper still and
taught my father how to make good moonshine. The white man would bring
my father sugar to make whiskey. Sometimes our house would be full of
white people with their girlfriends, drinking moonshine.
          We were always afraid of the law, but when these white people were
at our house they told us we did not have anything to worry about and
the law never came. However, if a crowd of colored people gathered up
around our house we would always see the law coming. Of course, when
we saw the law coming, my parents would give one of us children the
whiskey to run to the opposite side of the house from the way the law
was coming and we would run and hide the moonshine in the woods.
          One time, some of us children were in the yard and one of the laws,
Mr. Marshall Williams, told us to go in the house. However, I did not
go fast enough for him, so he kicked me. I turned around and hit him
upside his head as hard as I could. Then the whole gang came after
me. I could not get in the house, so I ran under the house. While they
were figuring out how to get me out, my father came back. I came out
then because I was now ready to fight.
          Mr. Williams told my father, "David, that boy you got yonder ain't
got good sense. I told him to go in the house and he acted like he
didn't want to go, so I kicked his butt and he turned around and hit
me and if it had not been for the good Lord, I would have killed
him."
          My father told him, "That's something I don't do, kick any of my
children and don't you kick any of them."
          Mr. Williams asked my father, "Is you got good sense?" Mr. Williams
told my father, "You teach that boy how to act when white people come
around because I don't want to hurt him."
          Somewhere down the line, after I stopped being afraid of white
people, I began to hate most white people.
          It is many colored people in their graves because they forgot to
say sir to a white man. I remember one my uncles who forgot to say sir
to a white man and the white 

man wanted to kill him. From that day on,
my uncle and me stayed as far away from the man as we could. The man
is now dead and so is my uncle.
          However, all the colored people did not always lose when they came
face to face with a white man.
          I remember Bishop D. Ward Nichols in St. Luke A.M.E. Church in
Eufaula, telling how everybody, no matter how little you think of
them, is good for something. He said once he was in a small town in
Florida, and his sister had been telling him how the white people
there were and they did not like to see colored people dress up. He
said he had to catch the train at a small station where they had to
stand outside. He said a white man came up cursing every colored
person that was there. He said the man started on just the opposite
end of where he was and came toward him, cursing and asking the
colored people where they were going. He said he was the Bishop and he
was very scared and he did not know what he was going to tell the
white man when he got to him. But, he said, just before the white man
got to him, it was a colored man sitting down that did not look like
he was fit for anything. The white man cursed him and asked him where
he was going, old nigger. The colored person did not say anything. The
white man asked again, "I say, where are you going, old nigger?"
          The colored man said, "I was going to Atlanta, but if you call me a
nigger again, I will be going to hell and I will send you on in front
of me."
          In 1932, all the people that owed the bank were being foreclosed
on. The bank was taking everything they had. When they came to our
house, my mother was in the bed sick. Mr. Beasley was the boss, so he
came in the house and told my mother how sorry he was to have to take
the little we had, which was a little corn and one mule. In the
meantime, while he was talking to my mother, he had already sent
Mr. Edmond Drewery and the other man with him to our lot to catch our
mule.
          In the meantime, Mr. Beasley was walking out the house. We told
mother that they had caught our mule. I had never seen my mother get
out of the bed and put her clothes on so fast before in my life. By
the time Mr. Beasley got out of the house and in the yard, my mother
was out there too and told them to take the bridle off that mule and
put her back in the lot. They got mad with my mother but she and all
of us was ready to fight. That same day, they took everything from my
grandfather, including his mule, wagon and buggy. That same day, they
went and cleaned out my great-uncle, Rev. Lee Jackson. Mr. Beasley
told Rev. Jackson that he had never seen such a nigger as my mother
before, but he was going back and take every chair out of her
house. Well, that has been 45 years and he hasn't been back yet.
          When my father was in prison, we still tried to make moonshine
whenever we could get as much as 10 lbs. of sugar. My mother would
send us children to make moonshine. We would make such a poor grade
until our mother had to go with us and try her hand. However, we all
failed and were no longer able to buy sugar, so we had to stop.
          That year, 1932, coming up to the 28th of May, at night we ate
everything in the house for supper. My mother thought all of us were
asleep, I heard my mother praying and asking God to please make a way
out of no way for us to get some food. I could not sleep all that
night, laying in the bed and wondering how we were going to get our
next meal of food.
          However, soon the next morning, my mother's prayer was answered. My
Uncle Henry Bishop came by and bought a yearling cow from my mother to
barbecue at Cedar Hill Church, celebrating the 28th day of May. The
cow weighed about 300 or 400 lbs. My mother sold the cow for $3.00. In
those days $3.00 was a lot of money. My mother took that $3.00 and
went to town and bought enough groceries to last a long time. My
mother knew how to make the groceries last. We never had quite enough
to eat, but it was enough to 

keep us alive.
          In our section, we did not celebrate the first of January, when we
were freed from slavery. We all celebrated the 28th of May. My mother
said, although we were freed January 1, we did not find out that we
were free until the 28th of May, and that is why we celebrate that
day. Along about this time, the government was giving away some dark
brown flour. When my mother found out about it, she would walk to town
and stand in line all day long and if she was lucky, they would give
her a 24 lb. sack of flour.
          When my father did get out of prison in August 1932, we were
gathering our crop (pulling fodder). We were thinking that things were
going to get better as soon as my father got home, but it did not work
that way because my father could not find a job and the $10.00 that
they gave him when he left prison was soon gone.
          However, my father soon got hold of 25 lbs. of sugar and he went in
with Mr. John Walker and he started back to making moonshine. Mr. John
Walker was the father of Lloyd Walker. Mr. Walker was old and a former
slave, but he knew how to make good moonshine.
          While we were sitting around the still watching the moonshine run,
Mr. Walker would tell us how things happened back there in slavery
times. Mr. Walker said they would fasten his mother up with a large,
big-limbed man and force her to breed from him. He said if she did not
want to have the man, they would take her out and beat her and put her
back with him. He said his mother had no other choice. He said his
mother had three sets of children and her master sold all of them
except him. He said he was sickly and looked puny and no one would buy
him. He said his master sold one baby out of her mother's arms to a
man in Geneva, Alabama. He said they never saw him again. Mr. Walker
said the plantation he lived on, when it rained, the slaves would
sing, "more rain, more rest." The master would ask what they said,
they said, "more rain, grass grow."
          In 1938, I married Lillian Catherine Webb. She was a schoolmate of
mine and a playmate. She went on to finish school, but I had to stop
halfway through the seventh grade and go to work. Me being the oldest
of 12 children was rough in those days.
          After I married, I got me a job at the sawmill, working for
Mr. Woodney Lawrence for $1.00 a day. I never could make ends meet, so
I put me up a small still of my own, making two and three gallons of
moonshine at a time. I would work at the sawmill at day and at night,
once a week, I would make moonshine.
          In 1939, somebody told the law that I had a whole lot of people
around me on the weekend and I was making a lot of money. So the law
set out to catch me to get some of the whole lot of money that they
thought I was making.
          One day the law came to our house searching for moonshine. After
they could not find any, they went around my yard and in my crib and
picked up all the empty bottles and jugs they could find and told me
they were going to take me down and let me pay them a little fine
because they had heard I was making a lot of money and I ought not
mind paying a little fine. I told them that I was not going with
them.
          They told me, "Oh yes you are." And told me to go in to the house
and put on my shoes. I went in the house like they told me, but I did
not come back out. I got my rifle and stepped out the back door and
went down through the woods. By that time, my wife had fainted and a
crowd had gathered around my house.
          The law gave my father a bond for me to sign and told him to tell
me when to come to court. They told my father they were not going to
hurt me because I did not have good sense. My good judgement told me
that they were mad at me and I should stay out of their way until
court.
          However, my cousin Elijah Snipes told me that he knew where a
fortune teller named Rev. Gardner could fix me so the law could not
bother me and they could not convict me in court. My cousin Elijah
took me to Rev. Gardner. Rev. Gardner told my fortune. I mean he told
me a lot of lies. He told me to give him a dime out my pocket. He took
the dime and took some kind of little roots and sprinkled some kind of
powder on it and he sewed it up in a small rag with my dime which make
a joe-moe. Rev. Gardner told me to take my joe-moe and wear it in the
toe of my shoe and when the law saw me, they would look the other
way. He also told me to catch him nine ants and bring them to him and
when the day of the trial come, he would fix those ants and take them
to the courthouse and the judge could not convict me. Rev. Gardner
charged me $3.00, which was over a half week's work at that time.
          Me being very young, I believed what Rev. Gardner told me and the
next day, I went to town. Two of the city police saw me and they did
not look the other way, like Rev. Gardner said they would. They
arrested me and took me to 

the jailhouse and told me to get out the
car and, as I was getting out the car, one of the laws knocked me down
and got in my stomach, stomped and kicked me until I was almost
unconscious. Then they put me in jail and told me they were teaching
me some sense. A few minutes later, they sent Mr. Bill Irby to turn me
out.
          That day, I started to planning and trying to figure out how I
could get all the white together who had mistreated me and kill all of
them at one time. I was never able to figure out how to get all those
people together at one time, because more than a dozen people had
mistreated me. I knew that if I killed all those people, some of them
would kill me. But I figured it was worth it.
          However, all that hate I had bunded up against white people have
disappeared now. In fact, it all did not disappear until years later
when Dr. King continued to teach to love everybody. I have found out
that I am a combination of Dr. King and Malcolm X because I will also
fight like Malcolm X would.
          
          The Supreme Court passed
the law in 1954 that the schools had to be integrated. I was at PTA
one night and Dr. T. J. Lee got up in the meeting and said the Supreme
Court had ruled that the schools be integrated and we should prepare
our children to be ready to go to integrated schools. The people
started grumbling and told Mrs. Smith to make Dr. Lee sit his crazy
self down because he knew very well that no colored and white was
going to school together in the South.
          Soon after the Supreme Court ruling, the white people got very busy
in Eufaula to buy up all the colored people's property that was close
to the school. They also built the colored a new school which was
better than the white school.
          In the meantime, I was still living in the country, but I owned
some property close to the white school in Eufaula and the Housing
Authority was trying to buy my property for only $3,200. I had heard
about Thurgood Marshall and I tried to get the group to hire him for
our lawyer. However, we contacted Mr. W. C. Patton of Birmingham and
he advised us to hire Atty. Fred D. Gray of Montgomery. We did hire
Atty. Gray.
          That was when I got a chance to meet the great Dr. M. L. King
Jr. At that time, he was at his home getting well from the stab wound
he got from that woman in New York.
          Atty. Fred Gray sent me, Rev. Lee Holmes, Rev. Adolph Cuming, and
Mr. Steven Tate by his home to see Dr. King.
          In the meantime, Atty. Patterson had outlawed the N.A.A.C.P. in
Alabama and most of the colored people were afraid to mention the name
of the N.A.A.C.P. in Eufaula, but I was not. We had to stop having our
meetings and stop paying our dues in Eufaula. That was in November,
1957. I took me out a life membership in New York. So far as I know, I
am the only lifetime member of the N.A.A.C.P. in Eufaula
la. Atty. Fred D. Gray went to work for us here in Eufaula la and,
although the white people were able to get the colored people from
around the white school, they had to pay all of us a fair price for
our property.
          In the meantime, the State of Alabama had come up with all kinds of
tricks to keep colored people from voting. I took my wife to register
to vote. They took out a book and asked her all kinds of silly
questions and then told her she could not register because she did not
pass. However, my wife and I studied and got the answer to every
question that they asked. So when the board met again in the next two
weeks, we had to drive 20 miles to Clayton to meet the board. When we
got to the board, they would not let me go in with my wife. I had to
stand out in the hall. My wife went in and soon came out. I asked her
did they register her. She said, "No."
          I went to the door and asked why they did not register my wife?
          Mr. Stokes jumped up and pointed his finger in my face and told me
they had examined her and she did not pass and he did not want to hear
any more about it. His face turned red like he wanted to fight.
          My wife said they did not ask the same questions that they had
asked before. They told her they had 200 different questions and they
could ask her any on of them they pleased. I think history will record
that those people at the board acted very childish. However, I came
home that same day and wrote the Justice Department in Washington and
Mr. Stokes did not hear any more about it until they had him in
Federal Court in Montgomery.
          When colored people started to registering to vote and we got
Atty. Fred D. Gray in Eufaula so that we could get a fair price for
our property, it made a lot of white people mad. They would ride by my
house at night and throw rocks on top of my house.
          The white people were determined to block me from making an honest
living, so they sent three carloads of law to 

my night spot on
Saturday night. My place was packed with people. The laws came in with
their rifles and pistols and got in the middle of the crowd and took
his rifle and shot two shots straight through the top of my
building. They then went across the road to my house and started
shooting at my porch light with their pistols and rifles until they
shot holes all in my house and shot out my porch light.
          That did the work for them. My customers stopped coming to my place
and I had to close up. The holes that the law shot in my house and my
night spot are still there for any one to see who wants to.
          When you have the officers of the law enforcing economic pressure
against you, you just cannot make it.
          I had no other choice but to start back making moonshine. I had
spent quite a bit of money building my night spot, so I was determined
to make it pay off. So this time, I put me up a still in the
basement. I would be making moonshine and peeping out the window and
watching the law ride along the highway looking for my still. One of
my white friends told me that the state, county, and city spent many
thousands of dollars trying to catch me and send me to prison. I knew
when I put that still in that building that sooner or later the law
was going to catch me and probably send me to prison. But I figured
that being in prison could not be any worse than being tormented by
the law all the time.
          As I said, I never gave up what I thought was right and I never
gave up trying to get colored people registered to vote, so the law
never gave up harassing me.
          Since they had outlawed the N.A.A.C.P. in Eufaula and the colored
people in Eufaula did not know what to do, so I went to Birmingham to
get some advice from Mr. W. C. Patton. Mr. Patton gave me some
information on how to organize a Barbour County Improvement
Association. I went around and got a group of people to meet me at the
Eufaula Baptist Academy. On a Thursday night, in January, 1962, we met
at the school and organized the Barbour County Improvement
Association. After organizing, they turned around and elected me
president, which I did not want to be. I wanted somebody to be
president that had more education than I had, but everybody was
afraid. So I accepted the job because I did not have enough sense to
be afraid.
          The same night I was at the school and we were organizing the
Association, the law was out to my house, setting a trap to catch
me. My wife told me the dogs were barking all while I was gone. Of
course, the law knew I was gone because they knew better than to hang
around my house at night when I was home.
          The law caught me in that trap the next morning. I had just taken
my five year old daughter to kindergarten school in Eufaula, and I was
supposed to pick her up that afternoon. However, I could not pick her
up because, when I got back home, the law came by and made me unlock
my building and they took me in to the still and put handcuffs on me
and took me to jail.
          While I was in jail my wife said it looked like everybody in town
came out to look at my still and take pictures. There were people at
the jail ready to sign my bond, but one of the deputy sheriffs took
the bond and went off and hid. They wanted to keep me in jail until
they could steal everything from around my house that they could get
their hands on. My wife watched out the window while they broke in my
workshop and took all my tools out. Mr. William Adams was the sheriff
at the time and my wife watched him take my grandfather's scales that
he used to weigh cotton with.
          Those scales had been in the family for many years and the family
wanted me to keep them because they knew I would take care of them. We
asked Mr. Adams for those scales and tools until he died, but he never
gave them back to us. Mr. Adams had a son that is an attorney in
Clayton, Alabama. We are hoping that one day his son will turn those
scales back to the family. We forgive Mr. Adams and the rest of the
laws for taking those other things, but we will never forgive them for
taking those scales.
          Judge Jack Wallace gave me a big surprise at my trial. I was
looking for him to give me a year and a day, like he had been giving
all the other people for making moonshine. But Judge Wallace gave me
three years. Then I realized that the one year was for the moonshine
and the two years were for my Civil Rights activities.
          They sent me to prison in October, 1962. While I was in Clayton
jail, waiting to be sent to Kilby, I started to writing to the
officials in Barbour County, criticizing them for mistreating colored
people. They got very mad with me while I was still in jail. While in
prison, I got a chance to learn a whole lot.
          There I was with all that concrete under my feet and over my head
and steel all around me. I was exactly like Jonah in the belly of the
whale and I did exactly like Jonah did. I began to call on God and God
answered my prayers.
          Soon I had to go before three doctors for them to examine me to see
if I was crazy. When I went before the doctors they had a stack of my
letters that I had wrote to Barbour 

County. They began to read those
letters and asked me questions about them and had me to explain
everything I had wrote on those letters. They also had a book that
they asked me questions out of. I answered all of those questions
correctly. Those doctors began to look at each other and said, "This
man is not crazy." They told me I only wrote facts and the people back
in Barbour could not stand facts. They told me the ones that thought I
was crazy, they were the ones that were crazy. They told me the
trouble was there were some people back in Barbour County that did not
want me back. Of course, I already knew that and I had planned not to
go back to Barbour County when I got out of prison. But I had fooled
on my own self, because as soon as I got out of prison, I went
straight back to Eufaula and Barbour County and I started right back
to making moonshine.
          I did not make moonshine long before the law started tearing up my
still again. But what made me stop making moonshine for good was, I
found out I cannot run fast anymore. Most of the time when I ran, I
caught a cramp and fell out. For that reason, I knew the law would
catch me. I think I will have to stop making moonshine for good.
        
        
          The Southern Regional Council Beginning the Fifth Decade: Our
Annual Report 
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 7, No. 3, 1985, pp. 21-26, 28-30
          
          1985 marks the forty-first anniversary of the founding of the
Southern Regional Council. Today, as in the past, the Council's vision
of the South's future radiates from a belief in democratic
principles. And, as in the past, the Council's task remains that of
providing research, information, and technical assistance to
individuals and groups who are able to bring change, and of providing
forums out of which Southerners of goodwill can think and act
together.
          Our agenda for the future has been drawn around several broad
concerns in which democratic principles must be affirmed and extended:
the ballot box, the schoolhouse, the courthouse,
ideas and information, the uses of technology and the
workplace.
          
            The Ballot Box: Democratic Government in the South
            
              -extending research and technical assistance to
assure that the Voting Rights Act is fully enforced in the South.
            
            
              -drawing model redistricting plans to promote
democratic government while avoiding dilution of minority voting
strength. The SRC's Voting Rights Project has drawn more than 350
state and local plans.
            
            
              -providing state legislators in the Deep South
with nonpartisan research, analysis, model legislation, and current
information about issues relating to the poor and minorities.
            
            
              -assessing policies at all levels of government
that affect the poor and minorities.
            
            
              -researching working conditions, rights and
earnings of workers, and worker ownership.
            
            
              -monitoring the South's electric utility
cooperatives as major democratic, economic institutions that provide
vital services to rural people.
            
            
              Voting Rights Project
            
            The Southern Regional Council maintains the only project that
systematically monitors compliance with Section Five of the Voting
Rights Act in Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia,
Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana, and Florida. We work with local
community groups and their lawyers to oppose racially discriminatory
changes in voting laws and jurisdictions. The Voting Rights Project
examines proposed changes and assists local groups in preparing
comment letters that demonstrate how the changes discriminate against
black voters. The Project also files such letters on behalf of local
groups.
            To enable minority communities to elect candidates of their choice
to public office, the Voting Rights Project reviews and designs
redistricting plans, primarily--in the last year--for city, county, and
school system governing boards. These plans are used by lawyers in
Section Two litigation, by community groups seeking equitable
representation, or they are submitted to the Justice Department for
review under Section Five as fairer alternatives to discriminatory
plans. All of our plans are designed to incorporate population and
registration patterns that reflect real levels of political
participation.
            The Project is making special efforts to assist state and regional
groups in developing their capacities and their constituents' interest
in voting rights enforcement. The SRC Voting Rights Project serves as
a clearinghouse for information on voting rights issues. We are asked
to provide counsel, courtroom testimony, legal and technical
assistance, information, and referrals to community groups, the media,
lawyers and scholars. In 1984 the Project began publishinga quarterly
newsletter, The Voting Rights Review--an effort to
develop a better system of sharing information among voting rights
activists. Alex Willingham, a political scientist, expert witness and
Rockefeller Foundation Fellow, 

edits The Voting Rights
Review which circulates among community leaders, experts,
lawyers, and government officials. A complimentary copy is available
by writing the SRC offices in Atlanta.
            Voting Rights Review is a quarterly newsletter designed to cover a
broad range of issues relevant to voting rights. For information write
to Alex Willingham, Southern Regional Council, 161 Spring Street, NW,
Atlanta, Georgia 30303.
            
              Local Redistricting
            
            Constitutional challenges to at large election systems have
increased substantially since extension of the Voting Rights
Act. Community groups such as local chapters of the NAACP and local
voter leagues seek legal remedies when governing bodies do not
voluntarily abolish at large election schemes.
            In 1984, the Voting Rights Project drafted sixty-six redistricting
plans, as well as numerous revisions and modifications. Requests for
SRC assistance came from Arkansas, Alabama, Georgia, Florida,
Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Kentucky, and
New York.
            Only a few sources exist which provide redistricting and mapping
services that truly represent minority interests in the South. Some
state agencies draw plans for local governing authorities. In
Louisiana and Mississippi, private firms compete for lucrative
contracts to prepare reapportionment plans for cities and
counties. Without the assistance of the SRC Voting Rights Project, the
interests of many black communities would get left out of the planning
and decision making in reapportionment.
            
              Section Five Monitoring
            
            In 1984 the Voting Rights Project examined over 150 election
changes in election laws for their discriminatory effects. We assisted
community groups in twenty administrative cases under Section Five.
            When called on to comment on election law changes at the Justice
Department, we present information about the totality of circumstances
in a community that inhibit black registration, voting, or election to
office. We point out any retrogression which may be present in
proposed election law changes, show the discriminatory results, and
evident racial intent.
            The Southern Regional Council has adopted the following goals for
its continued involvement in voting rights activities in the South:
            
              Continue to draft model redistricting plans.  Monitor and
assist in the enforcement of the Voting Rights Act.  Assist
groups to prepare for redistricting following the 1990 Census and to
carry out more technical work for themselves.  Develop a
systematic collection and analysis of the major indicators of
political participation, such as voter registration rates, turnout
rates, voting records and patterns.Southern Legislative Research CouncilThe Southern Regional Council began a special project in 1979 to
determine if improvements in non-partisan research, analysis and
technical assistance would help state legislators better address the
needs of poor and black constituents.The Southern Legislative Research Council (SLRC) has aimed its work
in three directions. First, because the legislative black caucuses
represent the greatest institutional presence for minorities and the
poor in Southern legislatures, the SLRC has assisted the caucuses in
developing a capacity for effective use and analysis of information in
state government.Second, the SLRC has provided assistance to all legislators whose
records and constituent populations suggest that its services could be
useful on issues relating to the poor and minorities. Finally, the
SLRC makes available its information to community groups, government
staff members or any legislator.The Southern Legislative Research Council provides reference
services on specific issues, as well as on the drafting and analysis
of legislation. The project's intern program assists legislators by
monitoring daily legislation and committee work, by analyzing proposed
legislation, and by providing summaries.The SLRC's expert network includes researchers from institutions
across the South who offer technical assistance in preparing
materials. The SLRC's information exchange consists of bulletins to
legislators, interested groups and individuals about legislative
events.In 1984, the SLRC helped increase the independence of its client
legislators. The Alabama and Georgia black caucuses have incorporated
and are seeking non-profit status. Now, both can receive outside funds
for education: and research. Also, the SLRC helped the black caucuses
hold successful fundraising dinners featuring nationally known

speakers. The Georgia Caucus raised over $60,000 and the Alabama
Caucus more than $50,000.The Georgia Caucus has opened an office in the state capitol, hired
a small staff, and has begun--with support from Atlanta University--an
intern program. The Alabama Caucus is pursuing the development of an
intern program.Grappling with the increasing cuts in federal funds, much of the
SLRC's effort in the past year has focused on state budget
issues. Client legislators have won increased funding for Aid to
Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), Medicaid programs, and
education-including both public and private black colleges.Client legislators have also secured state money for sickle-cell
anemia programs, health services to the poor, community action
agencies, and the Federation of Southern Cooperatives. Georgia and
Alabama black caucuses were instrumental in the passage of legislation
providing for increased minority firms' share in state contracts;
urban enterprise zones in economically depressed inner-city areas of
Birmingham and Atlanta; stronger state regulation of employment
discrimination; reform in voter registration and election laws; and
the passage of state laws making the birthday of Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr., a holiday.In the coming months, the Southern Legislative Research Council
will extend its presence and its influence beyond the borders of
Alabama and Georgia. The SLRC willorganize conferences for legislators in which model legislation
will be produced around specific issues expand its legislative
bulletin to include analysis on regional issues throughout the eleven
Southern states expand the project to other states in the South,
providing them with staff and intern support during the legislative
session, and ongoing assistance during the interim
period.
            
          
          
            The Schoolhouse: Equal Opportunity to an Excellent, Integrated
Education
            
               -assessing educational reforms in the region to
help maintain integration and improve education in the schools.
            
            
               -examining the effects of segregation academies
on Southern public education.
            
            
              Equal Education Project
            
            Thirty-one years after the Brown decision, hostility and neglect--in
the South and in the nation--have rendered almost immobile the
historical, broad-based movement for integrated public schools as an
essential element of an excellent education. The Reagan Administration
has opposed, and reduced appropriations for, almost every special
educational program for the poor, minorities, and the disadvantaged
while it has supported special treatment for already privileged
students, and even for segregation academies.
            The number of private schools in the South stands at an
unparalleled high. Some are struggling, others are prosperous. A few
have a handful of blacks, most remain segregated. In Alabama, for
example, the most prosperous private schools belong to one of two
state associations. There is the Alabama Christian Education
Association with seventy-four elementary and secondary schools and the
Alabama Private School Association which represents fifty four schools
unaffiliated with any church. In these 128 private schools of the two
associations, only a total of sixty black students are enrolled among
a student population of 

65,000. The other thirty or forty private
schools not in the two state associations apparently have no black
students at all.
            The continued growth of the private, segregated academy is having a
direct, damaging effect on public schools. In the rural South,
especially, many public schools remain virtually segregated because
whites are attending segregation academies.
            Too often, white parents South who send their children to
segregation academies join ranks to oppose, successfully, sufficient
financial support for the public schools. Because local taxes are a
primary factor in school financing in the South, the growth of the
private segregation academies has often resulted in the refusal of
local white voters and rural white legislators to support increases in
local taxes to keep up with inflation. The consequences have been a
physical deterioration of schools and the use of inferior
equipment.
            Reform of school financing in the Southern states appears to find
its strongest oppositon among legislators and officials
from areas where segregation academies continue to operate most
successfully.
            Last year the Southern Regional Council held several meetings
around the region to identify new opportunities for activities to
promote equal education and to determine the best role for the
Council's research and technical assistance.
            We are completing and will soon publish a computer based, annotated
bibliography on the problems of Southern schools--especially the
problems of desegregation--during the last ten years.
            Also, the Council is preparing the first substantial study and
analysis of private schools in the South in over a decade. Focusing
largely on the role and impact of segregation academies on public
education in the South, the final report should be completed in early
1986 and will become the basis for test litigation and proposals for
changing public policies.
          
          
            The Courthouse: Just Men and Women in the Institutions of
Justice 
            
              
                providing research and technical assistance to
groups assessing employment practices of Southern state and federal
courts.
                
                  
                     analyzing the pattern of
appointments of judges in the South to state and federal appeals
courts.
                  
                
                
                  Southern Justice Project 
                
                With some fourteen-thousand employees working in more than
two-hundred courts, the federal court system is a major employer. Its
practices with regard to equal employment opportunity set standards in
federal and state courts. From 1978 through 1980, the Southern
Regional Council reported on the appointment of federal judges, the
prevalence of their membership in discriminatory private clubs, and
the employment patterns of Southern federal courts. In 1979 the US
Judicial Conference adopted its first affirmative action plan after
Congressional hearings were prompted by the SRC findings.
                As federal courts become more integrated, they stand to become
institutions with employees who appreciate the issues of equal
opportunity and affirmative action in employment, housing, voting, and
public accommodations.
                Most federal court employees work in the central cities of the
major metropolitan areas where minority unemployment is highest. The
jobs in the courts require a wide range of experience and
qualifications, but most do not require law degrees. Commonly, court
employees are concerned with the processing and use of information, a
kind of occupation that is among the fastest growing in the
country.
                Over the last five years, there has been no consideration of the
changes and progress, if any, which federal courts have made in
employment. The Council is beginning to do that study in a project
that will collect and analyze the annual employment reports in all
federal courts for 1979 to the present, examine and critique the
adopted affirmative action plans of the federal district and circuit
courts, and encourage compliance with affirmative action goals in the
courts by acting as a referral and coordinating agency for openings in
the federal courts in the South.
              
            
          
          
            Ideas and Information 
            
              
                assessing and reporting upon governmental
activities and political participation.
                
                  
                    publishing Southern Changes, our journal of
opinion, and syndicating SRC-produced materials.
                    
                      
                        working to establish regional radio
programming not now available in the South.
                        
                          
                            beginning production of alternative cable
television programming.
                            
                              
                                preparing a unique microfilmed database with
an on-line computer abstract and index of more than one million
newspaper clippings (from 1944 to 1976) about Southern people and
events.
                              
                            
                            
                              
                            
                            
                              SRC Reports
                            
                            While the Southern Regional Council continues to find practical
ways for government to work for all people, it continues its long and
useful tradition of monitoring and assessing government policies and
levels of political participation with regard to the region's poor,
women and minorities. In 1984, the Council published two major reports
on poverty and government programs for the poor. The findings of these
reports document an unprecedented rise of poverty in the South and the
nation and a dramatic decline in the federal assistance to the poor
since roughly 1980.
                            The Council's report, Patterns of Poverty, found
that poverty in the eleven states of the South had increased sharply
since 1979, ending a twenty year decline. Poverty among blacks in the
eleven Southern states has probably risen to thirty nine percent, a
rate which means that almost two out of every five Southern blacks are
poor.
                            A second Council report, Public Assistance and
Poverty, examined the claim that government benefits
discourage the poor from working. We found that in 1982 seventy-nine
percent of all major government assistance to the poor in the South
went to households headed by women with children or by persons
sixty-five years or older.
                            Our reports show that the work ethic remains strong among the
poor. Nationwide, in 1982, the majority of all poor persons from
fifteen to sixty-five worked part-time or fulltime in 1982. We also
found that when poor families headed by women with children under six,
and by persons sixty-five years or older are excluded, almost
three-fourths of the remaining poor families had someone working
full-time or part-time in 1982.
                            Public Assistance and Poverty revealed that almost
one and a half million recipients of federal assistance in the eleven
Southern states have been removed from federal poverty programs since
1980. Literally millions of the poor who continue to receive
assistance have fallen significantly deeper into poverty because of
reductions in levels of assistance. The largest number of recipients
removed from the programs were children. The Council estimates that
almost 680,000 children were among the 1.4 million recipients
eliminated from poverty programs in the eleven Southern states.
                            These findings of these SRC reports have been well publicized
across the nation, but especially in the South. In fact, most of the
major daily newspapers in the eleven Southern states gave the stories
front page coverage. Many television newscasts included details and
interviews. The reports were used as the basis for many local follow
up stories.
                            Helping to sustain an awareness and discussion of poverty and the
government's responsibility to address it, the Council's reports are
sought and used by a wide range of community leaders, poverty rights
advocates, lawyers, and public officials in and outside the South.
                            Southern Changes is the bi-monthly journal of the
Southern Regional Council. It serves as a forum for ideas, opinion and
analysis on issues and events of importance to the
South. Southern Changes seeks to involve readers and
writers both inside and outside of the South in reflections upon past
circumstances, present conditions and future prospects for social and
economic justice.
                            
                              SRC Newsclip Service
                            
                            The Southern Regional Council maintains a collection of materials
that provides daily, detailed coverage of a thirty year period of
extraordinary change in the South and the nation: the dismantling of
the Southern system of racial segregation and the beginning of an end
to white supremacy. The collection consists of more than one million
newsclippings and three thousand rare, weekly newspapers. It is unique
in the nation. No other collection of news clipping on the subject can
match its scope and no collection of newspapers matches its ease of
accessibility.
                            Most of the collection was compiled from 1944 through 1974 by the
staff of the Southern Regional Council. Over the years, the Council
also has received limited collections of clippings from the US
Commission on Civil Rights, the American Friends Service Committee,
and the Southern Education Reporting Service.
                            The SRC newspaper collection can serve the needs of researchers,
activists, lawyers, reporters and others who
                            
                              Spectrum Cable 
                            
                            Building upon our experience with the SRC-sponsored Southern
Network--which telecast programming by 

satellite to more than forty
cable systems in Florida, Alabama, and Georgia each week night in
early 1984--the Council is laying the groundwork for a national
satellite network on cable television--called Spectrum Cable.
                            From January through mid-March, 1984, the Southern Network sent out
ninety hours of original programming on the presidential primaries in
Alabama, Florida, and Georgia to an audience of between 600,000 and a
million cable television viewers. The project involved the cooperation
of some forty cable systems, two satellite companies and numerous
political and community leaders. The programs were produced as an
alternative to the encapsulated candidate's "image" usually presented
in paid campaign spots and network news coverage. Southern Network ran
gavel-to-gavel debates and unedited campaign speeches from all over
the region. The Network also produced programming that examined the
key issues of the 1984 presidential election. The audience, and the
reaction from the participating cable systems, indicate there is a
strong interest in alternative forms of television programming.
                            Spectrum Cable is now proposing a programming service which
addresses the full range of issues in domestic and international
affairs, includes cultural and musical programming, and provides a
broad spectrum of progressive, civil libertarian, minority, womens and
labor groups an opportunity to reach to a wider audience. A project of
this scope requires extensive consultation with groups who have
national and regional members and who produce programming. It also
needs substantial funds and dedication over a few years to assure that
it happens.
                            We are now searching for ways to place these newsclips on microfilm
and to develop a complete and easy computerized indexing
system.
                            
                              Regional Radio
                            
                            No concept in broadcasting has been underused as much as
regionalism. Because of the structure of the broadcasting industry,
programming has usually been local or national in nature. Local
stations cover and produce programming on local events, and national
networks cover the nation and the world. As a result, regional
programming has been usually spotty or only espisodic.
                            Ad hoc regional networks are often formed to distribute programming
that covers sporting events. Also, state networks offering news,
sports, and information are commonplace. In this void, a regional
radio network can provide a wide, rich variety of unique programming
that covers the people, places and events of the American South
through narration, interviews, music, and drama.
                            The Council's efforts to develop a regional network of radio
programming has been slowed by a several costly technical problems in
the proposed distribution system. One of the solutions to distribution
may come as more radio' stations obtain satellite dishes to receive
programming from national networks. Meanwhile, the Council continues
to capture on audio tape aspects of the South's rich history and
current affairs which escape the attention of the national
media.
                            
                              Press Institute
                            
                            The Council continues to assist the news media in the region and
the nation to understand the American South. Throughout 1984 the SRC
staff consulted with producers and reporters on hundreds of occasions
about developing news stories. The Council assisted almost every major
newspaper and news weekly in the country, as well as reporters from
national television and radio networks in analysing regional trends
and in locating experts and local leaders who could articulate
problems and issues.

                          
                        
                      
                    
                  
                
              
            
          
          
            More Democratic Use of Technology
            
              
                developing specific, direct uses of
inexpensive, accessible computers.
                
                  
                    locating existing, inexpensive databases for
use by community groups in the South.
                  
                
                
                  Project for Community Technology
                
                The application of computer technology continues to change every
aspect of American society. Almost half the labor force in the United
States now holds a job involved with the production, processing or
distribution of information. Thirteen percent of all homes presently
have computers. Almost 750,000 subscribers now connect their computers
to a national databases. Micro-computers are now found in
approximately eighty-five percent of the nation's school systems. In
the next five years the federal government expects to spend $23.5
billion on software alone.
                As in past societal transformations, the wake of the information
revolution may leave the least resourceful of this generation as the
least able of the next generation.
                Perhaps the most obvious barrier to new technologies is their
cost. Many modest non-profit organizations face steep financial costs
(up to $200 per hour) for the use of most available databases. A
wealth of both private and public information, once available at
little or no charge, is increasingly being converted to databases that
require a high fee for access. Also, less than one percent of the
currently available software is designed for any kind of
not-for-profit organization.
                The consequences of this inaccessibility of non-profit groups to
the new technologies could be far-reaching and severe. The capacity of
groups who have been traditionally under-represented will be further
taxed if their ability to use computers and other communications
technologies does not grow.
                The Council is intent on increasing computer use by local and state
community-based, nonprofit organizations who have a proven record of
representing the poor and minorities in the South. While the SRC has
used mainframe computers for various tasks in the past, we have
operated our own computer system for only the last three years. In
1980, we helped to create a project that explores new means by which
video technology may assist local community groups. The Council is
building an internal computer library from the reports, documents, and
statistics whit we produce. The SRC now uses some national database'
and receives as well as sends information, including the text of
Southern Changes, by computer to locations across the country. Also,
efforts are underway to increase access to and use of computerized
census data in developing model plans for reapportioning local and
state government districts.
              
            
          
          
            Economic Democracy and the Workplace
            
              
                monitoring and reporting upon the South's
electric utility cooperatives.
              
            
            
              
                assessing the rights and conditions of workers
in the South.
              
            
            
              Co-op Democracy and Development Project
            
            Few private or governmental institutions play a more important role
than electric utility cooperatives in the lives of the rural
poor. These co-ops are the largest corporate citizens and the largest
non-governmental employers in the rural South. Unlike investor-owned
utilities which have huge standing plants, electric co-ops are largely
distributors of electricity and have a potential, corporate
self-interest in finding ways of conserving energy and creating jobs
at the same time. By law, cooperatives are intended to be democratic
institutions, supposed to be controlled by the customers they
serve.
            The SRC's Co-op Democracy and Development Project assists poor and
black Southerners in rural areas in making electric utility
cooperatives more democratic and more responsive to the needs of their
local communities. From Arkansas to Virginia the aim of the Coop
Project is to change 

the role of the coop by changing the control of
the corporation. In the Mississippi Delta, litigation is being pursued
to halt the electric cooperatives' mischief with democratic
practices. In only two or three areas of the South have co-ops'
management made even small efforts to include blacks and the poor on
their governing boards.
            The experiences of the Co-op Project and community groups in the
last two years reveal the tactics that current cooperative managements
use in order to stay in control of the corporation: denial of access
to financial data and membership lists, the quick changing of by-laws
and procedures to fit the management's immediate needs, and the use of
co-op resources--telephone, personnel, trucks, mailing facilities--to
recruit support for the incumbent management. All of these maneuvers
rest upon the coop management's misuse of information and
resources.
            The Council is completing a report on the status of co-ops in the
South. A small portion of the report--relating to the absence of blacks
on co-ops boards of directors--was pre-released earlier. The coverage
led to meetings with the National Electric Cooperative Association to
discuss the plans and progress of the coops.
            The forthcoming SRC co-op study addresses the cooperative
managements' self-perpetration; their exclusion of blacks, Hispanics,
and women from decision-making positions on boards and management;
their patterns of financial irregularities; poor employment patterns;
high electricity rates; and their minimal efforts to create
jobs.
            
              Southern Labor Institute
            
            One of the earliest areas of concern of the Southern Regional
Council was the South's workplace. In 1945, the organization's first
major publication criticized Southern states for their "attack on
union organization" and tied the 

South's low standard of living with
the region's low wages. Since then, Council analysis has continued to
show the damaging effects of Southern state policies that promote low
wages and ineffective job training.
            The Council has worked to assure fair employment practices
throughout the region. An early SRC project helped to launch
successful campaigns that resulted in blacks being hired for the first
time as policemen in major Southern cities. In the ensuing three
decades the Council's research helped to document the need for federal
legislation to assure equal employment opportunity. SRC technical
assistance contributed vitally in integrating public and private
workplaces throughout the region.
            The Council's concern for the workplace is more than a matter of
history. We continue to report on employment patterns in the region
and to help community groups and labor unions combat discriminatory
practices when they are revealed. Because of the need to improve the
level of wages and working conditions of Southerners today, the
Southern Regional Council has created the Southern Labor Institute.
            The Southern Labor Institute strengthens the historical commitment
of the Southern Regional Council to address the problems of low wages
and non-union working conditions in the South and to unite the goals
of the civil rights movement with the struggle for economic
justice.
            Currently, the Southern Labor Institute is assembling data on the
status of workers in the South, especially with regard to wages,
working conditions, unionization, industrial trends, occupational
hazards and discrimination. In the process the Institute is
establishing a network of people, institutions, and organizations
doing research and analysis about the needs and problems of workers in
the South. Using the analysis and data of both SRC and others, the
project is currently preparing a report on the "Workers Climate" in
the South--a unique ranking of how states treat and reward workers.
            For more than four decades, the Southern Regional Council has
assisted community groups concerned about political, social and
economic change in the American South. Now, as in the past, the
Council'stask is to provide research, information, and technical
assistance to individuals and groups who are able to bring
change.
          
        
        
          Abandoning Affirmative Action
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 7, No. 3, 1985, pp. 1-2
          
          The Reagan Administration stands on the verge of severely weakening
affirmative action rules for federal contractors. As it is now
drafted, a proposed Presidential Order eliminates existing
requirements that deficient federal contractors set attainable goals
and timetables for the employment of minorities and women in
proportion to the number of available and qualified workers in a
particular labor market. The draft order also forbids the Labor
Department to statistically monitor contractors' compliance with the
goal of non-discrimination.
          "Existing affirmative action programs need only two
changes," says Southern Regional Council interim director Ken
Johnson, "stronger enforcement and presidential support."
          "In many Southern counties, white income is four, even five,
times higher than black income," Johnson continues. "Neither
Sunbelt Boom nor economic recovery has altered that fact. We
desperately need new and creative programs to increase minority
economic opportunity and reverse the effects of past discrimination,
not scrapping of policies which have proven demonstrably effective in
eliminating discrimination in the Southern workplace. We must not halt
the equal employment progress of the 1970s."
          Federal affirmative action programs affecting tens of thousands of
government contractors have been tested and improved since the late
1960s. The strongest, most effective section of existing federal
rules, which is the use of statistical goals, timetables, and
measurement of results, was actually put in place during the Nixon
Administration in a 1971 regulation usually called 'Revised Order 4.'
Efforts made during four Presidencies to eliminate economic inequities
felt by minorities and women have at last begun to bring visible
results. The existing requirement that federal contractors
statistically measure the makeup of their workforce does not impose
quotas at all, as affirmative action opponents have often
charged. Indeed, under Revised Order Number 4 "goals may not be rigid
and inflexible quotas which must be met, but must be targets
reasonably 

attainable by means of applying every good faith
effort."
          To support the conclusion that existing affirmative action rules
for federal contractors have been successful, the Southern Regional
Council has analyzed statistics on black occupational representation
in five Deep South states.
          The Council finds that both in the South, where the harshest racial
inequities remain, and nationally, significant numbers of blacks are
beginning to move upward from low wage, low status jobs into
traditionally white male, higher status jobs. The total number of jobs
held by blacks has expanded, outpacing black population growth.
          In the state of Georgia, for example, from essentially "zero"
beginnings in 1961, blacks in private businesses or industries
employing one hundred or more persons, or employed by federal
contractors with more than fifty employees accounted, by 1981, for 7.5 % of all officials/managers, 7.4 % of professionals, 15.7 %o of
technicians, 14.6 % of sales workers, 18.8 % of office/clerical
workers, and 17.6 % of craft workers.
          Drawing upon data from the US Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, the SRC's analysis shows that in Alabama, Georgia,
Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina black representation has
increased from 1973 to 1981 in the higher status and traditionally
white occupations, while blacks as a percent of all laborers and
service workers declined. The five state representation of blacks
among all officials/administrators stood at 2.8 % in 1973, but had
risen to 6.6 % by 1981. The greatest gains--both in the South and
nationally--were made following issuance of Revised Order 4 in 1971,
with its requirements of goals and timetables for contractors whose
work forces gave evidence of discrimination.
          The results of several other recent studies demonstrate national
progress in advancement of minorities and women under affirmative
action policies. A 1984 study by the Office of Federal Contract
Compliance, covering over 77,000 establishments employing a total of
20.8 million workers, found that in 1974 non-contractors employed
somewhat higher proportions of minorities than contractors in six of
nine job categories. By 1980, contractors--operating under the more
stringent affirmative action requirements of the '70s--had surpassed
or almost caught up with non-contractors in minority participation
rates in six of the nine job categories used in job force analysis.
          The Leonard Report, a study partially funded by the Labor
Department and released in 1984, concluded that "while the
targeting of enforcement could be improved, and while the impact of
affirmative action on other groups is unclear, the evidence in this
study is that affirmative action and Title VII (of the Civil Rights
Act of 1964) have been successful in prompting the integration of
blacks into the American workplace."
          If Reagan Administration officials such as William Bradford
Reynolds and Edwin Meese have their way, the President will soon sign
the draft executive order that undercuts affirmative action for
federal contractors, setting his hand to yet one more action in the
continuing effort to push back twenty years of civil rights
gains. 
        
        
          Figures of Speech: Fish We've Never Seen
          By Tullos, AllenAllen
	       Tullos, Photographs byRankin, TomTom Rankin
          Vol. 7, No. 3, 1985, pp. 10-21
          
          An annual highlight of the late summer in Fayetteville, North
Carolina and neighboring Fort Bragg, the United States Army's Heat and
Death Festival was moved this year at the request of the Army Corps of
Engineers to Columbus, Mississippi to coincide with the June 1
dedication and grand opening of the Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway. The
Tenn-Tom, a 234-mile-long, nine foot-deep and three-hundred foot-wide
trench stretching across northeast Mississippi and west Alabama,
connects sixteen-thousand miles of mid-America's navigable rivers with
Elvis Presley's boyhood home. Only after reaching Fulton, Mississippi,
must Presley pilgrims transfer from the Waterway barges and travel
west on US Highway 78 by air-conditioned tour bus for the few
remaining miles to Tupelo. There they can choose to walk or ride down
Canal Street toward Elvis Presley Lake, stopping on their way at
Lawhon School where, in the fifth grade, Elvis won second place in a
talent contest by singing "Old Shep."
          The Army, especially when it was This Man's Army and had not yet
become the New Action Army Concept, has always kept a warm spot for
former Pfc. Presley. Madison Avenue still can't do in a day the work
The King once did for recruiters before nine in the morning. So,
twelve years and two-billion dollars worth of dredging across the
forests, fields and towns of two Deep South states became the Corps'
way of saying, "Aloha Elvis."
          Since 1972, when Alabama Governor George Wallace and President
Richard Nixon broke ground in Mobile for the Tenn-Tom, not the Corps,
nor the Secretary of the Army, nor the dozens of members of Congress,
governors and other dignitaries present at this summer's grand opening
and dedication have been willing to talk freely about what most
Mississippians, years ago, embraced as their Elvis Canal. Down to the
present, officials continue to ballast speeches and press releases
with projections of thousands of new jobs the Tenn-Tom will create in
wood products, recreation, and the polymer resin industries. Yet, from
Iuka to Paducah, the locals know that it is Elvis who will haul the
freight for the Waterway's foreseeable future.
          "You have to understand," says one community leader- Sheriff
R. O. "Red" Leflore of Shelby County, Mississippi -a bit defensively,
"mercenary training camps and the Elvis industry are two of the
South's hottest tickets for what's left of the 1980s. Several states
have jumped the gun on us with the mercenaries. But now that
Tenn-Tom's finished, we're primed for the Elvis crowd, on their way to
or from Graceland.

          "We've worked quietly in the trenches," continues Leflore,
"digging out 307 million cubic yards of dirt. That's more than the
Panama Canal could hold. With the Waterway in place, a family coming
to Presley Park from Iowa City, will save over eight-hundred miles of
travel. We harvest the difference at the Elvis Youth Center Gift Shop
and Interfaith Chapel."
          As the mid-morning hour for beginning the Tenn-Tom dedication
ceremonies approached on this first day of June, the sun spread waves
of heat over the broad, straight rows of plastic folding chairs set
out on a patch of river bank next to the Columbus Pool. Several
hundred visitors trailed currents of sticky air into and out of three
Army canvas circus tents erected to the Past, Present and Future of
Mississippi. Dry clothes soaked through in minutes, whether one sat
paralyzed near the display cases of the John C. Stennis exhibit or,
dripping sweat and lemonade, walked the sawdust-covered Pathway to a
Dream Trail connecting the three tents.
          "They ain't many people here," said a muddy-haired woman
wearing a straw hat, deck shoes and a cotton dress printed with
dogwood buds and blossoms that offered little shade.
          "It ain't about people, it's about progress," said the
red-faced man with her. A cap on the man's head bore a drawing of a
large-caliber revolver and the words: "I traded my wife for
this." An on-the-site radio crew urged the temperature toward a
hundred degrees:
          "Jim Bob, there's not more than a few thousand people in
attendance today. As many as ninety thousand were expected. But with
twenty-some odd acres out here, no matter how many people you put on
it, it would look like it's not very crowded.
          "If you're listening, there's plenty of room for you, but try to
hurry because the dedication ceremonies look like they will begin any
minute."
          "On the other hand, Linda, I'm sure this is a larger crowd than
Sieur de Bienville expected when he suggested to Louis XIV the plan
for a waterway connecting Quebec and Mobile Bay."
          "You're right, Jim Bob."
          "You're listening to a live broadcast of the Tenn-Tom dedication
from the Gulf-Southern Radio Network. I'm yours truly, Jim Bob Bugles,
here on the east bank of the Columbus Lock and Dam. Linda Comfort is
talking with us from the west bank."
          "Jim Bob, all the dignitaries, such as Senator Stennis, et
cetera, are taking their seats here on a ceremonial barge right on the
edge of the water and that's where the big ceremonies will be taking
place. Our listeners might not know that one expected guest, Governor
Wallace, will not be coming. Apparently, he talked with several of his
advisors about a dream he had last night in which the Alabama State
Capitol caught fire. President Reagan, also an announced guest, is
also not coming."
          "Linda, as many as thirty members of Congress are on
hand. Secretary of the Army John Marsh will be the principal
speaker. Set to deliver short remarks are Mississippi Senators Stennis
and Thad Cochran, Alabama Senators Howell "Judge" Heflin and Jeremiah
"Blinky" Denton, Mississippi Reps Jamie Whitten, G. V. "Sonny"
Montgomery, and A. K. A. "Tootle" Tutwiler. Alabama Representative Tom
Bevill will be the master of ceremonies and will also speak, as will
Mississippi Governor Bill Allain, Tennessee Governor Lamar Alexander,
and Kentucky Governor Martha Lane Collins."
          "Jim Bob, before things get going here, let's go for a word back
to Mike Mann at the WLQC studios."
          "Thanks Jim Bob and Linda. The Tenn-Tom dedication ceremonies
are brought to you by another pioneer of the Waterway, Tom Soya Grain
Company. The hard work you put into your crop is the same hard work
and dependability Tom Soya gives you in storing and marketing your
crop. Tom Soya is now accepting wheat, and booking for soybeans and
milo. Call your nearest Tom Soya Grain Elevator with river locations
in Aliceville and West Point or also in Macon, Hamilton and
Muldoon. Plus, look for our new facilities to open soon in Amory and
Aberdeen.
          "Before we rejoin Linda Comfort and Jim Bob Bugles at the
dedication site, let's check in with Bud Trotter in our remote
newswagon out on the Bypass. Bud, how's that shuttle bus system
working?"
          "Mike, it's just fantastic. As you know, there's only one road
in and out of the dedication site and no private vehicles are being
allowed to enter. East Columbus gym, First Federal Savings and Loan,
Franklin Academy, National Bank of Commerce, Waters Building Parking
Lot, Fairview Baptist Church-those are just a couple of the locations
you can go to park and catch a shuttle bus out to the Columbus Lock
and Dam. It's a fantastic system they have worked out, Mike."
          "Bud, tell our listeners just where you are now."

          "Mike, I'm out at the Waffle House near Military Plaza. And I
think if we could hold it here just a minute we could talk with a
visitor or two.... Excuse me sir, what about sharing some of your
thoughts about this great day for the Columbus area with our radio
audience?"
          "Sure. Well, yesterday they had some top flight
entertainment-Little Boy Bluegrass, the Gospelettes-and no one was
publicizing it. I'd like to get out there and hear some of that but I
don't care about going out there to listen to speeches and pats on the
backs. We get enough of that anyway."
          "But it's a milestone. And I hate that everybody's shying away
from it. But they've been broadcasting all week long, said, 'Don't you
try to go out 45 North. Stay off 45.' Everybody said, 'Heck, I ain't
going out there to fight that crowd.'
          "As for the Waterway, you got to outrun the skiers, but there's
outstanding fishing out there. From an ecological standpoint,
enhancement of fishing, it has definitely improved. I'll give them
full credit for that. We've had a Coors Bass Tournament. We're
catching some sea run, some stripes and some hybrids out there. It's
real nice. We catching northern pike. Some folks carried some pike
home, but everybody thought they was river trash fish--gar. We're
catching fish we've never seen. That what you want to know?".
          "That's great. Have a good breakfast here at the Waffle
House. Mike at the studio?"
          "Okay. Thanks, Bud Trotter in our remote unit. Right now it's
ninety-seven degrees and that's in the shade in Columbus in front of
the radio station. We're going to take you back out to the Lock and
Dam and Jim Bob and Linda."
          "Thanks Mike, it's close to a hundred out here because there
ain't no shade. The Corps bulldozed all the trees down to make the
Waterway. I think Linda has something for us over on the west
bank."
          "... tore violently.... Uhm, Jim Bob, we might say here that if
you are out on the grounds and you need medical help, Red Cross has
stations scattered out. You can see their big flags. Rescue and Search
are out here in their yellow shirts. There are cool quarters back over
here, a couple of units of air conditioners for those who need to just
come in out of the hot weather. Plus plenty of ice water."
          "Linda, I was talking with one of the first aid volunteers at
the water's edge. We were watching the ski show that was really
nice. And he said that the biggest problem was the folks that think,
'Aw, it's not that hot. I can keep going.' He said that's always the
ones that faint."
          "You're right, Jim Bob. You really don't know the change of your
body temperature. You do not feel real warm. But if you begin to feel
just a little bit nauseated, or fainty, be sure to move into a
shade. And when you drink ice water, don't gobble it down in a big
hurry because that will add to your dilemma."
          "Linda, with ceremonies about to begin there are still a few
visitors coming out of the Past Tent here on the east bank of the
Columbus Lock and Dam. Let's see if I can .... Ma'am, would you talk
with us a minute?"
          "I've seen the beginning and I've seen the end."
          "Beginning and end of what?"
          "Never you mind. I've seen the beginning and now I've seen the
end."
          "Well, okay. Thank you. Let's see about someone else here. Sir,
your impressions of the Waterway dedication celebration?"
          "I've done my thing and I'm leaving."
          "Would you tell our WLQC listeners what was your thing?"
          "It was a multi-image audio visual program, it was a patriotic
message. But outdoors is just not the place for an audio visual
program. We were very fortunate to have good weather last night. I had
to set up last night for it.
          "It's a religiously oriented patriotic program. I use 450 slides
and seven projectors. It's totally original. It started at
8:15."
          "Do you show it around?"
          "I guess you might say I do. I've shown it over sixteen hundred
times now in thirty different states. I guess I'm about to learn how
to do it.
          "The official title is "America, O America the Beautiful!" First
of all it's just a general survey of the beauty and majesty and
splendor of America and then we go back and trace the history and the
heritage, beginning with the American Revolution and touching on each
conflict up through the Viet Nam conflict. It's the kind of program
you'd think would be prepared especially for Memorial Day type things,
but it's more general than that. Kind of about projecting Christ's and
America's power around the world."
          "How long have you been out here?"
          "I got here at eight o'clock yesterday morning and

haven't hardly left this hill. And I am bushed.
          "There wadn't a good crowd all day yesterday. Don't look like
much today either. I don't mind sharing my personal thinking. I think
they were so tight on the parking restrictions that it just scared
people away. I tell you I'm generally a very mild type individual. I
very seldom get perturbed or lose my temper, but I almost did last
night. I'm a guest up here and I had to beg them to give me a pass to
get on this place. I started to say, 'I'll take my projectors and go
on back to Clinton.' That just wadn't necessary. I been in the Army, I
been in the Pentagon with this program and I had less trouble up there
than I have down here.
          "I'll tell you something I saw which just about says it
all. Yesterday, just as I was finally getting my truck around this
state patrolman who had his car straddling the only road in here, up
comes a fellow in a pickup, loaded down with ice and something brown
under the ice. Course, he has to stop at the roadblock. So he says,
'Where can I deliver these crawfish?' And the patrolman says, 'I don't
know. If they was shrimp, I'd say leave 'em right here."'
          "Well, thanks and we wish you and your equipment a safe trip
back home.
          "Linda, to you at the west bank. The ceremonies should be
starting."
          "Jim Bob, our invocation is about to be given by Glover Wilkins,
one of the Waterway's several fathers, who from 1962-84 was
Administrator of the Tenn-Tom Development Authority."
          
             Warm applause.
          
          "Let us pray.
          "Almighty God, we come to you today with hearts overflowing,
with joy and appreciation for this great gift, the Tennessee-Tombigbee
Waterway. We have gathered here today to dedicate it in thy holy
name. May this great project-the engineering miracle of our time-which
represents the collective dream of the people of this region fulfill
their every expectation and bring to them a better way of life, needed
economic development and expanded recreational opportunities. We
appreciate all of the dignitaries who have done so much to bring this
watercourse into being.
          "Particularly do we appreciate those who continued to support
the waterway even after suffering crippling infirmities.
          "For these all your good gifts, we thank you, O God,
Amen."
          "This is Linda Comfort for WLQC radio. Our live broadcast
continues with the arrival, out of the blue, of more than two-dozen
members of the US Army's crack Hype-Jumpers Parachute Team. Each
soldier, or fighting unit as they prefer, descending in a plume of
self-activated smoke, will land right in front of the ceremonial
barge, bringing a small vial of water representing a state connected
with the Tenn-Tom Waterway network. The contents of each vial will be
poured together in a large vat, then, when all the jumpers have made
their drops, a symbolic spigot will be turned to empty the mingled
waters into the historic Waterway.
          "We're expecting Representative A. K. A. "Tootle" Tutwiler, the
sky-diving Congressman from Mississippi's 

Ninth Congressional District
to join us here in our WLQC broadcast tent after he free falls onto
the site as a guest of the Hype Jumpers. Let's see if we can pick up
official announcer Mark Ledbetter as the Army parachutists deliver
their fluids of American commerce."
          ". . . the Big Muddy provided a key link between East and West
in our nation's early development. The Missouri River holds great
promise for flood control, recreation and hydroelectric
development.
          "The water from Wisconsin is from the Saint Croix River. The
upper reaches of the Saint Croix is a wild and scenic river that is
very popular with outdoor recreation enthusiasts. The lower portion of
the Saint Croix is used to support commercial activities. This river
is an excellent example of a multi-purpose resource.
          "Michigan. Has sent water from the Great Lakes, which with their
connecting channels to the St. Lawrence River, have been the key to
development of the . . .
          "This is Linda Comfort again, at the Tenn-Tom dedication where
Representative Tootie Tutwiler has joined us, fresh from his parachute
jump onto the Columbus Lock and Dam. Congressman Tutwiler brought a
small container of ceremonial water from the Mississippi River, Father
of Waters, collected at Vicksburg, to be mixed with the waters from
the other states tied to the Tenn-Tom.
          "What a thrill, Congressman! We're happy to have you with us in
our broadcast booth for the remainder of the ceremonies."
          "Thank you Linda. I'm very glad to be here today.
          "Actually, I'll share a secret with your listeners. I had
already bailed out of the damn plane before I realized I didn't have
my Vicksburg water. Somehow, I found a Dixie Cup in my chute pack and
managed to produce a little substitute by the time I touched down. But
that's between us."
          "Quite a presence of mind."
          "Quite a relief, but Linda, if I could just say one
thing. There's been all this talk by the media, not so much you folks
at WLQC--all of us know and appreciate what a team player your boss
Clyde Price is--but others, and especially the Northern and
out-of-state papers, about the Elvis Artery or Elvis Canal, some call
it. Well, I say that's hitting below the Sun Belt. . . .
          "I know as ranking member of the House Intelligence Oversight
Sub-committee that the Tenn-Tom is a multiple use waterway, not built
exclusively for the Presley pilgrims, as much as we love and welcome
them with Mississippi hospitality. Nor is it merely a fatted calf for
the Corps or politicians hired by-the timber and coal industry. Seeing
that this is dedication day, I'll say a little more."
          "Please."  . . . 
          "Well, Linda, I know your listeners know that for years the Army
and Elvis shared the very same slogan, "Be All You Can Eat." You see,
and Army Secretary Marsh will make reference to this in his speech
today, the Tenn-Tom provides us with a jumping-off place to attack
Communist aggression in Central America, particularly Nicaragua and,
El Salvador. The TennTom will enable us to follow the current
Operation Big Pine in Honduras with Operation Heartbreak Hotel, if you
get my drift."
          "Representative Tutwiler, this is exciting, and exclusive,
news. All Southerners, not just Mississippians, can be proud of the
way you and your colleagues in Congress from the South-both Democrats
and Republicans-have hit upon the plan to reduce our foreign trade
deficit by making counter-revolution America's biggest export. And we
are especially proud to learn of the Tenn-Tom's role."
          "Thank you, Linda."
          "Congressman Tutwiler is going to stay with us here and offer
some additional comments later. Now, let's go back 

out to the
ceremonies. The last of the Army Hype Jumpers has landed."
          ". . . water from the Ohio River, which provides the major
arterial link to the Tenn-Tom. This water system will provide a large
increase in commerce between the regions of our country.
          "Illinois sends water from Blackberry Creek where Abraham
Lincoln may have refreshed himself from its cool running waters. Today
more than ever, water is the lifeblood of Illinois and is used and
reused by cities, industry and commerce.
          "Iowa has sent water from the Iowa River, an early
transportation system for settlers.
          "Nebraska. Sends water from the historic Platte River, which is
a truly multi-purpose river. This river provides irrigation, aquifer
recharge, hydropower production, recreation, wildlife habitat
enhancement and aids barge transportation upon its confluence with the
Missouri River.
          "West Virginia sends water from the Kanawah River. This water
system serves the central coal fields of West Virginia as well as the
Kanawah Valley's chemical manufacturing industries. The Tenn-Tom will
shorten by five hundred miles the barge travel distance for thousands
of tons of commerce.
          "Arkansas . . .
          "This is Jim Bob Bugles for WLQC radio. As the last of the
parachuters arrive and before the official remarks begin, we're going
to let you listen to a pre-recorded portion of a press conference held
earlier this morning in the Columbus Hilton with Mississippi Governor
Bill Allain, Speaker of the Mississippi House, C.B. "Buddie" Newman-an
uncapped well of the oil and gas industry, and Jerry Mc Donald
representing the Tenn-Tom Development Authority. Can we roll that tape
now?"
          Governor Allain: Not to put cold water on the enthusiasm of people
in this area, nor dampen their hopes of what this waterway can do
here, but a job in any part of Mississippi helps all Mississippi. All
of us must work together in a cooperative spirit in order to bring the
kind of jobs we need in this state.
          Buddie Newman: Is that fellow from Fortune magazine here today? He
was telling me a story about this rich friend of his. Said he went out
to Las Vegas in an eighteen thousand dollar Cadillac and came back
home in a hundred thousand dollar Greyhound Bus. We don't want that to
happen to the Waterway.
          In Mississippi we have an internationally recognized bidness
climate. Bidness is going to be coming to make a profit. And I believe
bidness will find they can make their profit in Mississippi.
          Jerry McDonald: We will be marketing the Tenn-Tom for

different types of industry. We are targeting two areas: polymer
resin industry (plastics industry) and wood products.
          You may ask, "Why plastics?" Number one: it has been identified as
a growth industry. Number two: there is some plastic products industry
in the region now, so we do have an available workforce. Number three:
water is a precious commodity and the plastics industry uses less
water than a lot of other industries. Buddie, you have another
word?
          Buddie Newman: Industry is looking for a good bidness climate where
they can make a profit. Now they're not coming here if they can't make
a profit. They're not going to risk their capital if they can't make
some money. They're looking for a good life for their bidness and
their employees. On the Waterway, you've got water, recreation,
hunting, fishing, swimming, boating. You can throw a rock and hit a
junior college. So you've got it all in a package.
          Governor Allain: It's not boiler plated. The techniques of
marketing remain the same: telephone solicitation, direct mail,
advertising, and so on. There's shotgun marketing and target
marketing.
          Buddie Newman: I can tell you that the members of the Mississippi
legislature are free enterprise people and we are going to maintain
this good bidness climate. Thank you for coming this morning.
          "This is Jim Bob Bugles along with Linda Comfort, back live
again for WLQC radio at the Columbus Lock and Dam. Governor Martha
Lane Collins of Kentucky, who is also Chairman of the Tenn-Tom
Development Authority is about to address the several thousand persons
in attendance at the dedication barge.
          
             Warm applause.
          
          Collins: Thank you very much. Distinguished platform guests and
ladies and gentlemen, I'm delighted to be here in my two
capacities.
          Today marks an historic day in the commercial life of the
Southeast. Today our rivers are joined to Gulf ports by a new
navigational artery. Today Mobile becomes our port.
          The Tennessee-Tombigbee means more markets and lower transportation
costs for Kentucky coal, for Tennessee timber, for Mississippi
chemicals, for Alabama steel and for Florida produce.
          Idn't it great to be in Mississippi in the summertime?!--on our way here we saw a dog chasing a cat, and they were both
walking. But seriously, we're going to remember the hospitality more
than the heat.
          Right now, I'd like to introduce our host, a man who has presided
over unprecedented growth in this great state. His support of the
Tenn-Tom is living testament to that leadership. I give you now the
Honorable Bill Allain, Governor of Mississippi.
          Governor Allain: The other night I was in Tishomingo County. A lady
came up to me from Holcut, Mississippi. Now many of you might not know
where that is. I had to confess I didn't know whether I'd ever been
through there. But the town of Holcut lay, smack, in the path of the
TennTom's construction. The Army had to buy the town and destroy
it.
          And she said, "Governor, I love that town. I was born and reared
there. My parents were born and reared there. My grandparents lived
there." But she said, "We willingly allowed our town to die to
give birth to the Tenn-Tom."
          She said, "Governor, will you promise me one thing? That you
will not go back to Jackson and the others go back to Washington and
forget us. And forget the promises you made about the economic
development, the jobs we're supposed to have, and the kind of quality
of life all of us will have because of the Tenn-Tom."
          And I promised her then, and I promise you now that we will work
long and hard with the local administrations, with the state and the
federal, to make sure that that little town of Holcut, Mississippi did
not die in vain.
          
             Feverish applause.
          
          Governor Collins: And now to hear from representatives from our
other Compact states, I call on our master of ceremonies, the man who
for ten terms has been perhaps the Tenn-Tom's biggest supporter in
Congress. As chairman of the Energy and Water Resources Development
Subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee, Congressman Bevill
has been the author each year of the bill that provided funding for
the Tenn-Tom. I'm proud to introduce Tom Bevill of Alabama.
          Congressman Bevill: The dream of the Tennessee Tombigbee Waterway
began in the early 1800s. It has been a long fight, an uphill fight,
but today we are privileged to be very happy over this special
occasion because we are dedicating the biggest manmade waterway in the
world.
          This country wasn't built by the negative thinkers and if we had
listened to them, we wouldn't be here today.

          The opening of the
Tenn-Tom comes at an opportune time. A time when in the last year we
have witnessed the greatest international trade deficits in the
history of our I country. The TennTom will help turn that around.
          The current chief of the Army Corps of Engineers has served this
country for more than thirty years and has worked closely with the
Tenn-Tom. He is my good friend, an outstanding officer. It is my
pleasure to present General Vald Heiberg.
          
             Heated applause.
          
          General Heiberg: This is a proud day for the Army. We're glad to be
with you here today and members of the Army. From the active Army,
both the civilian and military part, including the Rangers that many
of you met coming in, the advance force, these are the captains, the
future leaders of the Corps of Engineers.
          The Reserves and the Guard are here today to promote the One Army
Concept that is preparing our defenses. Many of you crossed the ribbon
bridge to get here put up by a couple of companies of the Alabama
Guard. Many others from the Services stand here who have done a fine
contribution. The United States Air Force. The United States Coast
Guard. The United States Marines.
          The Tennessee-Tombigbee is prepared. It is finished early. It
always takes a few years to get the traffic going, but we are always
surprised by uses that we do not expect when a waterway is
finished.
          On behalf of the Corps I salute all of you who have helped make
this contribution to the generations of the twenty-first century.
          
             Applause.
          
          Congressman Bevill: Now, it is my pleasure to present to you the
senior senator from Mississippi, my good friend John C. Stennis,
without whom there would be no Tennessee-Tombigbee.
          
             Standing applause.
          
          Senator Stennis: Many years ago this June, I came here to this
county and surrounding counties, a total stranger almost. I was a
candidate for district prosecuting attorney. I'm back today.
          That was during what they call now the Great Depression. I'm back
here today where we're in a period of uncertainty but I have no doubt
that we'll pull through our present financial situation.
          Now let me mention, many could be mentioned, let mention just a few
of the processes that I've seen over the years. I just mention, by way
of gratitude, the work brought about, here's our Waterway,
connected-up with all the waterways in America and the United
States. Well, it's here at our doorstep.
          I want to especially thank those who gave, whether willingly or
not, of their land to make this possible.
          I want to thank especially the United States Army engineers for
their capacity to conceive this entire plan and prove their case and
help obtain the money to make it come out even. I believe that of
their type and their kind that they are truly the finest, greatest
organization in the world when it comes to big time construction.
          
             Applause.
          
          We're grateful too to the organization of the five states who
helped make a tremendous difference in the push, the
          POWER, behind this project to get the money: Alabama, Mississippi,
Kentucky, Florida . . . and the fifth one. . . umnh. . .
          Voice from the behind Stennis: Tennessee.
          Stennis: Yeah.
          Now that's not just a casual thing, this recognition, but they went
in it at the time without any real expectation of getting the case to
the world that they're now going to get.
          I know it means a lot. Bet's take it quite seriously that we now
are on this Waterway, the greatest and the lowest cost form of
transportation the world has ever known. When it comes to gross
products, lumber and lumber products, ore, coal, a host of other
things that move on these barges.... very timely . . .
          I go back to when we first had the boll weevil. . . change is on us
again. . . I'm in full sympathy with farming in all forms. I know a
little about it. I was born and reared on a farm in Kemper County,
very small town, I know the problems of the little farmers, the
little-little farmers, the medium-sized farmers and those a little
above that. I was taught to plow a straight furrow, that that was the
measure of a man.
          We have this grand opportunity here now of working with others by
giving business a real chance. I think we'll put a straight furrow to
our financial affairs in Washington, finally. We'll come through it a
strong nation and we'll continue our pattern of having one era of
growth and development after another and for a long, long time we'll
be the United States of America, the land of real freedom.
          
             Applause.
          
          "This is Jim Bob Bugles for WLQC radio at the Tenn-Tom dedication
ceremonies. We're going to break away from the official remarks for a
minute to talk with Wendell Paris of Livingston, Alabama, representing
the Minority Peoples Council here today. Mr. Paris, you've heard
Senator Stennis speak and the other remarks here today.  What are your
thoughts and those of your organization about the opportunities the
Tenn-Tom brings?"
          "Well, Jim Bob, after hard and diligent efforts we were able to
get minority participation almost In proportion to minority population
in the Tenn-Tom region for only one 

year of its construction. Needless
to say it's nothing to be so overly proud of because the Army Corps of
Engineers and the proponents of the Waterway never wanted to see that
happen.
          "As with most of the times that we have had to deal with the
Federal government, this effort to gain participation has taxed us to
our very limit. We didn't have anyone from the government's side who
was willing to measure up at all to its pronouncements.
          "As to the prospects for black citizens in the Waterway's
future, the Tenn-Tom will help communities develop economically in
direct proportion to the indigenous efforts that are made here. It has
been called a panacea for solving the problems of poverty in the rural
Black Belt areas. That's nonsense."
          "What do you mean?"
          "Every community along the Waterway is now thrown on their own,
out for themselves. Our argument down through the years is that this
ought to be a coordinated effort. The Corps should have the same
fervor to see that the development is done as they did in seeing that
the physical construction of the Waterway was completed.
          "The Minority Peoples Council has been very much concerned about
the industries that are actually coming in. We have seen the arrival
of the Chemwaste toxic waste dump site at Emelle in Sumter County,
Alabama, which is one of the first industries to locate on the
Waterway. Bringing the most deadly wastes from the eastern half of the
whole country. And if that's the type of industrial development that's
coming in, needless to say we don't need it.
          "We're standing in the middle of some of the most impoverished
counties in America. What people here need--black and white--are decent
houses, plumbing, health care facilities, development that benefits
all the community. Instead we have the Corps of Engineers digging this
big ditch for coal companies in Kentucky and wood products companies
in Mississippi and Alabama to float their barges. The benefits, the
profits here, go to a very few people."
          "Thank you, Wendell Paris for the views of the Minority Peoples
Council, casting a bit of a cloud over this otherwise historic
day. The greatness of our country is that everybody is entitled to a
view. We're going to go back now to the ceremonial barge where Alabama
Senator Howell Heflin is speaking."
          Senator Heflin: . . . There is one other I want to mention
here. Governor James Folsom of Alabama (applause). Big Jim was the
governor when the first funds were appropriated for the
Tennessee-Tomigbee Waterway Development Authority way back in 1946.
          There are those that say this is a boondoggle. We have faced that
battle in the Congress. We see it still in the media today. I look
back in history and I see that the Louisiana Purchase was called a
boondoggle. That when the Alaska was acquired, they called it a
folly. There were those in the media who criticized the purchase price
of the isle of Manhattan, saying that twenty-four dollars was too
much. History proved them wrong. And I think that history will prove
the cynics and the scoffers and the pseudo-sophisticates wrong
today. But I want contemporary history to prove them wrong. That means
that we must have a promotional and sales effort in regards to the
Tennessee-Tombigbee Waterway.
          We're going to have to sell it. I think that contemporary history
will prove that this is a miracle, an economic miracle for this
section of the country and also an economic miracle for those who use
the Tennessee-Tombigbee. This is a day of dedication and let us
reforge our efforts to sell the great Tenn-Tom. Thank you.
          
             Applause.
          
          Congressman Bevill: Our next speaker has served with devotion and
great skills in the Senate. He is a retired admiral, a former prisoner
of war for seven and a half years, an American patriot, an authentic
American war hero. It is with great pleasure that I introduce to you
my good friend, Senator Jeremiah Denton.
          
             Applause.
          
          Denton: Bright . . . and hot! Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished
guests from great states, we are indeed fortunate to be here on this
bright day sharing in the celebration of brighter days ahead. Today,
by marking the dedication of this great public works project, we are
marking new and hot economic opportunities for the nation and for the
entire region lighted up on that big board over there.
          As a Senator from Alabama I joyfully see the door opening to
expansive export of the bountiful blessings God has bestowed and man
has developed in our state of Alabama. Our wood products, farm
products, coal, chemicals among others. The beneficial trade products
are accompanied by enhancement to our national security and we are
fortunate that the distinguished Secretary of the Army, Jack Marsh is
our fortuitous choice as our principal speaker on 

this occasion.
          Ladies and gentlemen, Tenn-Tom means more trade, more security. We're ready and grateful for both. God bless you.
          
            Applause.
          
          Congressman Bevill: The people of Mississippi are fortunate to have our next speaker representing the first district of this state in the Congress. He is one of the most respected individuals ever to have served in that body. As dean of the House, Jamie Whitten has an enormous understanding of our government. He has been a part of it for nearly forty-four years. As Chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, Jamie is recognized as one of the most powerful members of Congress. He has been directly involved in the Tenn-Tom since before its authorization in 1946. His influence, dedication and determination helped insure this project's completion. He and I have worked closely together to bring the funding legislation for this project to the floor of the House and to get it passed. Without Jamie Whitten, there would be no Tenn-Tom.
          Congressman Whitten: The dedication of the Tenn-Tom marks perhaps the greatest man-made development of our nation, or any other nation in the world. May I say that we had all sorts of problems. We had to take an old authorization and bring it up to date, we had to change the Highway Act, we had to give instructions to start on both ends and meet in the middle. There have been hundreds, thousands at the local, state and national level who have helped get this thing through.
          May I say that this brings the Southeastern part of the United States up to the rest of the country. And contrary to what I read now and then we didn't whip anybody to get this. Thank you.
          
            Applause.
          
          "This is Jim Bob Bugles again for WLQC radio. I'm out at the water's edge with Alabama National Guardsman Jerry Psenka, one of the Tenn-Tom footsoldiers who's been on summer camp duty here for the last three weeks. Jerry, what's doing?"
          "We just finished up the temporary footbridge this morning. So visitors can walk for today only from the east bank to the west bank."
          "Do you get to go home tonight?"
          "No sir, we get to go over to Anniston on Monday, Ft. McClellan, for the last week of our summer camp. I'll be glad when this is over. We lost a boy and there wadn't no sense in it .
          "What?"
          "Yessir. He got crushed while we were pushing the pieces of the bridge in place. That happened Monday. I'll just be glad when we pull out of here. There's been a mess of it. That's all I want to say."
          "I understand. Thank you. Guardsman Jerry Psenka. Let's go back to the barge where I believe Bob Dawson of Alabama, the Assistant Secretary of the Army, is introducing Army Secretary Jack Marsh."
          Dawson: .... this nation's vital defense and the respect accorded our country all around the world. His emphasis on

physical fitness,
the Army family, leadership and victory have instilled a new pride, a
new optimism and a new effectiveness throughout the Army. He is an
example of the impact of one man, properly seasoned and inspired, can
have in public service. So it is most fitting that he is here to
dedicate the Tenn-Tom, the achievement of a dream.
          Ladies and gentlemen, I invite you to welcome a great leader, a
great public servant, representing the President of the United States,
the Secretary of this nation's Army, the Honorable Jack Marsh.
          
             Applause.
          
          Secretary Marsh Please sit down, please. Thank you very much
Bob.
          You know as we assemble here today to honor a great achievement, we
should also take a moment to pause and recognize the sacrifices that
have been made by some. I would like to pay tribute to a young Alabama
national guardsman in the Corps of Engineers, Dewayne Hayes who gave
his life in the last several days in the line of duty in the
completion of this project. To mark that sacrifice and to insure his
memory, the temporary footbridge nearby will be designated in his
name.
          From time to time there are events that happen that change the
pattern and the course of this great nation. This is such an
event. The American poet James Russell Lowell wrote, "Life is but a
leaf of paper white, whereon each of us must write." Well, these
two rivers--the Tennessee and the Tombigbee--and the Appalachian
foothills that once lay between them are our paper. The Corps' pens
are bulldozers and dredging derricks, and our ink is concrete. Enough
concrete was used in the building of the Tenn-Tom to make a highway
four inches thick that would run from Mobile to Atlanta.
          The dedication today gives reality to a dream that began in another
century. It shows us the primary importance to our country of the Gulf
of Mexico, the Caribbean Sea, the Panama Canal. The health, vigor, and
freedom of these places are of vital importance to us all. Almost
fifty percent of our water-borne commerce transits the Panama Canal or
the Caribbean, and over a half of our imported products travel these
vital sea lanes.
          Central America, on the coast of the Caribbean, is a troubled
world. It is not a world that is half a world away. Although there has
been marked progress in combating the insurgency in El Salvador,
Nicaragua is building the largest army in Central America, having
received arms and equipment from the Soviet Union, Cuba and other
Soviet surrogates. Surely, it must be perceived that there is a
growing threat to the collective security of this hemisphere.
          In a troubled world, the Tenn-Tom Waterway is a demonstration of
American strength and the achievements of the American people. It
shows the resourcefulness, the vitality, of the American System and
the American people. And it sends a message.
          Now, Congressman Bevill, if you will join me here at the replica of
the Waterway, we will release water from the twenty-three states which
will directly benefit from this great project. As we turn the valve
releasing the water, those of you in the audience can see on the giant
billboard to my right the economic benefits flowing from this new link
in our nation's waterway system.
          
             Applause.  The Army Band strikes up "As the
Caissons Go Rolling Along." Hundreds of helium-filled red, white and
blue balloons lose their fight to rise in the hot, saturated air. They
drop into the water and drift away from the barge.
          
          "This is Linda Comfort. Congressman "Tootle" Tutwiler has been
with us here throughout the ceremonies. Congressman, some final
thoughts about what this day has meant to Mississippi and the
South."
          "Linda, this Waterway will be a tremendous shot in the arm no
matter what color your personal flotation device. We've seen that
reinforced here today. You know, I think recreation is the real
sleeper here. So many opportunities are unfolding that are
recreational in nature. Already this year, the first pleasurecraft,
the 112 foot Viking Explorer with some thirty passengers, made its way
down the Tenn-Tom."
          "Congressman, what exactly is a pleasurecraft?"
          "Linda, it's kinda like a drawing board out of water.
          "And Linda, let's talk jobs. I heard what Wendell Paris said
earlier about how only the big landowners and corporations were going
to benefit from the Tenn-Tom. Frankly, we don't need that kind of
talk. In Amory, Mississippi, Weyerhauser is building a ten million
dollar plant to produce wood chips for making paper. That plant will
employ twenty-five people. Now that may not sound like much to the
Minority Peoples Council, but it's twenty-five more jobs than we have
now. And don't think there won't be some black workers in those
woodpiles."
          "Congressman, how much land does Weyerhauser own

in the Tennessee-Tombigbee region?"
          "Well, Linda, it's over 700,000 acres. Last year they planted
nearly seventeen million pine seedlings in their forests in Alabama
and Mississippi."
          "Incredible. That means, if the Army Corps of Engineers
estimates are correct and three million expected visitors use the
Tenn-Tom for recreation next year, that figures out to 4.28, which
must be the highest seedling-to-tourist ratio in the country."
          "Yep. Even more than Alaska or Maine. And Linda--and I see you
signaling that we are out of time--but let me say this as a way of
summing up. Some people just don't want to salute the ingenuity of
man. But, and the Corps recognizes that-and you know we tend to forget
that the Corps has environmental scientists of its own, good ones
too--you have to tinker a little with nature anytime you join a
powerful north-flowing river system like the Tennessee with a major
southbound river, the Tombigbee--bodies of water that haven't met in at
least forty million years, perhaps never. Some fine tuning is
inevitable in this. But the main thing is to get the bucks flowing in
the right direction."
        
        
          Crackdown in the Black Belt: On to Greene County
          By Williams, RandallRandall Williams
          Vol. 7, No. 3, 1985, pp. 2-5
          
          Fifth of July "not guilty" verdicts by a
federal jury in Selma have freed the voting rights activists known as
the Marion Three. Stymied, for the moment, is the Reagan Justice
Department's effort to help local white officials reverse the
electoral gains of black voters in many rural counties of the South
since the passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act.
          As the Marion (Perry County) defendants were acquitted, trials for
five other activists from nearby Greene County began. At this writing,
two of these cases have ended with hung juries in federal court in
Birmingham.
          The various trials and the situations from which they have arisen
are complicated, involving multiple-count indictments, scores of
witnesses, political infighting, and conflicts between the ideals and
realities of voting procedures. Regardless, a central fact is becoming
increasingly clear to courtroom observers:
          These cases only incidentally involve voting; the real issues are
power and control in the parts of the Deep South where black
majorities are wresting public offices from 

historically entrenched
white elites.
          For a decade after passage of the Voting Rights Act, black
population majorities in Alabama Black Belt counties were not
transformed into electoral victories. Greene County was the exception,
with blacks capturing all of the county's elective offices as early as
1968. By 1975, others had begun to catch up. The school boards in the
five counties where the FBI has been conducting its voter fraud
investigations are good illustrations. In 1975, blacks held all five
school board seats in Greene County, but only two of five in Sumter,
one of five in Lowndes, and none in Perry and Wilcox. Following the
elections of 1984, blacks filled all the school board seats in Sumter,
Greene and Wilcox, and four of five in both Perry and Lowndes.
          These gains came through hard work and through increasingly
sophisticated voter registration efforts by black activists, most
recently in conjunction with the Jesse Jackson presidential campaign
which proved especially strong in heavily black rural counties.
          The outcome of the voting rights revolution in Alabama, has been a
bitter factionalization within the Black Belt counties. Lining up on
one side have been almost all of the black leadership, the vast
majority of black voters, and political organizations like the Perry
County Civic League headed by Albert Turner and the Greene County
Civic League headed by Spiver Gordon (whose trial begins in
October). Within the past couple of years, beginning about the time
blacks began winning all the elections, white dominated political
action coalitions (commonly referred to as "PAC" or the "Coalition")
emerged in several Black Belt counties. The white leadership of these
groups courted blacks to run as candidates who were less
objectionable--to whites--than the black activists in the civic
leagues.
          John Zippert, a white civil rights activist who has worked for more
than a decade with the Federation of Southern Cooperatives, describes
a leaflet circulated by the PAC in Greene County opposing several
measures proposed by the black community for the 1984 elections. Among
these were an increase in county tax on parimutuel betting at the
white-owned Greene County greyhound racing track; reallocation of some
dog track revenues to give funds to organizations directly serving
poor and black people; annexation of three predominantly black
subdivisions into the city of Eutaw (whites still control thirty-three
of forty-two city governments in the Black Belt), and an increase in
 ad valorem  property tax rates in Greene
County for the support of the public schools.
          All of these measures were in the interest of most black people in
Greene County. "After PAC's initial meetings were held, " says
Zippert, "I learned that PAC had selected a slate of black
candidates to run for the county commission and other offices. PAC
stated that these candidates were 'responsible,'
meaning in effect that they would take their direction from powerful
white people."
          According to Zippert, the 1984 elections in Greene County came down
to a choice between two slates of black candidates. "One slate was
supported by the Greene County Civic League, dedicated to pursuing a
course of action in the interest of establishing and maintaining
effective political participation by low income persons of any race or
creed and by blacks who comprise a majority in Greene County who
traditionally have been excluded from political participation by
whites; the other slate consisted of blacks who had made a deal with
the whites and were willing to serve the interests of whites in the
county.` Race and racial politics were the dominant factors in the
1984 local elections in Greene County."
          In those elections, both political factions vigorously campaigned
and engaged in voter registration, including absentee
registration. Neither side had great success recruiting from the
other, although blacks in the "coalitions"
outnumbered whites aligned with the civic leagues.
          Voter registration figures for both blacks and whites in the
ten-county Black Belt of west Alabama include dead people, folk who
moved away years ago, and voters registered in the county where they
live and in the county where they work. The latest figures available
are inaccurate, but the relative numbers are nonetheless
significant. From the pre-1965 era when there were essentially no
registered black voters here, the 1982 registration figures show some
70,000 black voters and 62,000 whites.
          The 138 blacks who currently hold public office in these ten
counties account for nearly half of the state's total of elected black
officials, which is among the highest in the nation. With increased
voter registration and the diminishing of old fears--black fears, that
is; whites fear a different 

bogeyman and imagine they now hear him
scratching at the door--comes the promise of additional black sheriffs,
school board members, county commissioners, district attorneys and
probate judges. With black political power comes control of county
revenues, sufficient clout to secure black participation in government
public works contracts and programs, several seats in the Alabama
legislature, influence on the outcome of a Congressional seat, and the
margin of difference in a close US Senate race.
          On July 5, all of these prospects were on the minds of the Marion
Three defendants as they embraced. waved to the press, and sang with
their families and supporters on the steps of the Selma courthouse
soon after the not guilty verdicts and after the courtroom audience
had stood to loudly applaud, then cheer the departing jury. Albert
Turner, the most prominent of the defendants, renewed his contention
that the man with the most to gain from the intimidation of black
voters in Alabama is freshman GOP Senator Jeremiah Denton.
          The far-right Denton, who voted against the extension of the 1965
Voting Rights Act, who has defended Jerry Falwell's attack on Desmond
Tutu, and whose re-election in 1986 is by no means assured, has
branded as a "nefarious lie" Turner's view that Denton bears a
measure of responsibility for the current Justice Department
crackdown.
          Yet, in several instances over the previous four years, Alabama's
junior Senator has intervened with the Justice Department in Alabama
voting rights matters, taking the side of local white powerholders
against the interests of black citizens. Too, the offices of the US
Attorneys in Alabama now bulge with Reagan appointees made upon the
advice of Senator Denton.
          Proof of Denton's involvement in the west Alabama cases is not
necessary in order to appreciate the black activists' fundamental
claim that they are being selectively prosecuted as part of a larger
effort to thwart the emergence of political power in areas of the
rural South. Grassroots black organizers are convinced they are
witnessing a second period of Redemption, when whites who have lost
local power, as they did during Reconstruction, are using whatever
measures they can to displace blacks from the political process. In
the view of the Albert Turners of the Black Belt, the Reagan
Administration is abandoning the black citizens whom the federal
government championed during the Civil Rights movement and is placing
its authority and might with the whites who previously held control
and who want to again.
          A General Accounting Office investigation of the Federation of
Southern Cooperatives, (based at Epes in Sumter County), is- seen as
one recent example of federal pressure being applied after local
whites made complaints against the black economic development
organization. After several years of intense scrutiny of the
Federation's books turned up no wrongdoing, the investigation was
closed, leaving the Federation badly crippled by the constant
harassment.
          Attorneys representing Union (Alabama) mayor, James Colvin, the
first of the Greene County defendants to go on trial in Birmingham
this summer, made allegations of similar politically motivated
pressure from the Justice Department as they argued a selective
prosecution motion.
          Ira Burnim, a Southern Poverty Law Center attorney on Colvin's
defense team and the lead counsel in a civil lawsuit filed against the
Justice Department (see Southern Changes, May/June 1985), tells of a
conversation with Marshall Jarrett of Justice's Public Integrity
Section.
          Jarrett made clear to attorney Burnim that the investigation and
prosecution,! in Greene County are part of a larger effort by the
government not only in the Black Belt of Alabama but in black majority
counties of Mississippi. Burnim says there exists a letter from an
assistant U.S. attorney general to Utah Senator Orrin Hatch which
treats "the problem of voter fraud" as a single interconnected
issue. Another Justice Department official has said that the
investigations were brought on by "arrogance on the part of
blacks."
          As arrogance is not yet a federal crime, the government needed
other charges to place before grand juries. In the summer of 1984,
Justice Department officials--including William Bradford Reynolds and
Stephen Trott--devised a new policy for federal investigations of
election offenses which, in effect, enabled federal prosecutors to
target black civil rights activists in Southern black majority
counties. The FBI was ordered to Greene and the other Black Belt
counties prior to the September 1984 elections to collect
evidence. Judging by the testimony during Colvin's trial, practically
every citizen in the town of Union must have been interviewed by the
FBI Colvin's defense lawyers found it curious that the federal agents
uncovered evidence of alleged wrongdoing only by people affiliated
with the Greene County Civic League.
          In a single summer's day of interviews with voters in Greene
County, Colvin's defense team investigators identified eight
fraudulent ballots, four fraudulently witnessed ballots, and other
election offenses committed by political opponents of those who have
been indicted by the government.
          "We're talking about vote fraud involving federal elections and
not only members of PAC, but public officials as well," Burnim
maintains.
          One person who has lived outside Greene County for years told a
defense investigator that he did not vote in last September's
Democratic primary or primary run-off elections in Greene. Yet a
ballot affidavit in his name was among the evidentiary materials
collected by the US Attorney's office. The ballot affidavit was
notarized by a white Greene 

County public official who is a known
supporter of the PAC.
          After the September 1984 elections, FBI agents
interrogated voters to determine if campaigners for the Greene County
Civic League had cast fraudulent ballots. Meanwhile, Civic League
leaders turned over to the US Attorney's office evidence of similar
alleged misconduct by their opponents in PAC. No PAC campaigners or
officials have been implicated in the Justice Department
investigation.
          Burnim tells of numerous PAC-related incidents which an intense
federal investigation should have uncovered. In one instance, an FBI
agent approached a voter whose name and address appeared on two
absentee ballots cast in the election. The voter identified her
ballot, but told the FBI she had never seen the second ballot, which
was witnessed by the signatures of two PAC supporters. The FBI
apparently never questioned the two individuals who had signed the
ballot.
          Under Alabama law, it is illegal (indeed, it is so written on the
ballot) for candidates to witness absentee ballots or give assistance
to voters. Yet Burnim presented the court with evidence of several
instances where PAC candidates were witnessing absentee ballots. None
of those voters were interviewed by the FBI.
          Other selective prosecution evidence presented by Colvin's
attorneys included cases of persons voting absentee who lived outside
Greene County and were thus ineligible to vote. One person whose name
appeared on an absentee ballot notarized by a public official
affiliated with PAC told defense investigators he not only did not
request to vote in Greene County but was registered in another state
at the time of the election. The public official notarizing this
ballot was not indicted.
          Much of the evidence of PAC violations paralleled material which
had been delivered to the Justice Department last fall by members of
the Greene County Civic League, yet apparently none of it had been
followed up by the FBI. "Is it not startling," asks Burnim,
"that all of the indictments have been against Greene County Civic
League leaders when it took us just three days to uncover vote fraud
by PAC? Wouldn't it be striking if we can find misconduct on both
sides and the government cannot?"
          In a written opinion denying Burnim's selective prosecution motion,
a federal magistrate concluded that in terms of judicial resources the
US attorney might be justified in indicting the Greene County
defendants while not pursuing the complaints against PAC because the
number of incidents revealed in the three-day defense investigation
was less than the number gathered by the eight-month FBI
investigation.
          A more realistic assessment is that the Reagan Justice Department
is cooperating with local whites intent on reversing and dismantling
the black movement for democratic political empowerment.
          
            This article is based on reporting by Southern Changes
editors Allen Tullos and Randall Williams and on articles published in
the Green County Democrat. Previous articles in this series have
appeared in Southern Changes for March/April and May/June,
1985. 
          
        
      
    
  
