
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 7, Number 2,
	       1985
        
          Vengeance and Justice
          By Hahn, StevenSteven Hahn
          Vol. 7, No. 2, 1985, pp. 22-24
          
          Vengeance and Justice: Crime and Punishment in the
Nineteenth Century South. By Edward L. Ayers. Oxford
University Press, 1984.384 pp. $24.95
          The glass and steel that now form the skylines over Atlanta,
Birmingham, New Orleans, Houston, Greensboro, and a good many smaller
cities may symbolize the South's new found cosmopolitanism, but the
recent spate of executions in Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Texas,
North Carolina, and Virginia reminds us of the cultural peculiarities
that began to distinguish the region by the early nineteenth century
and still manage to leave their imprints. The code duello, lynch law,
the convict lease, and the county chain gang have of course, passed
from the scene. Yet, in the incidence of violence and the meting out
of harsh justice the South continues to hold invidious distinctions:
the highest homicide and assault rates, the greatest number of
handguns, and the most inmates on death row. This is a nation
experiencing unprecedented rates of violent crime and renewed
acceptance of capital punishment.
          The apparent continuity of Southern distinctiveness of these
regards cannot fail to impress. It should not, however, obscure
significant changes in the nature and conceptualization of crime and
punishment, particularly during the 19th century as the South moved
from slavery to freedom. For it is in the very changes that the
meaning of Southern distinctiveness may be discovered. So Edward
Ayers, a talented young historian at the University of Virginia,
suggests, and his new book, Vengeance and Justice 
takes us far along the route of discovery.
          The route is difficult and treacherous, replete with wart paths,
false leads, and blind alleys. Much is shrouded in the haze of myth
and shibboleth. Ayers is mindful of the dangers and respectful of
those who have made the journey before him. Nonetheless, he pushes
ahead boldly and ambitiously, shedding fresh light on older trails
while charting many new ones. His scope is at once regional and local,
sweeping across the Southern states and then focusing in upon three
different areas of Georgia so as to explore patterns of crime and
punishment in considerable detail: Greene County in the Black Belt;
Whitfield County in the Upcountry; and Chatham County along the coast
and dominated by the city of Savannah.
          Ayers begins with the antebellum period and an examination of the
social and cultural underpinnings of Southern violence and
justice. Like Bertram Wyatt-Brown before him, he finds a system of
honor-wherein one's own worth was determined by the judgment of the
community -to be the prevailing field of force, encouraging extremes
of behavior, acute sensitivity to insult, and personalized settlement
of disputes. Unlike Wyatt-Brown, he situates honor within a specific
grid of social relations while recognizing the strong countervailing
currents produced by the South's links to the increasingly bourgeois
North and the increasingly important market economy. Honor, Ayers

reminds us, thrived historically in hierarchical, economically
undiversified, and localistically-oriented societies, and its roots in
the South would have withered, as they had withered in the North, were
it not for slavery. More than anything else, the master-slave
relationship helped insulate the South from the economic and cultural
forces associated with the alternative system of dignity and
self-worth. But the insulation was never complete, and although
traditional patterns of crime and punishment persisted in many areas
up to the Civil War, Southern states began to build penitentiaries and
white Southerners began to debate the issue of institutional
confinement in a language of republicanism that touched the entire
nation.
          Ayers highlights the parameters of continuity and change in his
meticulously researched local studies, where he utilizes quantitative
and literary evidence. Thus, in the rural plantation and nonplantation
counties, violent crime loomed largest, relatively few cases went to
trial, and convicted offenders normally received fines as
penalties. Defendants, for the most part, came from middling economic
ranks and if they had not committed an act of violence it was likely
that their offenses involved drinking, gambling, or sexual
misconduct. Indeed, fluctuations in the "crime rate"had little to do
with the cycles of the marketplace and a good deal to do with various
campaigns against "immorality." Crimes against property-ever
pronounced in the North- were rare, but at the same time punished most
severely: of the few rural offenders sent to the state penitentiary,
the majority had committed property crimes. The affected parties, of
course, were white and usually male; slaves were subjected to
plantation justice lest their offenses were capital or committed off
the plantation when the state stepped in and, significantly, devoted
careful attention to proper procedure. Significantly, too, when cases
involving slaves reached the courts, the conviction rates were about
the same as for whites.
          In antebellum cities such as Savannah, where ties to the market
economy and bourgeois world were more extensive, the dimensions of
crime came nearer to approximating the North. White offenders tended
to be outsiders, often immigrants, from the poorer classes; property
crime proved more common; authorities resorted to the penitentiary
more frequently; and the onset of economic depression, as in the late
1850s, triggered a dramatic rise in incarceration rates. Still the
majority appearing before the local courts had committed an act of
violence, testimony to the power and pervasiveness of the South's code
of honor.
          If Savannah anticipated some of the vectors of social change, the
Civil War and Reconstruction propelled them forward while giving them
a distinctive aspect. With the bonds of enslavement severed, black
people entered, however ambiguously, the South's civil society; and
the relations of the marketplace spread, however haltingly, through
the region. With the plantation system in disarray, landowners
surrounded private property with newly defined and sharpened hedges so
as to limit the economic alternatives available to ex-slaves. The
result was a rather different "configuration of crime and punishment,"
yet one that would "endure for generations to come." The ebb and flow
of crime, in town and country alike, came to follow the fortunes of
the economy, with a considerable surge evident during the depression
ridden 1870s. Offenses against property furthermore, became
increasingly common, and defendants in the plantation counties were
now overwhelmingly black. Finally, institutional confinement,
especially for the swelling number of convicted black offenders,
emerged as the first rather than last resort.
          The numbers soon overtook the institutions, however, and although
Southern legislatures planned to build larger penitentiaries, county
and state officials looked for alternatives to the already crowded
jails. They eventually found one in the convict lease. But as Ayers
demonstrates in an excellent chapter-length account, there was nothing
automatic or inevitable about the rise of the lease, and its early
history was filled with irony. Indeed, while many Southern states
turned to the lease as a temporary expedient, blacks as well as
whites, Republicans as well as Democrats, share some responsibility
for perpetuating it. The 1860s and 1870s saw "cautious
experimentation," as leases ran for relatively short periods and
convicts worked chiefly as agricultural and railroad laborers. By the
1870s and 1880s, the lease's moorings had been firmed and convict
labor concentrated most heavily in mining, particularly in Alabama,
Georgia, Florida, and Tennessee. Handsome profits there were, both 

for
the state governments and the lessees.
          Yet Ayers perceptively views the lease as more than one of the many
parvenu schemes befitting the "great barbecue"; he views it as an
integral part of the larger transition from slave to capitalist social
relations. For in the South, as in other post-emancipation societies,
various forms of forced labor bridged the path from the old order to
the new. It required a lengthy campaign on the part of free workers
and the urban middle classes before the lease was laid to rest; even
then the death throes were protracted and the legacy ambiguous.
          Ayers concludes his study with a close consideration of the
vigilante violence-lynching and whitecapping-that swept the Black Belt
and Upcountry during the 1880s and 1890s. Reluctant to "over-explain,"
he nonetheless sees the contradictory intersection of honor,
republicanism, and the market provoking a social crisis. Intensifying
white dread of black men violating white women did reflect the premium
that honor placed upon female chastity, male virility, and the
integrity of the patriarchal household. But by the 1880s a new
generation of whites and blacks eyed each other across an
ever-widening chasm, adding fears born of ignorance to the deeper
fears born of the tenuous social balance that had characterized
relatively insulated and hierarchical communities. Lynching harked to
the tradition of retribution and public humiliation, and it was no
accident that black victims were often considered outsiders by both
races in a particular neighborhood. The great upsurge in lynchings,
however, also dramatized the disintegration of relations and norms
that had given the antebellum system of honor some structure of
order. And it was not simply a question of race, for the increasing
penetration of the market into white counties turned the wrath of
communities against whites who violated local custom or represented
the intrusive forces of the outside world, whether they be Mormons or
federal revenue agents. If slavery served as the foundation of
Southern distinctiveness before the war, the gradual and peculiar
transition to capitalist relations continued to set the region
apart. Jettisoned by the educated middle class, honor and its code of
vengeance were perpetuated during the twentieth century by smalltown
folk, and the lower classes, white and black.
          Vengeance and Justice is at its weakest in examining
the legal re-definition of crime after the Civil War and the very
specific social contexts in which "crimes," as distinguished from
general acts of violent retribution, occurred. We learn relatively
little about what Ayers acknowledges to be a wide-ranging process
whereby the law mediated the transformation of social and property
relations: changing patterns of crime provide evidence more of the
impact than of the substance and historical meaning of the
transformation. At the same time, we do not get much of a feel for the
subjects or circumstances in the story; we are, by and large, offered
aggregate statistics instead. It should be said, of course, that the
court records leave much to be desired in this regard and Ayers has
done an impressive job simply in compiling the cases. Nonetheless,
given the challenging insights into the social dimensions of crime
that have come, most notably, from recent studies of sixteenth,
seventeenth, and eighteenth century Europe, Ayers could have culled a
bit more even from his limited resources. That he did not do so in
part reflects some of the book's thematic ambiguity: Vengeance
and Justice is both about more and about less than crime and
punishment in the nineteenth century South.
          Shortcomings aside, Edward Ayers has written a book of enormous
interest and genuine importance. His work contributes compellingly to
the debate over the character of the South and the transition from
slavery to freedom, and will serve as an indispensable guide for
students who wish to pursue the many lines of inquiry that Ayers has
opened up. Without question  Vengeance and Justice
helps to raise the discussion of Southern distinctiveness and the
South's painful legacies to a new level of sophistication.
          
            Steve Hahn teaches history at the University of
California at San Diego. He is author of The Roots of Southern
Populism. (Oxford Univ. Press, 1983).
          
        
        
          Victorian to Modernist Thought in the South, 1919 - 1945
          By Hobson, FredFred Hobson
          Vol. 7, No. 2, 1985, pp. 21-22
          
          The War Within: From Victorian to Modernist Thought in
the South, 1919 - 1945. By Daniel Joseph Singal. University of
North Carolina Press, 1982.
          In the quarter-century between the close of the First World War and
the close of the Second, the thought and writing of the American South
underwent a change that has been explained in various ways by various
commentators. Allen Tate attributed the change in thought-in
particular, the coming of a Southern literary renascence-to a
"crossing of the ways," an historical moment when agrarian past met
industrialized future with particular intensity, causing a "double
focus, a looking two ways" among Southern writers and
intellectuals. Gerald W. Johnson and others attributed the change to
the shock produced in Dixie when outsiders such as H.L. Mencken
exposed the South as a cultural and literary desert and laid bare all
its cherished institutions and myths. Daniel Singal's approach is
somewhat different. He explains what happened in Southern intellectual
circles between 1919 and 1945 in terms of a progression from Victorian
to Modernist thought. Thus certain Southern writers--historian Ulrich
B. Phillips, economist Broadus Mitchell and novelist Ellen Glasgow--are
"Southern Post-Victorians." Others--William Faulkner, poets John Crowe
Ransom, Donald Davidson and Tate, and sociologist Howard Odum--are
"Modernists by the skin of their teeth." Still others--publisher
William Terry Couch, sociologists Rupert Vance, Guy B. Johnson and
Arthur Raper, and, finally, Robert Penn Warren--are full-fledged
"Modernists."
          Singal's attempt--and in most respects, his accomplishment--is a
noble one. For he attempts to impose order on a body of twentieth
century Southern writing which, to some extent, resists the kind of
order he imposes. Modernism, by its nature, is a many-faceted
thing. As Singal notes, the Modernist tends to unlock the whole being
(by employing Darwin, Marx, Freud, Jung and other thinkers); does not
repress human vitality or deny kinship with other animals (as the
Victorians did); plumbs the human psyche, believes the universe is
unpredictable, and possesses "an ability to live without certainty."
True enough. But because of the protean quality of Modernism, one might-by focusing on some
particular aspect of it at the expense of other aspects--take Singal's
thirteen Southerners and group them in many different ways. I would
contend, for example, that Davidson and perhaps Odum were not
Modernists at all, even by the skin of their teeth--and that Faulkner
and Tate were closer than Couch to being the real thing.
          But to focus on such distinctions is to miss the immense value of
Singal's book. In fact, The War Within is an enormously suggestive and
important work, thoroughly researched and very well written. Singal's
first chapter, on the South and Victorian culture, is highly
instructive: Victorianism is not so hard to pin down as Modernism. His
treatment of Phillips and Mitchell is particularly good, and his
discussions of Faulkner and of the Southern Agrarians, particularly
Warren, are sound.
          But it is Singal's discussion of the Chapel Hill group--the
"crusading" North Carolinians, as Donald Davidson called them--that is
perhaps most valuable. Five of his thirteen subjects were associated
with the University of North Carolina, and four of those five--Couch,
Vance, Johnson and Raper--have not previously received their full
due. Howard Odum, of course, is the most significant figure in the
Chapel Hill renascence of the 1920s and 1930s. But what has not been
previously explored-although it has been frequently acknowledged-is
the contribution to Southern intellectual life of Couch and the
University of North Carolina Press and the contributions of the second

generation of Chapel Hill sociologists-Vance, Johnson and Raper-all of
whom studied under Odum but who differed from him (and from each
other) in their approach to Southern life and in their degree of
militancy. Vance was more hard-boiled than Odum. Johnson was more the
true social scientist. Raper was more militant. Couch quarreled with
Odum. The "Chapel Hill group," that is to say, was no more unified
than the Vanderbilt group."
          As valuable as Singal's discussions of Chapel Hill sociologists and
Vanderbilt Agrarians are, he omits or dismisses several other
Southerners of the period 1919-1945 whose inclusion would have made
his study even richer. Although center stage for the intellectual
debate within the South in the 1920s and 1930s was marked "whites
only," Southern blacks were hardly silent. Equally indefensible is the
dismissal of a white Southern woman such as Lillian Smith who edited
the most outspoken Southern journal of its time, South
Today, between 1936 and 1945--particularly since, in many ways,
Smith seems to have been a more representative Modernist than many of
the author's choices. More than any other Southerner of her time,
Smith acknowledged all aspects of being human, truly plumbed the
Southern psyche, relied heavily on Freud, and, in the 1930s and 40s,
openly condemned racial segregation in any form it might take.
          Singal does refer to Smith in passing on two occasions and
acknowledges, in the book's conclusion, that "with her the assault
against the Victorian ethos reached maturity" and that she, "more than
anyone else, brought the issue of race and segregation into the open."
He quotes her description of the white Southern mind--"Not only Negroes
but everything dark, dangerous, evil must be pushed to the rim of
one's life"--and cites her belief that genteel Southerners had certain
wishes and desires which "we learned early to send to the Dark-town of
our unconscious."
          Yet Singal dismisses such pronouncements as "today [having] about
them the ring of the commonplace." "Her description of southerners as
repressed, violent, and perverted strikes readers of the 1980s as
extravagant and overdramatic. . ." And now "Smith's insights have
become stale."
          I do not think so. And, indeed, even if some of her logic should
today appear "commonplace," her message--in its time and place, when it
mattered most--was both original and courageous. That she was heard is
suggested by the attention she received, not always favorably, from
Southern liberals. "A modern, feminine counterpart of the ancient
Hebrew prophets," Ralph McGill called her; the William Lloyd Garrison
of the South, Virginius Dabney said.
          Singal's study, then, omits significant points of view within
Southern society--blacks, women (except for Glasgow), outspoken
prophets such as Smith, and others who spoke with radically different
voices. The study is principally--with the notable exception of
Faulkner and the Agrarians--a discussion of certain aspects of
twentieth century white male Southern liberalism. To capture the full
flavor of Southern intellectual life between 1919 and 1945 the author
might have included some less established, less genteel Southern
voices. But what Singal does he does well indeed: he understands well
most of the mainstream intellectual and literary currents of his
period, and he has written a book filled with energy and
originality.
          
            Fred Hobson teaches in the English Department of the
University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa. His most recent book is
Tell About the South: The Southern Rage to Explain
(L.S.U. Press, 1983). 
          
        
        
          Games Registrars Play
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 7, No. 2, 1985, pp. 1-2
          
          Two decades after the passage of the Voting Rights Act, no one
really knows how many black citizens are registered to vote in the
South today. While no better basic standard exists by which to measure
an open democracy, the level of voter registration is unknown in the
region because many local white officials, especially in rural areas,
continue to keep meaningless information and thereby promote unfair
political practices.
          In the 1940s, the Southern Regional Council began estimating the
levels of black registration in the South because most Southern
officials refused to keep or distribute information about the race of
registered voters. Without official numbers verifying the
insignificant size of registered black voters, white politicians in
those days maintained that they were color blind while using all-white
primaries, literacy tests, and poll taxes to keep blacks off the
voting rolls and out of the ballot box.
          Today the practices of non-information continue in the South. In
Alabama, Arkansas, Mississippi, Tennessee, and Virginia--five of the
eleven Southern states--officials in charge of voter registration
cannot tell how many blacks are registered to vote. In these states
the best source of information is sample surveys of the US Census
Bureau carried out only at the state level every four years.
          Records of registration kept by white registrars in predominantly
black populated counties in the rural South are unbelievably bad. In
Mississippi in 1980-the latest date for a count of the voting age
population of counties- rural, predominantly black Coahoma County had
23,246 people of voting age (eighteen years or older). Yet, according
to the Mississippi Secretary of State who keeps registration data,
24,273 people were registered to vote there. In Yazoo County,
Mississippi there were less than eighteen-thousand citizens of voting
age population in 1980 while more than 

18,500 people were registered to vote.
          In fact, in the Second Congressional District of Mississippi, the
state's only district with a majority black population, one-half of
its twenty counties have more registered voters on the rolls than
people of voting age.
          Mississippi is not the exception. In Wilcox County, Alabama,
eighty-five percent of the total population was registered to vote in
1980, according to the reports of the county's board of registrars;
however, only sixty-two percent of the county was old enough to vote
that year. In predominantly black Lowndes County, where whites also
control the registration board, eighty-two percent of the total
population of the county was registered to vote in 1980, although only
sixty percent of the population was of voting age.
          In other Southern counties where registration rolls are better
kept, some local officials know more than they are telling. In
Alabama, the Secretary of State's office says that most counties do
not keep voter registration data by race. Yet, in Sumter County, local
white registrars--appointed by the governor of Alabama--have the
information. They just don't distribute it. Less than two years ago,
an SRC representative discovered on his third visit to that
registrar's office that registration data was being kept for each
precinct, by race on computer. White officials simply did not wish to
distribute the information and had denied its existence until it was
inadvertently seen.
          These inaccuracies and duplicities retard local efforts to increase
real voter registration and turn-out; they hide local officials'
caprice and hostility to black voters; and, too often, they permit
former residents of a county and current residents of the local
cemetery to vote.
          Proposals for reform offered by registration boards and their
political allies would often have the same effect as the problems they
are supposed to correct. In southwest Alabama, for example, recent
proposals of reform would have' wiped away all names from the voting
rolls and required all citizens to re-register to vote within a few
months. Opportunities for registration in most of these counties are
restricted to less than ten days a month and usually only from nine to
five (and closed at lunch time). Most registration can only occur at
the local courthouse.
          While farmers doing seasonal work might once have been able to
re-register under these conditions, the fact is that most blacks in
these rural areas now work regular shifts and must get the permission
of white employers and miss a day's work to register. And for a large
part of the elderly blacks who have no transportation, this type of
reregistration would mean no registration.
          In effect, these reforms would eliminate in two months a level of
black registration that has required twenty years to build. Thus,
blacks in these counties have been offered a political Hobson's
choice: useless registration data or crippled black registration. Most
blacks have chosen to block the devastating reforms and live without
hard, accurate registration data which could often help them target
registration drives.
          Thirty-five years ago, V. O. Key stated in his authoritative study,
Southern Politics, that "every local registration
officer is a law unto himself ...." In different circumstances today,
the same conclusion applies to much of the South's Black
Belt. Southern local and state governments must begin to collect
accurate information on registration by race and to implement
procedures that help--not hinder--people to register. Until we know how
many blacks and whites are registered to vote in the South's
precincts, we should assume that officials continue to hide
mischievous practices which prompted the passage of the Voting Rights
Act twenty years ago.
          
            Steve Suitts is executive director of the Southern
Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Crackdown in the Black Belt: Not-So-Simple Justice
          By Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 7, No. 2, 1985, pp. 2-11
          
          In a trial that should reveal the distance the Reagan Justice
Department will travel to cooperate with local white officials in
suppressing the voting rights of black citizens, the case of United
States of America v. Albert Turner, Spencer Hogue, Jr., and Evelyn
Turner moved into a federal courtroom in Selma, Alabama, on June
19.
          Meanwhile, US attorneys continue to supervise investigations and
bring similar indictments against grassroots civil rights leaders for
alleged violations of absentee voting laws in five west Alabama Black
Belt counties. Indicted in Birmingham on June 11 were five Greene
Countians, including longtime activist and Eutaw city council member
Spiver Gordon, the black mayor of the town of Union, James Colvin, and
three voting rights workers.

          Other targets of the investigations include sheriff John Hulett of
Lowndes County, and--from Wilcox County--Rev. Thomas Threadgill (often
regarded as the spiritual leader of the Black Belt) and county
commissioner Bobby Joe Johnson.
          Arguing that the Justice Department's investigations of absentee
voting practices in Alabama arise from a Reagan Administration policy
of singling out black voting rights activists for prosecution, a group
of nine black citizens (including four elected officials) from Greene,
Lowndes, Perry, Sumter and Wilcox counties filed a class action suit
on June 11 in federal district court in Montgomery challenging this
policy and asking that the current, discriminatory, investigations be
stopped.
          Named as defendants in the federal suit are US Attorney General
Edwin Meese; William Bradford Reynolds, Acting Associate Attorney
General and head of the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division;
Stephen S. Trott, who oversees Justice's Criminal Division; and the US
Attorneys for the Northern, Middle and Southern Districts of
Alabama. The Southern Poverty Law Center and the Southeastern Office
of the American Civil Liberties Union are representing the Black Belt
citizens who have brought the complaint.
          "We think it's unfair the way the investigation is being conducted
and felt this was the only way to let the people know what was going
on," said Wilcox County Sheriff Prince Arnold, one of the
plaintiffs.
          The civil suit charges that Justice Department officials and US
Attorneys "are engaged in a concerted effort to unlawfully interfere
with black citizens' associational and political activities" in the
Black Belt, and that the current investigations discourage citizens
from exercising their right to vote. Federal and local officials are
also accused of ignoring numerous citizens' complaints as well as
other information (such as that collected by federal election
observers) with regard to electoral fraud and intimidation committed
by whites and by black political opponents of the targets of the
investigations.
          In recent weeks, a clutch of FBI agents operating out of Mobile,
Montgomery and Tuscaloosa offices have questioned as many as a
thousand black absentee voters about the casting of their ballots in
September 1984 elections. Civil rights leaders in the region wonder
where these agents have been during the long years of white
intimidation and violence that have accompanied the challenge to
minority rule in the Black Belt.
          The involvement of US Attorneys--whom local black citizens have
taken to calling "federal persecutors"--in actions that intimidate
voting rights organizations and voters in this majority black region
of the South presents yet another face of the Reagan Administration's
national effort 

to push back two decades of civil rights gains. While
not as widely known as Justice's moves to overturn affirmative action
programs in state and local governments across the country, or its
recent decision to oppose (in a US Supreme Court brief) North
Carolina's single member redistricting plan, the trial of the "Marion
Three" and the ongoing Black Belt investigations threaten to reverse
the substantial electoral gains made by grassroots black majorities
since the passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act.
          The discriminatory nature of the Justice Department's Black Belt
investigations can be traced to a Reagan Administration policy
change. Prior to 1984, Justice deferred to local authorities in cases
of mixed federal-state elections in which an alleged crime had no
effect on the outcome of a federal election. Just such an election was
the September, 1984 primary from which the current indictments have
sprung. In the summer of 1984, Justice Department officials--including
William Bradford Reynolds and Stephen Trott--devised a new policy for
federal investigations of election offenses. Now, federal officials
could begin to investigate "political participants" who "seek out the
elderly, socially disadvantaged, or the illiterate, for the purpose of
subjugating their electoral will" or under whose "watchful eye" a
voter happened to "mark his or her ballot." According to Justice's
manual on election crimes, this policy is aimed at persons who
"exploit . . . the franchise of dependent voters."
          The Justice Department has applied this superficially helpful new
policy in an explicitly racial and regional manner, targeting for
investigation only black civil rights activists in Alabama Black Belt
and other Southern majority black counties. According to materials
filed by the NAACP Legal Defense Fund in a pre-trial motion on behalf
of Perry County defendant Spencer Hogue, Jr., Assistant Director of
Justice's Office of Public Affairs John Russell is quoted as saying
that "civil rights leaders and religious leaders" have been targeted
for investigation because of "arrogance on the part of blacks" in the
region.
          "They have come in here, with their indictment papers in their
pockets, to wipe us out," says Sumter County schoolboard member
Wendell Paris, one target of the investigation. "There's another
Reconstruction headed this way. If they get the people they're after,
that's the end for the foreseeable future of black sheriffs in the
Black Belt of Alabama, that's the end of black state legislators,
that's the end of officials elected by the majority of black
people."
          At stake in the Black Belt is the coalescence of black political
power over a multi-county region which has historically been dominated
by some of the Deep South's strongest white politicos. At stake are
scores of local elective offices, administrative control of revenues,
resources and policies, sufficient clout to secure black participation
in government public works contracts and programs, several seats in
the Alabama legislature, influence upon the outcome of a US
Congressional candidacy, and the margin of difference in a close
Senate race.
          Over the past twenty years, blacks in the ten southwest Alabama
counties affected most by the current prosecutions have gradually won
local elective offices. Prior to 1965, whites controlled all ten
county commissions, eleven boards of education and thirty four town
governments. Since the Voting Rights Act, blacks have emerged to fill
the majority of the seats on five county commissions and five school
boards. Blacks now direct the municipal governments of nine towns,
while whites still remain in control of five county governments and
thirty-three of forty-two towns, including every county seat. The 138
black elected officials in the ten west Alabama Black Belt counties
account for forty-four percent of all of Alabama's black elected
office holders. Among this number are three sheriffs, one probate
judge, three state representatives and one state senator.
          Although anything close to exact voting registration figures for
blacks and whites in this ten county area (indeed, throughout the
South) are both hard to come by and reflect voting rolls from which
the dead, departed and duplicitous of both races have not been
cleared, the relative numbers tell a story. From the pre-1965 era when
there were essentially no registered black voters in the Black Belt,
1982 registration figures show more than 70,000 black voters and
62,659 whites.

          "The local white powers and the feds have said that the Black Belt
has gotten too politically strong," says Wendell Paris. "That's what
this is about. This isn't really about a few absentee ballots. And
they've begun by indicting Albert Turner because he is the bellcow of
the Black Belt.
          "Do you think that they're going to come through here and put
Albert and Evelyn in jail, Spencer Hogue in jail, Spiver Gordon and
Rosie Carpenter in jail, John Hulett, Reverend Threadgill in jail--and
you think black folks would come back to the polls>"
          The success of the strategy of collaboration between local and
federal officials to thwart the emergence of black political power in
this majority-black region of the South will be significantly affected
by the outcome and the public reaction to the trial of the three
defendants from Perry County.
          After months of a joint local-federal investigation in which white
law enforcement officials, US attorneys and FBI agents targeted black
civil rights leaders, violated the secrecy of black voters' ballots,
eavesdropped upon the activities of a grassroots voting organization,
intimidated grand jury witnesses, and ignored evidence of election
wrong-doing committed by the largely white, political opponents of the
defendants, federal prosecutors have assembled the approximately two
dozen absentee ballots which the Turners and Hogue are accused of
altering, falsely witnessing and mailing and for which they face years
in prison and tens of thousands of dollars in fines.
          Like Black Belt circumstances in general, the Perry County
situation must be understood in an historical context. For twenty
years Albert Turner, Evelyn Turner and Spencer Hogue, Jr., have worked
through the community organization which they founded, the Perry
County Civil League, to improve the lot of black citizens in their
home county and region. From 1965 until 1972, Albert Turner directed
the Alabama activities of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference
(SCLC). He was a chief lieutenant and confidant of Martin Luther King,
Jr., driving the highways and backroads of Alabama during the height
of modern white resistance.
          "There's no explanation in the world as to how I'm still living,"
Turner has said. I ran the state SCLC office. I was the top
rigger. And I didn't back off of nothing. I went in every county in
this Black Belt and preached and left at twelve o'clock that night and
drove home by myself. And ain't never looked back. Now you tell me
there ain't no God. I don't listen to that kind of talk."
          In the mid-1960s, voting rights activities of the Perry County
Civic League first began to move the county toward political
democracy. The group faced an intransigent land holding class,
descendants of ante-bellum Black Belt planters, who owned the area's
resources, and controlled the local governmental offices. Supporters
of the Perry County Civic 

League also faced the deferential customs,
deep fears and historical powerlessness of the black population in
this region where economic survival has been tied for generations to
the fortunes of local white families.
          The PCCL helped local blacks to fight the battles for integration
of public facilities and institutions. It assisted poor, elderly and
disabled black citizens in making application for federal food,
medical and financial aid. And, over a period of years, using the
wedge provided by the Voting Rights Act, the PCCL chipped away at
white rule in this county where today sixty percent of the population
is black.
          Throughout the Black Belt prior to 1965, blacks were shut-out of
the electoral process. No blacks were elected to public office in
these counties for nearly a century following Reconstruction. The
Turners, now under indictment for alleged voting law violations,
initiated the lawsuits that first brought federal registrars into
Perry County to aid blacks in becoming registered voters. PCCL
supporters have carried voters to the polls, accompanied them past the
uniformed presence of armed white lawmen, and upon request, have gone
with them into the voting booth. As in surrounding counties where
similar efforts were underway, black registration in Perry County grew
steadily, increasing from twelve voters in 1965 to the over
five-thousand names that are on the current rolls.
          Blacks who protested their historical inability to vote in Perry
County were met first with hostility, arrest and violence. In March
1965, Jimmie Lee Jackson, a black voting rights activist was
murdered. When racial violence diminished, white resistance continued
with public and private institutions fighting against integration and
democratic control. Today, Perry County, like the rest of the Black
Belts remains at the heart of Dixie's private school, "Christian
academy" movement.
          "The effects of this history," observes Steve Suitts, SRC executive
director, "are real and direct upon many elderly blacks who have been
victimized by a history of racial exclusion and violence--and by the
low levels of education obtained as a result of government-enforced
segregation.
          "For example, a black woman at the age of sixty-seven today in
Perry County has spent almost three-fourths of her life in segregation
where blacks could not vote, could not attend white schools, could not
use public toilets, and had to have a white person vouch for her in
order to obtain loans or government services. This is why it is
important that the black elderly, who make up fifteen percent of the
Perry County population have private citizens whom they trust to
assist in exercising the right to vote. For many of these blacks,
merely approaching a courthouse or polling place means overcoming a
lifetime of custom."
          "We have problems," says voting rights worker Rosie Carpenter of
Greene County, "because we are competing with white bankers, doctors,
lawyers and businessmen. They sit near the polls to intimidate the
black voters. Dr. Joe P. Smith, a local doctor here, came over to the
black precinct at the Eutaw Activity Center and there were black
people afraid to vote their conviction because he was sitting at that
table.
          "A black lady told me when I went to show her how we were voting,
'I tell you what I'm going to do. Dr. Joe P. been to my house and he
gave me this card and showed me how to' vote. You know he's us
doctor. I'm going to vote the way that the black people are voting,
but I can't let him know it because he is us doctor and we will need
him.'
          "This same doctor," Ms. Carpenter continues, " had white folks
picking up and hauling black folks. Out at the armory I saw white
ladies bringing in their cooks and maids. I had never seen that before
in history. The white mistresses were bringing their cooks in.
          "When Spiver Gordon was running to be the first black elected to
the Eutaw city council," recalls Ms. Carpenter, white policemen were
posted at black voting boxes, in their uniforms and with pistols."
          Absentee balloting emerged as a matter of serious concern to whites
in the Black Belt during the late 1960s, as black registration became
more common. For at least a decade, white absentee landowners and
former residents who have ties of kin and friends "down home," but who
now live anywhere from Birmingham to Chicago to New York have
continued to vote in Black Belt contests at the request of local white
officeholders and candidates. (See "Crackdown in the Black Belt,"
Southern Changes, March/April, 1985.) On election
nights throughout the early 1970s, white officials found electoral
deliverance inside dependable absentee voting boxes filled with
lopsided margins. Federal and state authorities took no notice, and
sought no indictments, against any whites on charges of absentee voter
fraud.
          "Do you know why the roads to white folks' cemeteries are paved in
the Black Belt?," Wilcox County Commissioner 

Bobby Joe Johnson
asks. "It's so people won't get their feet wet if it rains on election
day."
          Black support groups such as the Perry County Civic League sought
to counter white abuse of absentee balloting not only by registering
complaints, but by registering a greater number of black absentee
voters. They have worked to make the election process easier and more
accessible for elderly blacks, for those attending college away from
home, and for the many county residents who must commute to
manufacturing and wood-cutting jobs across county lines.
          "You can't win an election in the Black Belt of Alabama if you
don't have a sophisticated get-out the-absentee vote effort," points
out Annie Thomas, Rosie Carpenter's sister and another experienced
organizer in Greene County.
          Among the black absentee voters in the Black Belt counties are a
disproportionately high number of voters who are illiterate or
otherwise incapable by themselves of understanding the intricate
procedures required in order to apply for, fill out, witness and
return absentee ballots in the proper form. "Without the assistance of
persons knowledgeable about absentee voting procedures and the issues
and candidates involved," says the SRC's Suitts, "many rural black
voters in the Black Belt counties of Alabama, although fully qualified
to vote absentee, would be unable to do so and accordingly would be
deprived of the franchise."
          Virtually all blacks in the Black Belt over the age of twenty-five
were educated, if at all, in substantially inferior, segregated
schools. The level of education for the adult population, especially
the elderly, is very low. By the 1980 census, only forty-three percent
of the total population over the age of twenty-five in Perry County
had a high school diploma, although fifty-seven percent of all
Alabamians of that age had high school diplomas. For the elderly and
black the level of education is much lower. For example, the number of
persons twenty-five years or older with four years of high school
education in 1950 in Perry County--those who would be fifty-five years
or older today--was only 110 of 5,780 blacks.
          Black Belt counties are the state's poorest. To find jobs, many
workers must travel out of their home county everyday. Census data for
1980 shows that thirty-one percent of the working population in Perry
County (home of the Turners and Hogue) work outside the county. In
nearby Lowndes County, the number reaches almost fifty percent. To
vote, these commuting workers must miss work--and jeopardize their jobs
with white employers--or obtain absentee ballots.
          Job and housing discrimination in Black Belt counties has
restricted many blacks to housing in widely dispersed rural areas,
distant from voting locations. For these citizens, absentee balloting
has meant increased participation in elections.
          The right to vote in the Black Belt also remains impeded by
practical barriers. The number of days, the location, and the times at
which a citizen can register to vote this region are limited severely
in comparison to more urban and suburban locations in Alabama.

          "There ain't nobody else out there who understands this stuff like
we do," Albert Turner has said with regard to the efforts of community
organizers to gather the rural black absentee vote. "I mean you got to
know the laws, you got to have dedication. You've got to get up off
your ass and get out there and go to them folks' houses. This ain't no
playtime."
          The Perry County Civic League's get-out-the-absentee vote
organization merits awards rather than indictments. The PCCL has taken
a foothold in the Voting Rights Act and climbed toward political power
by squeezing every possible vote from the county's black
communities.
          About ten or fifteen group leaders are responsible for the
different communities of Perry County. Group captains first identify
potential absentee voters and help them fill out applications for
ballots. State law requires county officials to post, daily, the names
of persons requesting absentee ballots and also requires the ballot to
be sent on the day the county clerk receives the request. Black Belt
voting rights workers watch the courthouse bulletin board to see when
a ballot is in the mail.
          "And we get out there," says Rosie Carpenter, who performs a
similar task in Greene County, "and make sure the voters get their
ballots before anybody else can get them."
          "Over the last several years," says Steve Suitts, "elderly black
voters in the Black Belt have come to depend upon black citizens,
often civil rights advocates, to assist them in filling out their
ballots. The relationship between the activists and elderly blacks is
based upon trust, oral communications and shared assumptions. The
advocate must often interpret the oral instructions of the voter in
light of their past relationship and understanding.
          "For instance, several years ago, I traveled with a black civil
rights worker in the Black Belt as he visited with and assisted
absentee voters. I remember in particular one person we stopped to
see.
          "'I want it done like last time,' said an elderly black voter,
telling the organizer how she wished to vote. Yet, on this election's
ballot there were fewer candidates than 'last time.'
          "Because I was present," Suitts continues, "the black organizer
asked the woman a question he later told me he already had answered
for himself.
          'You want to vote for the blacks that are running?'
          'You know that's it,' she said. ' Don't you make fun of an old
woman like me."'
          Oral tradition and black community consensus inform the political
culture of the Black Belt. To be effective, civil rights advocates
must make make good faith interpretations of oral instructions, which
may not be plain in meaning to others who do not know the assumptions
established over time in their relationship. Yet, if community
organizers approached many elderly and non-literate voters
differently, they would discourage many of these folk from voting, and
they would not have achieved the increased registration and turnout in
the Black Belt since 1965.
          Not all elderly black voters who need and ask for assistance fit
the customary image. "We have some very shrewd and determined old
folks among the elderly population in this Black Belt," says Wendell
Paris. "They are our best voters because they were the ones out there
in the streets getting their heads beaten in 1965. Anybody who was
fifty years old in the movement is seventy years old today. They are
our best voters. They'll get on the telephone and call you and say,
'When are you going to come and get my vote?' They are serious about
voting."
          After ballots are marked, they are collected door to door by the
group captains and brought to a central meeting. Perhaps one person
picks up twenty-five ballots in her community. A man in another
community may gather seventy-five or a hundred ballots. All the
ballots are brought together in order to know exactly who has been
contacted and how many will be mailed. In Perry County, the marked
ballots are then taken to the county seat of Marion to be mailed,
using postage purchased by the PCCL. In the September 4, 1984 primary
Albert and Evelyn Turner mailed about 350 ballots; Spencer Hogue,
Jr. mailed perhaps 150.
          "If you mailed a ballot from the end of the county, out in the
rural area," says Rosie Carpenter, speaking from her experience in
Greene County, "it probably never would get to town."
          White opponents have been known to go through the backwoods roads
of Perry County and take enough ballots out of the mailbox to change
an election.
          "This is what folks like Albert Turner went through the
 
black belt teaching people," say Wendell Paris. That's why the white
folks consider him as the instigator of this."
          When black communities are organized so thoroughly, all the potential absentee voters are easily identified. "We
know," says Annie Thomas, "who is going to college, who's sick, who
goes out of the county to work. And that's what the FBI can't
understand. That's the reason they look for conspiracies and think
there's so much fraud. They know that there is no way for any a single
individual to honestly be able to go out in all these places and know
who's sick or who's going out of the county to work. What surprises
the FBI is the fact that we have a system whereby a local person who
knows the community gets people these applications and ballots. They
don't believe anybody could know all these people and their
situations. But you can't do it any other way and hope to win
elections."
          With gradual but steady success, the Perry County Civic League has
identified, promoted and help elect candidates that represent the
majority of the county's black voters. Yet, as the current
prosecutions demonstrate, the PCCL continues to face a core of diehard
enemies among the county's traditional white leadership, as well as a
small but significant number of black political rivals who at one time
or another failed to get PCCL endorsement for their candidacies.
          White powerholders in the town of Marion and the county of Perry
have not taken kindly to the PCCL's persistent attempts to perpetrate
democracy. The beginnings of the current trial go back to the fall and
winter of 1982-83 when state district attorney Roy Johnson of Marion
convened a grand jury to consider his allegations that the PCCL's
voter-assistance programs were not conducted lawfully. This
investigation targeted Albert Turner and Spencer Hogue, Jr., and arose
from the successful efforts of PCCL endorsed candidates in the
September, 1982 primary and run-off elections. Throughout the Perry
County drama, District Attorney Johnson has acted the defender for the
interests of the county's good white society.
          After Johnson presented his evidence against Turner, Hogue and
other PCCL supporters, the grand jury found no grounds for any
indictments. In preparing the final report of the grand jury, however,
he inserted a passage referring to vote "tampering" and requested an
"outside agency, preferably federal to monitor our elections."
Subsequently, Johnson and others in Perry County, including Probate
Judge Floyd Cooke appearing on local television, have relied upon this
statement in the grand jury report as proof of a local desire and need
for a federal criminal investigation. Interviews with the grand jurors
themselves, however, have established that they did not intend to
request a federal criminal investigation, but were merely endorsing
the kind of routine federal voter assistance and monitoring which
blacks in the area have been requesting and receiving since passage of
the Voting Rights Act.
          By the time that the majority black, locally constituted, state
grand jury had failed to indict any members of the Perry County Civic
League, District Attorney Johnson was already looking for federal
friends in high prosecutorial places. In October of 1982 he wrote to
Assistant Attorney General William Bradford Reynolds of the Civil
Rights Division of the Justice Department. Johnson charged that the
situation in Perry County with regard to absentee voting abuse and
intimidation at the polls was "becoming explosive." He said the county
sheriff's office was unable to protect citizens' voting
rights. Johnson suggested the need for a federal investigation and
asked, not for the usual federal observers, but for federal marshals
to supervise upcoming elections. In reply, Assistant Attorney General
Reynolds wrote Johnson that under provisions of the Voting Rights Act,
the office of Attorney General could not SCLC federal marshals to
conduct local elections. Reynolds suggested that Johnson take his
information to the FBI or the US Attorney for the Southern
District.
          Roy Johnson persisted. Sometime in 1984, the Justice Department and
US Attorney Jeff Sessions of Mobile (who came to his prosecutorial
office the grace of Alabama's first term Republican Senator Jeremiah
Denton), agreed to join Roy Johnson in a federal-local investigation
of members and supporters of the Perry County Civic
League. Conveniently, this effort coincided with the change in US
Department of Justice selective-prosecution policies with regard to
alleged voter fraud, and with the 1984 federal elections.
          In the summer and fall of 1984, with the encouragement of the
Department of Justice, District Attorney Johnson began to pursue an
investigation of the political and voter assistance activities of PCCL
supporters. County officials and would-be officials worked in concert
with the US Attorney and FBI agents to secure prosecution of PCCL

supporters in order to undercut the organization's political
effectiveness. The investigation included the assigning of the local
law enforcement officials to monitor PCCL meetings with listening
devices and to conduct surveillance of PCCL voter-assistance
activities leading up to the September 4, 1984 primary election.
          In addition, after consulting with US Attorney Sessions in Mobile
and Department of Justice officials in Washington, District Attorney
Johnson advised several Perry County candidates or former candidates
for local public office--all of whose candidacies had been or were
being opposed by the PCCL-to file a lawsuit in September of 1984 with
Circuit Judge Anne McKelvy. This suit's request, which was granted,
permitted white Perry County Circuit Clerk Mary Auburtin (a long time
PCCL opponent) to number all absentee ballots and envelopes--without
the knowledge or consent of absentee voters--in such a way that the
names of each voter and the candidates they voted for could be known
to law enforcement officials.
          After the September election, FBI agents took the numbered absentee
ballots, went to the homes of dozens of elderly black citizens,
confronting them with ballots which they thought had been cast in
secret, and began questioning them about "ballot tampering." By law,
federal actions affecting the custody, secrecy and integrity of
ballots must be supported by probable cause and authorized both by
federal court order and the prior approval of the Public Integrity
Section of the Department of Justice-none of which occurred in the
Perry County investigation.
          The next step in the federal-local effort was the convening--in the
fall of 1984--of a federal grand jury, not in the Perry County area
where all the relevant documents, witnesses and targets were, but in
Mobile. Unlike the state grand jury convened in the Black Belt by
District Attorney Johnson in 1982, selection of members of a federal
grand jury--as well as the jury for the Selma trial--drew upon a jury
roll heavily weighted with white, male, Mobilians.
          In the weeks between the September, 1984, primary and the November
general election, dozens of elderly, black Perry County absentee
voters were interrogated at their homes, then--with the help of FBI
agents, Alabama State Troopers, several Marion city police officers
and a game warden--were loaded on buses, and with a Trooper escort,
were transported two-hundred miles to testify about who they had voted
for and who had given them assistance in casting their ballots.
          These tactics of threatening, frightening and intimidating elderly
and uneducated witnesses, and of leading many of them to believe that
their absentee voting somehow violated the law, resulted in inaccurate
and misleading testimony. Among the witnesses whom the Government
carried to Mobile were several whose health was threatened by the
trip; a man in his nineties suffered a stroke and a woman, a
ninety-year-old woman had a relapse of heart trouble. The Mobile
ordeal has convinced some black citizens of Perry County never to vote
again.
          Mobile is not the Black Belt and the federal white grand jurors who
were selected there had little understanding of or sympathy with the
defendants' voter-assistance and voter advocacy activities. Although
members of the Perry County Civic League--and participants in similar
groups across the South--engage in constitutionally protected
activities in helping voters obtain absentee ballots, by endorsing
candidates, and by aiding elderly and illiterate voters to cast their
ballots, these practices offended some of the Mobile grand jurors'
strongly felt beliefs that voting is only proper when each individual
voter votes in total isolation and privacy without the knowledge or
assistance of anyone else. A twenty-nine count indictment was brought
and the trial set for Selma.

          One other theme must be wound into the present story of the Marion
Three and the Black Belt's prospects for political democracy. By 1982,
two local groups--the White Citizens Council and Concerned Citizens of
Perry County--were working actively against the Perry County Civic
League to elect white candidates and the few black candidates willing
to fly a flag of convenience. The appearance of a number of black
"coalition" candidates, as they currently describe themselves in the
Black Belt, represents the most recent innovation in the effort of
white elites to ignore the handwriting on the wall.
          In Greene County, where the "coalition" movement stirred to life in
early 1984 (and where blacks, who count for seventy-eight percent of
the population, have held all of the county's elective offices since
1968), a published handbill announcing the "coalition's"
organizational meeting argued that "if the forces of the radical Black
front" were to be defeated, the "key for the 1984 County election is
to support good, responsible Blacks and to keep Whites out of the
race." This strategy of combining white votes from the town of Eutaw
with an obliging minority of black votes led to several victories in
the 1984 Greene County election.
          "In the long run," Wendell Paris observes with regard to the white
strategy of divide and conquer, "single-member districting is the best
way. Ain't no doubt about it. You see, you can always get a few of
these blacks who ain't into nothing, who just want prestige, and a
white man tells him, 'I'll elect you, cause you are a good guy.'
          "Of course, what hurts these white folks so bad is that we did that
to them. When we first got started we couldn't beat the entrenched
white politicians. So what we did as black people was vote for a
milder white man to move out the giant. And came back then with a
black to beat the rookie white. They're reversing that on us.
          "What they're doing at this point is getting a Tom black elected
and next time they're going in themselves because they hope to have us
split."
          To head off the "coalition" strategy that cripples black voting
strength, Alabama state senator Hank Sanders of Selma along with state
representatives Lucius Black of York, and Jenkins Bryant of Newbern
(black legislators whose own elections testify to the growing
self-determination movement in the Black Belt), navigated a
redistricting bill through the Alabama legislature during the 1985
session. The new law provides for the replacement of the present at
large method of electing county commissioners with new single member
district plans for the counties of Greene, Wilcox, Sumter, Lowndes and
Perry. Already, white probate judge Floyd Cook of Perry County-a
stalwart of old guard opposition-has asked the Justice Department
(under the pre-clearance provisions of the Voting Rights Act) to
object to the new state law.
          "The local people in Marion," observes Wendell Paris, "would almost
rather have war than for the legislature to have passed the
single-member district plan. They believe that Albert Turner will run
for one of the soon-to-be created districts and be elected. If he
does, he could turn out to be chairman of the county commission, which
would be tantamount to being probate judge. They were hoping Albert
would be in jail by now, or on probation with his record ruined and
his influence at a dead end."
          The prospect of representation on Black Belt county commissions in
proportion to the racial distribution of the population is
unprecedented in the region. Supporters of the Perry County Civic
League and voting rights groups in the neighboring counties soon to
apply the colored pencils of redistricting to huge county maps like
the one which fills a living room wall at Albert and Evelyn Turner's
home in Marion.
          "Free the Marion Three" reads the 1960s-style slogan on a tee shirt
now being seen from Selma to Port Epes on the Tennessee-Tombigbee
Waterway. Above the slogan appears a black and white drawing of the
Turners and Spencer Hogue, Jr., as they pose in front of a map of
Marion drawn in single member districts. Will the census tracts belong
to the people?
          "So now," hopes Sumter County schoolboard member Paris, "white
voters in Perry County will get their two seats and we will get our
three. In Greene they will get their one and we will get our four. In
Sumter they will get their two and we will get our four. One person,
one vote and a surer chance at fairness for black and white."
          And so the importance of the current trial in Selma. 
        
        
          Consorting with the Enemy
          By Witt, EliseElise Witt
          Vol. 7, No. 2, 1985, pp. 15-21
          
           February 3. Miami, the cultural
intermediary. Tropical vegetation, flowering bushes in
February. Sultry air and a heavy, full moon. Spanish signs on Cuban
stores, Spanish being spoken. We share a Cuban seafood meal by the
Miami River.
          In the bilingual airport we try out the Spanish we have studied the
last few months. The Aeronica gate and our flight are filled mostly
with Nicaraguans. Three North Americans are aboard to meet a cotton
brigade. There are two students from Boston and California and an
older Mexican American woman who tells us she grew up picking
cotton. "Going to Nicaragua to help with their harvest is the least I
can do to lend support," she says.
          After two hours of flight, someone spots land. At the moment of
arrival in Managua a huge space within me lights up.
           February 4. We get to know our hosts at the
Managua Center for Popular Culture (CPC). The country wide CPC's are
community arts centers which will serve as our sponsors in each town
we visit on our sixteen-day tour. We meet with Arelhy Suarez, head of
International Cultural Exchange, and Cleopatra and Janet, staff
members at the CPC National Office.
          With Cleopatra, we eat our first Nicaraguan lunch. Tortillas,
salad, including pickled cucumbers, carrots and squash, plantains,
beans with cream--my two favorites--and a huge pile of queso
fresco--fresh, white cheese, similar to that my father makes out of
goat's milk in North Carolina.
          After lunch, we decide on a walking tour of Managua. Straight out
from the Hotel Intercontinental--the center for visiting foreign
"dignitaries"--we wander through blocks of empty grass and concrete,
vestiges of the 1972 earthquake and Somoza's bombs. Skeletons of
buildings are everywhere. Populated neighborhoods ring a vast, empty,
city center. Somoza pocketed most of the world-donated relief funds
after the earthquake.
          The Palacio Nacional is now the Palacio de La Revolucion. At the
Plaza Carlos Fonseca Amador the stone reads, "His body is dead, but
his spirit lives on in every Nicarguan." Fonseca, a hero of the
revolution, founded the Sandinsta party.
          The city of Managua is quiet on this first day of our visit. People
have gone to the countryside to pick coffee. The Ministry of Culture
is in the mountains, lending a hand.
          We walk to the Plaza Park, an outdoor amphitheater. On Election
Day, November 2, 1984, all of Managua gathered here for a fiesta. The
great cathedral in the middle of Managua was also ruined by the tremor
of the earthquake, but the frame still stands and we climb to look
over the sanctuary and catch another view of the city.
          From the cathedral we ride the bus. It is as crowded as everyone
told us buses would be. We lose Mary, Rick and Steve when we get
off. They have to ride a stop further before they can make their way
to the back door and step out.

          Walls are covered with folk art and graffiti. And there are the
billboards:  "In Construction Is the Solution." "In
Five Years We Have Built 1500 New Schools. This Is What We Are
Defending." "After the First Step We Will Never Stop Walking."
           February 5.  We leave Managua for the
countryside in a minibus driven by the CPC's Don Felix. In sight of a
large lake and volcanos, one still smoking, we head northwest toward
Leon. Beside the road, trees hang with coconuts, mangos,
grapefruit.
          We are met in the university town of Leon by Carlos Sanchez, the
city's CPC director. The Leon CPC is the former home of a rich
somocista who has fled the country. A huge garden is surrounded by
terraces. Much of the house is roofless and unused but the core of the
CPC is comfortable and well kept. In the library I notice technical
books for workers and a copy of Uncle Tom's Cabin in Spanish. Children
come every afternoon for folk dancing lessons. Many people use the
center for rehearsing, playing music, painting, and as a gathering
place.
          CPC worker Enrique Sandoval takes my guitar and shows me a new
song: "La Consigna," which tells about the struggles the Nicaraguans
have gone through before and since the triumph in 1979. It's a
singable song that everybody in the country seems to know.
          Enrique says he has a guitar but no strings. I had heard that there
was a shortage of strings-indeed of almost any kind of musical
supplies. Before leaving Atlanta I had gotten a donation from GHS
Guitar String Company in Michigan, and now Enrique has a new
set. Together, we play and sing "Guantanamera" by the Cuban, Jose
Marti, and "Flor de Pino," a Nicaraguan song about Sandino.
          Late in the afternoon we walk over to a Leon bank where the workers
are sitting in class listening to a professor of literature from the
University. At first I don't understand a word. Slowly, the Spanish
starts making sense. The professor is telling of Ruben Dario, the poet
laureate of Nicaragua who gave a new identity to Nicaraguan literature
and thought. "Hispanic culture must not be swallowed up by English
culture. The two must live side by side in the Americas."
          The bank employees have been at work all day and, afterwards, like
Nicaraguans throughout the country, they've sat through a
class. Nonetheless, they receive us enthusiastically.
          We start with "Yo Solo Quiero" which is upbeat and carries a
message of international solidarity.
          At last we are making music and our sense of purpose and belonging
seem clearer. This is our first concert in Nicaragua. The introduction
of the songs, in Spanish, begins to flow. The audience, at first
quiet, becomes warm and responsive.
          The program is balanced between our North American
songs--particularly lively jazz tunes--and our international repertoire:
"Bella Ciao," a revolutionary Italian song which is understandable in
Spanish, and "Paidu Vyidu," a Russian acapella love ballad. We end
with "Flor de Pino" which we don't know well yet, but which we know
means much to our audience.
          The best part of the concert comes afterward. People step up to
talk, at first shyly, hesitantly, then more enthusias-

tically. A
half-dozen conversations jumble together. A group of five bank workers
take up where Enrique had left off in leaching me "La Consigna."
          Afterwards, we walk out of town to the University where we share
the women's dorm with students who are there. They rise at four in the
morning to pick cotton until noon, then return for school work all
afternoon.
           February 6.  George King has the video
equipment out today and is shooting a walking tour of Leon led by
Enrique. Since George asks him to repeat explanations and descriptions
several times, I'm really understanding most of what Enrique is saying
about Leon's history and its importance during the revolution as the
center of the student movement. He shows us the Cathedral, the Virgin
of Guadalupe, the prison of the Somoza guards.
          We walk in the cells where barbed wire hangs in vines through the
open roof. Here, prisoners were packed a hundred to a cell. Tomas
Borge, now one of the leaders of the government, was held in such a
cell for six and a half years.
          That afternoon, aboard a truck used for hauling crops, Small Family
Orchestra and a group of young folk dancers ride to where the students
are picking cotton. Along the way we see parakeets and small, bright
yellow birds called gorriones sitting in orange, flowering
trees. "Zopilotes" (turkey buzzards) float over us for several
minutes, following the truck. We pass chacara seca (dry banana), a
small group of houses that belonged to a somocista, but is now a state
farm.
          Oscar, the leader of the student volunteers, asks me if I know "El
Arado" ("The Plow") by Victor Jara. We begin to sing it together on
the bumpy, dirt road to the cotton plantation at Miramar.
          At Miramar young students who have come from the fields sit around
us as we rehearse. Five lie in a hammock--which later breaks with
their weight. Others stretch out on the ground. They clap and sing
along.
          We try out "El Arado," then "Quincho Barrilete," a song about a
ten-year-old boy, killed in the revolution. Sitting in front of me is
a boy who knows all the words.
          At the evening concert, we share the stage with the wide-skirted
folk dance group who came with us from Leon. We sing a Carter Family
song and "Save the Bones for Henry Jones," the sound echoing over the
audience and against a volcano up into the starry sky.
           February 7 . Before we leave the dorm this
morning, Maribel, one of the students gives me a red and black
Sandinista scarf which she sewed herself, then ironed carefully. I
trade her a Photosouth baseball cap from Atlanta.
          We drive from Leon to Granada.
          At an evening concert at Estado Mayor we are proceeded by a solo
singer who sings in a rich full voice the new songs of Nicaragua. Two
folk dancers and a comedian, Jose Senteno, follow. Then we sing. At
the end we are given a copy of The Living Thoughts of
Sandino and a kiss from the companero who presents it to
us. Before the bus takes us home we sit around and share American
songs--North, South and Central.
           February 8.  We practice an Appalachian
spiritual, "Bright Morning Star." An Indian word in the Nahualt
language calls the morning star Nixtayolero, after the corn (nixtayol)
tortillas are made from. So we have translated "Bright Morning Star"
into Spanish. The harmonies fill up the huge room, the high ceilings,
the balcony of the Granada CPC-a former social club for the rich.
          Walking down the street in Granada, we hear that a young doctor
from that city at work in the north of the country has been killed by
contras only hours before. Flags in the city go to half mast.
          In the afternoon we ride by open jeep to Jinotepe, to celebrate the
return of brigades of coffee and cotton pickers. Nearly four thousand
student-aged brigadistas, just arrived, are gathered on the town
square. Each brigade has its own name and group spirit and there are
prizes for the best pickers. There is a parade and fireworks, and
children everywhere.
          Knapsacks are piled on the sidewalks and coffee beans are being
tossed into the air. A truck passes by decorated 

with stalks of
cotton. Between speeches by various brigidistas, we are introduced,
the norteamericanos. After we sing and play there are more
speeches. We sit and talk with a group of children. These ten and
eleven year olds tell us about studying Spanish, English, history,
natural science, mathematics, music and drawing in their school. They
all have on red and black scarves. One of them, Karen, gives me the
button that she earned during the Literacy Campaign. I give her a
figurine of a horse that I have from Germany in my guitar case.
          On the way back to Granada we stop at a fiesta where a band from
the Atlantic Coast, Dimencion Costena is playing. An eight man group,
they play music from the black-Creole, Atlantic Coast culture of
Nicaragua--a mix of reggae and calypso. This is a band that we hope to
bring to the US as the other half of our cultural exchange.
           February 9.  As we drive to the mountain
town of Boaco, we are joined by our new guide, Cruz, from Rivas in the
south of Nicaragua. Even in the mountains, we are traveling through
palm trees and tropical vegetation.
          The microbus is having problems carrying a fifty-five gallon drum
of gas, five musicians with instruments, a video producer with three
packs of gear and from three to fifteen Nicaraguans. On several of the
hills, we get out and push.
          our evening performance is at the movie theater of Boaco, where
we've replaced the evening's feature film. It's the first full length
concert we've done since the one for the bank workers. We include many
Spanish songs as well as our new Southern songs. The faces in the
audience give back a lot and many mouths are singing the Spanish
words. At the end, after "Flor de Pino," we invite the audience to
come and talk, ask questions, offer criticism. We are quickly
surrounded.
          A man with a sleeping daughter draped across his shoulder asks many
questions. He is a schoolteacher who, with his students, is collecting
regional history and folklore.
          "What do the people in the United States think of Nicaragua?," he
asks. "What news do they receive?" "Upon your return, you must speak
at every concert you play, with every person you talk with, about what
we are trying to do here. We want peace and the freedom to develop our
lives and our own history. We feel a kinship with the people of the US
and want to maintain bonds of friendship, not be separated by
misunderstanding."
           February 10.  Norman, a twenty-three year
old architecture student who speaks beautiful English that he learned
in Nicaraguan schools tells me, "Someday I would like to travel to
visit the United States and many other countries. But who knows when
that will be possible. Who knows if that will ever be possible."
          Norman is in the middle of his university studies. But he has to
wait a year, two years. For now, he must pick cotton and coffee and go
to the mountains to protect schools, hospitals and towns from contra
attacks. "Please tell your people, " he says, "that we want to
continue our development as a young country."
          By the time we left Nicaragua, it felt like everyone we met had
lost a relative or a best friend, either during the revolution or
fighting the contras.
          "At least one student from every classroom has fallen," says
Norman. "When you hear that the three most promising students in your
class have been killed, what else can you do but step forward and take
their place? When a child sees his parents killed by the contras, what
else can he do but join the fight himself, even though he is 'too
young.' They put these children in service as cooks or other
non-combatant duties, but they usually wind up in combat by
choice."
           February 11.  We have breakfast with
Eunice, Nelly, Roberto and the other CPC workers who have been
traveling with us. My sister Mary is giving Mateo a crash course in
reading music. Conversations buzz around the table.
          Abel, the regional director of the CPC's in the mountains, thanks
us for our visit with a brief speech and presents each of us with a
copy of a book by Ahmed Campos, a young poet, a friend who was killed
in the early 1980s by the contras. With a heartfelt speech, I thank
them for the three days that we have shared.
          A long bus drive takes us to Matagalpa, into the northern
coffee-growing mountains of Nicaragua, near the combat zone.
          At the Matagalpa CPC we meet Jose Manuel Chamorro Rios. Forty-eight
years old, Chamorro has six children. In our presence, he rarely
speaks without guitar accompaniment. It seems there is no music he
cannot play. He begins with a beautiful Nicaraguan folk melody, then
blithely changes to an intricate "As Time Goes By," followed by a
B.

B. King tune, then punctuates his last sentence with a Flamenco hot
lick. Students are coming in and out, asking advice, playing duets
with Chamorro.
          Although he is one of the best players I've met anywhere, he is
playing a beat-up guitar. Many of his students come in with
instruments missing strings, machine heads, screws and other parts. We
promise to send parts and art supplies to the CPC's we visit.
          We sleep at the National Training School for Theater
Instructors. There were supposed to be twenty-three people in this,
the first, class, but only twelve are here now. The others are away in
the military.
           February 12.  In the evening we play a
concert at a small art gallery where there is a show of Nicaraguan
paintings. People wander in from the streets, look at the paintings
and hear some of our quieter songs.
          We return to the theater school and stay up talking with the
students. "Every night I dream of a white devil who flies over and
swoops down attacking me," begins Oscar, who is studying to be a
theater instructor. "I have a lot of trouble sleeping. I was on the
front for a year. It has made me very nervous. For that year I could
not eat hot food because that would have required a fire. We lived on
canned milk and had to be on our guard every minute. You would enter a
home or school that had been attacked by the contras . . . young
children killed and mutilated. You were there, but you really didn't
see, you couldn't bear it."
          We trade songs with the students. Beth and I sing Joyce
Brookshire's "Whatever Became of Me?: Ballad of Cabbage town," and Tim
Krekel's Kentucky love song "In My Heart." A Bolivian student sings a
ballad from his country, then one of the wilder students cranks up the
favorite "All the Nations Like Bananas." Soon, we're all singing and
dancing.
           February 13.  We spend the day at the farm
of the theater collective, Nixtayolero, outside Matagalpa. Alan Bolt,
the director of Nixtayolero, is also the director of the Nicaraguan
national theater. "People come to this farm," he says, "from all over
the country to participate in theater workshops. We make plays with
them which deal with community problems. And while they are here, they
learn to eat vegetables."

          The rice, beans and corn which make up much of the Nicaraguan diet
are full of protein but lack necessary vitamins and minerals. Bolt's
collective uses theater to teach nutrition. 
Nixtayolero's farm,
besides growing grapefruit, oranges, bananas and coffee, has
introduced many new vegetables into the familiar agriculture.
          That night we play a concert in town on the recreation
square. People are lined up on the edges at first, but as we play,
they move in closer. Afterwards I sit and talk with three girls named
Maria. They sing a song they've learned in school. It's one I learned
in German as a child, "Ach du lieber Augustin." My friends are your
friends. Cuando somos juntas me sientofeliz.
          February 14.  The Matagalpa CPC is
organizing the festivities for the town's 123rd birthday party. This
evening there is to be a street dance. Claudia and Cruz have spent the
afternoon teaching us several Nicaraguan folk dance steps and showing
us how to salsa.
          At the dance two bands play on opposite ends of the main street. We
wander between the bands and the waves of dancers.
          I'm dancing with Chamorro's son Ernesto and Orfilia, one of the
workers from the Managua CPC who has come up to pick coffee. As we
approach, each band seems to be playing "Acarizieme," a Latin pop song
that we have heard often on the radio.
          As a slight drizzle falls we move to sit on the steps under the
roof of a little house that looks out onto the festival. The door is
wide open and we can see several generations of a family inside. They
invite us in for coffee and bring out their photos. Their grandmother
has 120 grandchildren.
           February 15.  We go to San Ramon to pick
coffee. As we arrive, food is being prepared to take to the
pickers. We ride in a truck piled high with tortillas, enormous pots
of beans, coffee and milk.
          The coffee bushes grow on steep slopes and I feel I could fall
straight down. I wear the basket tied around my waist and peel the
beans off the branches. I prop my feet against the trunk of the tree
and lean against the slope of the mountain. Usually only the red beans
are picked, which means going through the trees on several different
days.
          "Today we've started picking every bean-from the greenest to the
most rotten," explains Marcia, a volunteer worker from Canada. "A
coffee picker was killed by contras five kilometers 
away last week,"
she says, "and then, day before yesterday, a Honduran cigarette
package was found just two kilometers away. So we're getting
everything we can."
          Three days later we read in the newspaper that workers and children
had been killed three kilometers from that farm. It was now a war
zone.
           February 16.  We return to Managua,
Nicaragua's city, and feel the trip almost over.
          That evening Beth and I attend the Misa Campesina at the church of
Santa Maria de los Angeles. The church was destroyed in the earthquake
and rebuilt by the community. Every panel of its octagonal shape is
painted with a mural expressive of Nicaragua's history. The mural in
the front arches up over the altar set up in the middle of the
church. The people sit all the way around.
          The priest wears a black cassock with a brightly colored, woven,
Latin American band around his neck. He directs a small group of
musicians near the altar and leads the singing, moving easily around
the church. Over six hundred people are here tonight.
          The Misa Campesina was written by Carlos Mejia Godoy. It contains
some of Godoy's own songs as well as traditional Nicaraguan
melodies. The mass is interspersed with speaking and celebrants'
rising to talk.
          This evening the mass is also a funeral service for a young boy
killed by the contras only two days earlier. The mother of the boy
gets up to speak. In tears her words flow forth. Someone plays a tape
of the son before he went to combat. He speaks of his dedication to
the church, to the 

cause of Nicaragua, to the people of his family and
his neighborhood.
          Beth and I are asked to sing. We choose John McCutcheon's "No Mas,
No More," a song that insists that the people of the world can no
longer be separated by our governments' economic and political
interests. As I sing, I look around the church and see faces from
Scandinavia, Europe, from the Orient, from Africa and all the
Americas.
          It is our last night in Nicaragua.
          
            "I, Ronald Reagan, President of the United States of America, find
that the policies and actions of the Government of Nicaragua
constitute an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national
security and foreign policy of the United States and hereby declare a
national emergency to deal with that threat."-From the executive order
of May 1, 1985. 
            Editor's note:
            The Reagan Administration's Mayday embargo on US-Nicaraguan trade
was accompanied by an even more belligerent action: an ordered end to
direct travel between the two nations.
            By closing US ports and airfields to Nicaraguan ships and planes,
the Administration diminishes the opportunities and makes the means
more difficult for US citizens and Nicaraguans to visit each
other. Reagan's executive order seeks to control and shape public
perceptions, knowledge and discussion about Nicaraguan life and the
Sandinista government. Beyond this, the Administration's unilateral
actions take us a step backward from any ideal of unrestricted travel
across international borders. In this instance, Nicaragua becomes the
more open, welcoming society.
            Prior to Reagan's measures of May 1, many North Americans of
varying political persuasions had traveled to Nicaragua and returned
with views and interpretations of everyday life and national spirit in
that country which consistently contradicted official US
pronouncements. Among the passengers aboard an Aeronica Airlines
flight from Miami to Managua one day in February were the five members
of an Atlanta musical troupe--Elise Witt and the Small Family
Orchestra, on their way for two weeks of performances throughout
Nicaragua. Accompanying the group, camera-ready, was independent video
producer George King. Excerpts from Elise Witt's journal of the trip
(printed below) suggest the sort of personal cultural exchange that
the embargo has now taken away--as have other, related, actions such as
the recent denial of a US entry visa to Nicaragua's Minister of
Culture, the poet Ernesto Cardenal.--AT
          
        
      
    
  