
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 7, Number 5, 1985
        
          The Attack on Voting Rights
          By Mcdonald, LaughlinLaughlin Mcdonald
          Vol. 7, No. 5, 1985, pp. 1-3
          
          The Reagan Administration continues to widen its attack on minority
voting rights. In its latest depredation, it has filed a friend of the
court brief with the Supreme Court arguing that the election of even a
single black to office forecloses a challenge to a disputed election
plan under the Voting Rights Act.
          The case in which the brief was filed, Thornburg
v. Gingles, involves North Carolina's 1982 legislative
reapportionment. In oral argument before the US Supreme Court, heard
on December 4,1985, the Reagan Administration was represented by
Solicitor General Charles Fried. Julius Chambers, director of the
NAACP Legal Defense Fund (and a former president of the Southern
Regional Council), argued against Fried and North Carolina Attorney
General Lacy Thornburg on behalf of a group of black North
Carolinians. Chambers told the Court that "blacks do not have and have
not had an equal opportunity to participate in the electoral process
and to elect representatives of their choice."
          The Department of Justice originally approved the state's plan
under the special preclearance provisions of Section 5 of the Act, but
a three-judge court later ruled that features of the
reapportionment--six multi-member and one single-member
districts--violated another part of the Act, Section 2, because they
had the result of diluting minority voting strength. The court said
that even though a token number of minorities had actually been
elected in the challenged districts, this electoral success was "too
minimal" and "too recent" in history to support a finding that race
was no longer a significant adverse factor or that the elections were
fair. Justice, however, in an effort to defend 

its prior approval of
the plan, is now arguing that the minimal minority success at the
polls is a total bar to a further Section 2 challenge. Reduced to its
essentials, the argument is the familiar one emanating from Reagan
officials these days: that anything more than tokenism in civil rights
is a quota or a form of prohibited affirmative action.
          The Administration, despite its frequent rhetoric to the contrary,
has never supported strong voting rights laws. When the extension of
the Voting Rights Act was debated in the House in 1981, the
Reaganites, saying they were "studying" the question, kept silent on
the critical issue of whether or not to continue Section 5--which
requires certain jurisdictions with long histories of discrimination
in voting to obtain federal approval of new voting laws prior to
implementing them. After the House voted overwhelmingly to extend
Section 5, the Reagan Administration finally showed its hand. It
labeled the House Bill "extreme" and lobbied the Senate to cripple it
by enacting two amendments, one of which would have exempted a large
number of jurisdictions from compliance with preclearance, and another
that would have made it easier for the remaining jurisdictions to
enact new, potentially discriminatory voting laws. The Senate rejected
the proposed amendments and adopted a version of Section 5 similar to
that passed by the House.
          Reagan and friends also vehemently fought the strengthening of
Section 2 of the Act. Section 2 is a general prohibition against
discrimination in voting and is enforced in traditional lawsuits
brought by the Attorney General or by private parties. Unlike Section
5, it applies nationwide and to both old and new voting practices,
even to those which may have been precleared by the Attorney
General.
          The civil rights community advocated the amendment of Section 2 to
include a "results" test for voting rights violations. The issue was
important because the Supreme Court had indicated in a 1980 decision,
City of Mobile v. Bolden, that direct proof of a
racially discriminatory purpose was required in voting cases,
regardless of how discriminatory a particular procedure was in
practice. Given such a burden of proof, minorities could rarely expect
to challenge successfully even the worst of discriminatory
practices.
          Attorney General William French Smith testified before the Senate
on behalf of the Administration in January, 1982 and urged that
Congress reject the amendment of Section 2. He called the amendment
"bad legislation" and a "dramatic change" in the law. It would, he
said, require racial "quotas" for office holding and "proportional
representation." The Senate brushed aside the Attorney General's
objections and voted eighty-five to eight to adopt the results
standard. The President later signed the Act into law in a Rose Garden
ceremony, pronouncing the right to vote "the crown jewel of American
liberties," and, without betraying a trace of irony, said the new
legislation was evidence of his Administration's "unbending commitment
to voting rights."
          In light of Attorney General Smith's Senate testimony, it is not
surprising that the current Administration has taken a hostile view of
Section 2 in Gingles. What makes Gingles critical is that the Court has never before
revised the application of Section 2 to the particular facts of a
given case, and has frequently said that the opinions of the Attorney
General are entitled to deference--at least in cases involving Section
5 in which the Attorney General has unique enforcement
responsibilities. Whether or not the Court will defer to the Attorney
General's opinion in this case, and whether it will establish
restrictive guidelines for the implementation of Section 2, will weigh
heavily on minority voting rights in the years ahead.
          The government's arguments in the Gingles
case, however, are refuted by Section 2 itself. The statute requires
that political processes be "equally open" to minorities and that they
not have "less opportunity than other members of the electorate to
participate in the political process and to elect representatives of
their choice." As the statute makes plain, the right protected is one
of equal, not token, political participation.
          In addition, the statute directs a court to consider "the totality
of circumstances" in evaluating a violation, and provides that the
extent to which minorities have been elected to office "is one
circumstance that may be considered." If black electoral success is
merely one of a number of circumstances which may be considered in a
Section 2 case, a finding of minimal or any other level of minority
candidate success could not, as the government argues, be
sufficient.
          Congress, in fact, expressly considered and rejected the very
argument now being pressed by the Reagan Administration in the Supreme
Court. The Senate Report which accompanied amended Section 2 provides
that while minority electoral success is a significant and relevant
factor, it is n_ the be all or end all--it is not dispositive.
          Otherwise, the majority might evade the statute by manipulating the
election of a "safe" minority candidate to 

give the appearance of
racial fairness to a discriminatory election system. According to the
Senate Report, which drew upon the language of prior voting rights
cases, "were we to hold that a minority candidate's success at the
polls is conclusive proof of a minority group's access to the
political process, we would merely be inviting attempts to circumvent
the Constitution." Lower federal courts in Alabama, Texas, Louisiana
and Illinois have decided cases on the basis of the new law and have
predictably rejected the claim that minimal or token black success at
the polls forecloses a Section 2 challenge.
          The necessity of considering factors other than the election of
minorities in the North Carolina case is particularly apparent in
House District 21 (Wake County) and House District 23 (Durham County),
where black candidates have enjoyed perhaps their greatest electoral
successes. One black has been elected to the three-member delegation
from District 23 since 1973, and a black was elected in 1980 and 1982
to the six-member delegation from District 21. This success, however,
as the trial court found, was the result of single-shot voting by
blacks, i.e. blacks giving up the right to vote for all delegation
members and instead concentrating their votes on a few black
candidates. Black voters in District 23 forfeited up to two-thirds of
their voting strength and black voters in District 21 forfeited up to
five-sixths of their voting strength in this fashion in order to elect
candidates of their choice to office. Whites, by contrast, can vote a
full slate without forfeiting any of their voting strength and still
elect candidates of their choice. Such a system does not provide black
voters equal access to the political process and is another reason the
mere election of minorities to office should not foreclose a dilution
challenge. The totality of circumstances must always be considered.
          Aside from being contrary to the statute and legislative history,
the government's Section 2 argument is in opposition to the whole
thrust of modern voting and civil rights enforcement. Congress enacted
the Voting Rights Act in 1965 as an "uncommon exercise of
Congressional power" designed to combat the "unremitting and ingenious
defiance of the Constitution" by some jurisdictions in denying
minority voting rights. Based upon the continuing need for voting
rights protection, Congress extended and amended the coverage of the
Act three times--in 1970,1975 and 1982. It would be illogical to
suppose, that in amending Section 2, Congress suddenly retreated from
its general commitment to racial equality in voting and adopted a
statute providing only tokenism and minimal political
participation.
          Modern congressional enforcement of civil rights in other areas has
similarly not been one of minimalism. Congress, for example, clearly
intended to protect more than token access to public accommodations or
employment when it enacted the Civil Rights Act in 1964, or token
service on juries when it enacted the Federal Jury Selection and
Service Act in 1968. It makes no more sense to say that token minority
success at the polls forecloses a voting rights challenge than to say
the renting of a single motel room to a black forecloses a challenge
to a discriminatory public accommodations policy, or that the presence
of a few blacks in the jury pool bars challenge to a discriminatory
jury selection system.
          If the Reagan Administration prevails in its Supreme Court
argument, it will be impossible to eradicate discriminatory election
procedures in places where minority candidates have had some
success. On the other hand, jurisdictions in which blacks have had no
success will be encouraged to manipulate the election of a token
minority and block challenges to their discriminatory election
schemes. There will be no incentive for voluntary compliance with the
Voting Rights Act and every inducement for circumvention. The Reagan
Administration will have accomplished in the courts what it failed to
do in the Congress--to significantly retard the nation's twenty year
progress in minority voting rights.
          
            Laughlin McDonald is director of the Southern Regional
Office of the American Civil Liberties Union.
          
        
        
          The Importance of Black Legislators
          By Willingham, AlexAlex Willingham
          Vol. 7, No. 5, 1985, pp. 3-5
          
          The Southern state legislature, once the incarnation of
backwardness in Southern politics, now stands to become a center for
innovation in regional affairs. The formerly all-male, all-white,
one-party bastions of prejudice and reactionary social policy have
been changing in recent years. More change lies ahead. Political
moderates, Republicans, women, and labor representatives have won
seats, lending a bit of diversity to the legislatures. Blacks, whose
lack of power has characterized the South's "peculiarity," have been
elected in unprecedented numbers.
          Before 1963, when Leroy Johnson served in the Georgia senate, no
black had won election to a Southern legislature since early in this
century. Whites in the post-Reconstruction 

era eliminated blacks from
public office--indeed, from registration and voting. Disfranchisement
of blacks (and by the early 1900s, of poor whites as well) was the
linchpin of the modern South's undemocratic order. The effects of
disfranchisement have been shared not only by Southern state
legislatures but by county and city governments.
          Today 176 blacks--almost half of all black legislators in the
country--serve in the legislative chambers of the eleven Southern
states. Change, once begun, has been swift and dramatic. In Louisiana,
where blacks account for nearly a third of the population, there was
only one black in the legislature as late as 1970. Today, there are
eighteen, one of whom has been selected to the second ranking position
in the state's lower house. 
          As important as these Southern changes have been, they co-exist
with old continuities. For example, the racial composition of Southern
state legislatures does not yet reflect the black population. Black
legislators make up only ten percent of all Southern legislators, yet
blacks exceed twenty percent of the South's population. The forty-six
member South Carolina senate received its first black member in 1983
(see Southern Changes, May/June 1983). The number increased to four in
1984, but an additional ten blacks would have to be elected before the
senate would be representative of the state's black population.
          The situation is the same in the other Southern states. It would be
necessary to more than double their current numbers for black
legislators to achieve parity. In addition, reflective of continuing
racial polarization, the overwhelming majority of those so far elected
come from single-member districts composed primarily of black
voters--districts created in recognition of the special difficulties
facing black candidates.
          And, resistance continues. The creation of single-member electoral
districts has come under attack in North Carolina (see Laughlin
McDonald's article in this issue of Southern Changes) where state and
Reagan Administration officials have defended, before the US Supreme
Court, a state legislative election plan that would make tokens of
single-member districts and black voting strength.
          Recent resistance has also taken the form of Justice Department
collusion with state and local white powerholders in a so-far
unsuccessful two-year campaign involving the intimidation of rural
black voters and the prosecution of voting rights activists in the
Alabama Black Belt (see Southern Changes, May/June 1985).
          Blacks who do win legislative office find the chambers that await
them are fundamentally inhospitable to change. The accumulated wealth
and practiced despotism of business interests make for fierce
resistance or tempting accommodation. Setting out to represent the
hopes of their largely poor and powerless constituencies, black
legislators can find themselves stymied by the immovable, or swayed by
the irresistible.
          
            Winning Without A Majority
          
          The problems and prospects facing Southern black legislators were
discussed at a meeting in early November in Atlanta. Two questions
dominated the talk of black legislators and their staffs: To what
extent can the newly elected officials protect and expand their ranks?
What can they do to be effective in their present situations?
          "Winning Without a Majority," a conference paper prepared by Steve
Suitts addressed the question of effectiveness. "For continued
strength and increased clout," Suitts observed, "black legislators as
a group cannot depend upon a growth of their numbers. They must find
other means by which to make their current numbers count for more in
the legislative process." Several strategies were suggested: jawboning
presiding officers, influencing the implementation of policy at the
administrative agencies, proposing "local legislation", creating study
commissions, and blocking or changing legislative proposals that
require an extraordinary majority (i.e., a two-thirds or three-fourths
majority). Black state legislators now have the opportunity and the
numbers in most Southern states to win some important issues without a
majority of the votes. Suitts drew examples from several states;
legislators in attendance suggested others.
          
            
              Blacks in Southern Legislatures, 1985
              
                State       
                Reps.
                Senators
              
              
                Alabama     
                19       
                5
              
              
                Arkansas    
                4        
                1
              
              
                Florida     
                10       
                2
              
              
                Georgia     
                21       
                6
              
              
                Kentucky    
                1        
                1
              
              
                Louisiana   
                14       
                4
              
              
                Mississippi 
                18       
                2
              
              
                North Carolina 
                13    
                3
              
              
                South Carolina 
                16    
                4
              
              
                Tennessee   
                10       
                3
              
              
                Texas       
                13       
                1
              
              
                Virginia    
                5        
                2
              
            
          
          Illustrative of one tactic are the Sanders Bills, so named for
Alabama State Senator Hank Sanders of Selma. These "local bills,"
passed as custom decrees by the Alabama legislature upon request of
the legislators from the affected counties, allow local governments in
Senator Sanders' Black Belt district to change their method of county
elections from at large to single member districts. The Sanders bills
should insure proportional, bi-racial county and municipal governments
in these majority black counties.
          The effectiveness of black legislators will also be determined by
their tenure. Seniority will not only make them more "equal" with
their long-serving white colleagues but will let them look back on
their own experiences, make adjustments, form alliances.
          As for black increases in the present number of state legislators,
certainly the numerical potential exists throughout the South. In
Georgia, for example, which has the largest number (twenty-seven) of
black legislators, an additional thirty-two would have to be elected
before 

the racial make-up of the general assembly represented the
state's population. Black representation in the South Carolina Senate
is only ten percent of what it would be if proportionate to the
population; Mississippians would need to elect forty additional black
legislators.
          It seems clear, however, that the "easy" advances have already been
made; the "tough" cases remain.
          Most black representatives are elected in urban areas. Their
districts have compact populations, ready availability of candidates,
higher prospects for registration and voting, and a broader tolerance
for bi-racial politics. These patterns are nearly reversed in rural
areas where few blacks have been elected to the legislatures and where
opposition has been most persistent in opposition to black political
participation.
          In the past, and at least through the 1990 census, most hopes for
increasing the number of black legislators have lain and will lie with
redistricting. Now, with a visible, if small, number of blacks among
their ranks, white, Southern state legislators will claim even more
reason to resist substantial additions. The presence of even a few
blacks becomes a justification for no change.
          Token change in the racial make-up of Southern legislatures will
kill the promise of recent years. This would be tragic. In the coming
decade, state policies will be crucial in dealing with plant closings,
community development, job training, and in finding sources of money
for health care and public education.
          Business and corporate representatives are pressing their state
legislative agendas with the intention of avoiding anything and
everything which does not contribute to profitmaking. Moral guardian
groups are intent on retaining the death penalty, assaulting welfare
programs, and invading personal privacy. The election of black
legislators--like any search for popular participation
strategies--should speak to all Southerners who seek to counter the
powers of reaction.
          
            Alex Willingham lives in Shreveport, Louisiana. As a
Rockefeller Foundation Fellow, he is writing a book about Southern
reapportionment.
          
        
        
          Economics and a Murder Trial
          By Durr, VirginiaEliza Heard (Virginia Durr)
          Vol. 7, No. 5, 1985, pp. 14-17
          
          The road to Hayneville and Selma (No. 80) leads to dreams of
asphodel and honey. The old cotton fields are now meadows filled with
slow-moving fat cattle that drift from one patch of shade to the
other, and in the Spring they are covered with waves and sheets and
masses of the loveliest and most fragile flower that grows, the wild
primrose. It varies in color from deep pink to white and it covers
the fields, the banks, the center stretches of the road and is
accented and made even more beautiful by patches of purple vetch and
crimson clover. In the Spring it brings the Black Belt glory and along
with the primerose comes the honeysuckle, which is almost too sweet to
be borne and drugs one's senses with its overpowering perfume.
          The day of the first Liuzzo trial I went alone through the empty
countryside. A gentle wind rippled the primroses and brought the scent
of the honeysuckle and I felt I was in Sleeping Beauty Land,
everything was silent, empty and stretched for miles and miles under
the empty sky. I began to feel a keen loneliness and was glad to pull
in at a filling station to ask my way of a Negro youth who was keeping
the station and the store. "Where was she shot?" I asked him while he
serviced the car.
          He knew at once whom I meant and said: "Just half a mile down the
road on the left hand side."
          I went just half a mile down the road and there on the left hand
side were still the skid marks, scarring the dirt where the car ran
off the road with her dead hands on the steering wheel. And on this
day in Hayneville a man accused of murder was on trial charged with
shooting her fair in the face as he and others came abreast of her
car. A cold-blooded, calculated, planned and above all impersonal
murder was charged, for she was said to be utterly unknown to them,
and simply killed on "principle."
          When I finally got to the Courthouse in Hayneville, through more
miles of deserted countryside, I found the Courthouse surrounded, by
cars and by State Troopers, great, burly men with guns on their
hips. I went past the Courthouse and up the pleasant street of white,
green-shuttered houses and parked in front of one of the nicest, with
a lovely, flowering garden of azaleas. I noticed a string along the
fence with red rags tied to it and I thought it was to keep birds away
until a woman called to me from the porch, holding the screen door
half open. Her voice was not pleasant when she said: "You can't park
there, I don't want anyone parking there in front of my house. Didn't
you see the string?"
          So the red rags were not for the birds but for me, and this set the
tone of the reception the "outsiders" received in Hayneville that
day. I finally found a parking place and came back to the Courthouse,
thinking, "I'll never get in, there'll 

be such a crowd." But when I
did get in the courtroom was only half filled. It is a beautiful, tall
windowed, high ceilinged old room, and a bird kept flying through the
windows which were framed in green. Inside the courtroom, the jurymen
were being chosen, sunburned, angular, lean, and white. They looked
like all of the other thousands and thousands of white men I had seen
all my life in all of the little country towns of the South and I
liked their looks and felt at once a sense of kinship with them, so I
resented the whispered comment I heard in front of me, "Just a bunch
of red necks."
          This came from the newsmen who filled the front of the spectator
side of the courtroom. There were over half a hundred: a clotted group
of handsome, squat, powerful, long haired and well dressed Englishmen
on the front row, and behind them the taller, cigarette smoking,
nervous Americans from all the great papers, magazines and TV and
radio chains, and mixed in with the Americans and English, a few
others from all over the world, notably one young Swede who seemed to
have the most feeling about the murder of anyone there.
          When lunch time came I was invited by a local reporter, a
red-headed boy from Tallapoosa County, to have lunch with the newsmen
on the lawn in front of the old white Courthouse. Every drug store and
restaurant was closed tight against the "outsiders" but we were
permitted to stand in the street and get a cold drink and food handed
to us through a wicket. We sat in a circle and the Tallapoosa boy and
I were the only ones in the whole group who looked for a
conviction. All of the newsmen were intelligent, experienced, polite
and cynical and, I must also add, contemptuous. They looked on this
trial as just another of the folkways of a barbaric Southland, for
which they felt no affinity and no responsibility. They spoke casually
of "fascism" and Nazism, compared the South to South Africa and seemed
to think that here in the South was the repository of original sin.
          Since none of the white residents of Hayneville would speak to
them, they asked me a thousand questions: "Was it true that one man in
Lowndes County was known to have killed 15 Negroes and never even got
indicted?"
          I had heard the same tale, and thought of an old Negro who came by
once to cut the grass and in the course of the morning I found he had
come from Lowndes County and worked for Mr.-------, whose reputation
as a killer was so bad. I asked him, "Weren't you afraid working for
Mr. ------?"
          The old man shook his head, "No, Ma'm, I won't scared of him. He
won't no bad man, he wouldn't do nuthin' to you--that is less you
'sputed wid him." Evidently the old man had "sputed wid him" as he was
seeking sanctuary in Montgomery County.
          I also remembered the tale of Walter Jones. The first white man
ever hung in Montgomery County, he had come up from Lowndes County
where he too was known as a killer, and had hunted down his enemy, a
white doctor who was sitting in a train at the Union Station, and
poked his gun in the window of the train and "blown his head off." I
had heard that tale with embellishments a hundred times. And the tale
always ended the same way, "The mistake he made was doing his killing
in Montgomery County. If he had just waited till Dr.------ got back to
Lowndes County he would never have been hung."
          By the second day it was plain to see that the man charged with
Mrs. Liuzzo's killing would not get hung and probably not
convicted. The feeling in the courtroom was not one of horror at the
slaying but resentment that it had taken place in Lowndes County.
          During that day's recess the reporters and I again had dinner on
the grounds. Here, various groups sat rigidly to themselves, all
eating from the same kinds of boxes and on the same ground, but having
no word to say to each other.
          The KKK group was large. There were there, also, weary looking
women, handsome children and sunburned men, country people, some who
had gone to town and worked in the steel mills and suffered the
torments of Hell in the burning mills and the dirty, smoky, town of
Bessemer. Such as they are not only exploited but looked down on by
the other citizens of Birmingham and Jefferson County. "Poor white
trash" is the usual term applied to them. I remembered from way back
when the men in the mills worked twelve hours a day and 24 on the
swing shift in heat and flame and danger, with no union and no
protection or compensation for the injuries they received. They lived
when they were off work in dingy company houses, traded with scrip at
dingy company stores, and all day the smoke hovered over them, lit by
the flames at night. We used to ride out to see a "run" and watch the
little figures working with the molten steel and wondered how any
human beings could stand the heat.
          And out of this life had come many Alabama Ku Kluxers, the men
looking slightly askew and their women weary and with that vague, wan
look that suggests pellagra some time in their lives. Some looked as
if they had had pellagra of the body, mind and soul. And I thought
once more of the times when the mills closed down and the men were out
of work and the credit cut off at the store and while the mules were
watered and fed, the people were thrown out of the houses, not fed,
not watered, and expected to provide for themselves. I had worked with
the Red Cross all during the Depression and I could look back now and
see vividly just these same kinds of people coming to the door, so
ashamed of having to take charity and trying to excuse themselves for
their failure, as if it was their fault. And I remembered the gaunt,
fanatic preachers who hollered at them that they had sinned and that
their suffering was the price of their sinning, and who, as though
they did not have Hell enough on this earth, sent them to an even
hotter Hell each Sunday.
          Out of these conditions had come these fanatic, joyless, pitiful
and ignorant people who were filled with hate of the "riggers" and of
all who helped them out.
          There was a public relations man at the trial, looking like a
parody of an old southern colonel, big, black hat, string tie, dirty
white shirt and dirty white whiskers, passing out hate literature
which went after not only the "riggers," but the Jews, Communists, and
Catholics, the U. S. Supreme Court, the President of the United States
and the United Nations. Hatred seemed to take in just about
everybody.
          Sitting close to the Klan was the Law, the big, powerful state
troopers, not only close to them in presence but it seemed in spirit;
there was a communion there between the Kluxers and the troopers that
could not be missed. Once 

again the newsmen said contemptuously,
"Storm Troopers." Sitting to themselves were the County Prosecutor and
his Assistant and the Judge, proper gentlemen doing a painful duty,
and not happily.
          The third day was the worst when the defendant's lawyer, Matt
Murphy, began his wild tirade to sway the Jury. A massive man, he had
the same noble brow and handsome looks of all the famous aristocratic
Percys from Mississippi. His uncle and grandfather had been general
counsels for the steel mills and had been gentlemen and men of
integrity, and had both died of their own hands.
          But here was a descendant of the Percys, having descended into the
Pit and dragging all of the rest of us with him. He was unutterably
and unnaturally vile. He accused the poor, dead woman of the nastiest
sort of sex mania and the Negro boy of even worse. She had only come
South for purposes of sex, she was driving with the Negro boy for
purposes of sex, she was going out to park with the Negro boy with no
other purpose than sex. He piled vileness upon vileness until the
whole courtroom stank. And all in the name of "Southern Tradition and
pure white Southern Womanhood."
          The visiting reporters were not so polite that day. I was the only
example of pure, white and certainly southern womanhood they could
talk to and they made it plain that they did not think I was worth the
vileness that had taken place in my name and in the name of all "pure,
white southern womanhood." Since I am an old time grandmother I did
not get offended as I agreed with them; I, too, felt shame that such a
cesspool should have overflowed into the courtroom in the name of
"southern womanhood." I did not feel we women deserved it but then I
did not feel we protested enough against it, and still again I did not
think we were the real reason.
          Killing may be done in our name but the real reason is much deeper
and has been there forever, since the beginning of man, and that is
the desire of one man to keep another man in bondage to him, so he may
live at ease and the other man must do the hard work.
          Life is pleasant in Hayneville and in all the other little southern
towns; that is if you are white and have even a small amount of
money. You wake up in the morning to the sound of someone stirring in
the kitchen, and come in to a hot breakfast. During the middle of the
day, you sit on your porch and direct a black man digging in the yard
while another black woman cooks the dinner, cleans up the house,
washes and irons the clothes and, above all, looks after the
children. Cheap labor is one of the greatest luxuries of life, and to
give it up is one of the hardest things there is to do.
          And it is cheap labor and the power over cheap labor that is at the
heart of Bloody Lowndes. The men accused of killing Mrs. Liuzzo were
jobless steel workers.
          Many southern white men have been brutalized and oppressed
themselves and given nothing to comfort their souls but that "they
were better than riggers." They feed their souls on it and when that
support is removed, they must face the fact that they are nothing but
"poor, white trash" with no one to look down on, but rather looked
down on from above with the same kind of contempt and disgust they
show Negroes.
          There in Hayneville, the white men who own the county 

and control
it simply want to "keep the Negro in his place." They are determined
to do so and when the jury came with a mistrial I realized that even
this was better than I had hoped for. Matt Murphy had not won them
over with his mad cries of "race mixing." As the jurymen said for the
newsmen, "That guy must have thought we were awful ignorant." (But
they did not find the Ku Kluxer guilty. In a second trial, a jury
exonerated him. The defendant and other Ku Kluxers had taken delight
in their actions and were still proud of themselves after the first
trial was over, as they went to konclave after konclave to be
worshipped and admired.)
          I drove back by myself after the trial was over. Still alone in the
empty countryside, for the first time I became afraid, and for a
moment I had a feeling of terror such as I never had before. Just
halfway between Hayneville and the junction with No. 80, on. a
perfectly empty road with empty fields stretching on either side, I
saw a big red car coming behind me which must have been going at least
80 miles an hour, and I thought it was going to strike me deliberately
and knock me off the road. It came close but it did not strike, and I
saw those pale, fanatic, askew faces of the defendants, Matt Murphy
beside them as they roared off up the road. I stopped the car until I
could get my breath and my heart could stop beating so hard. I knew
killing would strike again. For the white people of Hayneville had
condoned the killing whatever they might say; there was killing in the
air.
          And it did strike again. This time a young white Episcopalian
priest was killed by a white man who comes from one of the "leading
families" of Lowndes County and a young Catholic priest lies at the
point of death from the same man. Bloody Lowndes is living up to its
reputation and this time it is not just "uppity riggers" they are
killing but "outside agitators" who come "meddling." I remember a
white woman I knew from Hayneville who told me once, "I simply love
living there; it is all just like one big family." Of course she meant
the white people, and they do all stick together; the idea that the
white man who killed the Rev. Mr. Daniels would be convicted was
absurd.
          Matt Murphy was not at this trial. he had been killed in an
automobile wreck not long after the Liuzzo trial. But vileness was
there, and this time the charge was merely manslaughter, and the
verdict--not guilty.
          I cannot see that just the "right to vote" is going to change these
kinds of counties very much, and they are the dark heart of
Dixie. Lowndes County has a population of 81% Negro and 19% white, but
the white people own almost all the land and practically all the
businesses. So the Negro people are economically entirely dependent on
the white community. Even if the federal government does come in and
insist that they be registered and their right to vote protected, what
can the government do about giving them a living if they are fired?
After the Civil War the federal army was down here to protect the
right of the Negroes to vote, but they never got the 40 acres and a
mule, and much good voting did them. As soon as the federal troops
were withdrawn, the Negroes were thrown back into bondage.
          Into these Black Counties have gone the SNCC kids, jeans, beards,
sandals and long haired girls, with courage that seems almost beyond
belief. They live in the Negro communities, work and eat there and
never walk alone, every minute in danger, and they know it. Suppose
they do get every Negro registered, what then? How are the Negroes in
Lowndes County going to make a living? The landowners were already
going from cotton to cattle to get rid of labor, and now they are
mechanizing as fast as they can to get rid of even more labor. Lincoln
said "a necessitous man is not a free man" and I see no way to make
them free until they have a way to make a living, and in Lowndes
County I don't see how they are going both to live and be free. Will
Bloody Lowndes live up to its name again and again before it gives the
Negroes life, freedom, and a living?
          
            (Editor's Note) In October 1965, the Southern Regional
Council published "Economics and a Murder Trial" in its journal New
South. The essay, a first-person account of the Hayneville, Alabama,
trial of a Klansman indicted for the murder of civil rights worker
Viola Liuzzo, was one of several written in the mid-1960s by Virginia
Foster Durr under the pen name of Eliza Heard. At the time, Virginia
and her husband, attorney Clifford Durr, lived on a small farm near
Wetumpka, Alabama. (See the accompanying article in this issue of
Southern Change.)
            "I was the only Southern white woman who went to the trial,"
Virginia Durr recalls. "I drove over by myself to Lowndes County every
day. And all the journalists--who had come from throughout the
world--wanted to take my picture. I said, 'You think you're doing me a
favor, but you 're just going to ruin me. All that will come out in
the papers, you'll be gone to the next story, and I'll be the one who
gets the late night phone calls and the threats. ' So they didn't run
the pictures.
            "For the same reason, when I wrote about the trial for Maggie Long
(editor of New South)--and I had to write about it because I was so
mad--I felt I couldn't sign my name.  Cliff and I were in enough
trouble already. So I thought of Eliza Foster--my great-grandmother on
my father's side--and Virginia Heard--my father's mother--and I signed
"Eliza Heard."
          
        
        
          Grace and guts
          
            
              Durr, VirginiaVirginia
               Durr
            
          
          Vol. 7, No. 5, 1985, pp. 17-21
          
          
            Steve Suitts:
          
          I have the privilege of introducing Virginia Durr, a remarkable
Alabamian whose life, spanning more than eight decades of Southern
history, chronicles the best aspirations of our region. In the great
movements which the South has witnessed, which it has endured, and
which it has triumphed in this century, Virginia Durr has been an
irreplaceable part. It started even as she was a child.
          At the age of six, in Birmingham, she went out to take a place in
the day's great crusade--for prohibition in Alabama. Virginia, the
daughter of one of Birmingham's most respected Presbyterian ministers
got ready to march. She was handed a sign that read: "Please save my
father from the demon rum."
          Even at six she knew that the daughter of a well-known minister
ought not make such a public declaration. For the first and perhaps
only time, she decided to forgo participation in a political
movement.
          Not too much later, when across the South working people began to
organize and the struggle of the times became one between labor and
capital, Virginia Durr took up with labor. When the Depression hit,
Virginia-vice-president of the Junior League of Birmingham--didn't see
just the small niceties of country club parties, she saw the hungry
bellies. She saw the children wearing flour sacks, and she began to
make a difference in the way she lived her life and in the way that
people had to endure their lives in the South.
          Ten years before the creation of the Southern Regional Council,
Virginia Durr became one of the young men and 

women who went to
Washington with the New Deal. When Franklin D. Roosevelt declared that
the South was the nation's "number one economic problem," Virginia
Durr already knew that. She was already working with a variety of
Southerners concerned with the problems of poverty.
          Virginia Durr was never, thank God, the soul of discretion. When,
after World War II, the nation began to tolerate the intolerance of
McCarthyism, when white liberals separated themselves from long-time
friends and stood silent when they were persecuted, Virginia Durr
stood up and shrieked in protest. When people were ostracized,
Virginia Durr would invite the accused to dinner and drinks. She
protested that people cannot be guilty by their associations.
          Twenty-five years before the creation of the Southern Regional
Council's Voting Rights Project, Virginia Durr knew that one of the
keys to a democratic South lay in the voting rights of blacks and poor
whites. She successfully led the anti-poll tax efforts throughout the
region and in the halls of Washington.
          Now for most people that would be a lifetime of accomplishment. But
Virignia Durr was only getting started. When she returned to Alabama
from Washington--because she would not hold her peace during the days
of McCarthyism--she continued to work and to live a life which
deserves all honor. When Rosa Parks decided she was not going to get
up on the bus, Virginia Durr was there supporting that effort as an
activist, as a friend, and as a white liberal.
          When the Civil Rights Movement began to grow, the Durr farm near
Montgomery was a center of activism, of retreat, and of planning for
the defense of the defenseless. Long days and nights were spent there
by many prominent leaders--and by many whom you never will know.
          During the development of the anti-poverty programs, and later, the
anti-war movement, the Durr farm continued to be a place where young
men and women could understand that there had been others who came
before them and that these would be others who would suppport them.
          With the advent of the feminist movement, Virginia Durr was
there. She said, "I've been doing that all my life." And she had. When
it comes to speaking her mind, Virginia makes a few exceptions about
being a Southern lady.
          And now, in this age in which not fear but indifference causes
inaction, Virginia Durr's continues to be the voice of
encouragement. She is a woman who combines grace and guts. Her
upbringing and even her voice reminds us of the accent of an
aristocrat, of Southern high culture. But her beliefs, her actions,
and her works are those of an egalitarian.
          It's hard for me to recall Virginia without also recalling Cliff
Durr. Their lives together showed how social commitment and personal
loyalty to another can be lovingly and effectively combined. When
Virginia faced Mississippi's Jim Eastland before the Senate witch hunt
committee that he conducted in the South to find the communists and
bolsheviks, she said, "My name is Virginia Durr. I'm the wife of Cliff
Durr." A woman whose accomplishments were her own, she recalled
herself in association with the person she most loved.
          For a long time Virginia said about her sister Josephine and her
brother-in-law Hugo Black that their lives were a marriage of justice
and mercy. Virginia should know. For she is one of the region's models
of both cherished qualities. Today we're privileged to have a
Southerner whose contributions to a democratic South have been a
mighty force in shaping the opportunties that exist in the region. But
just as important, Virginia Durr has given us the loveliest example of
how to conduct a life with a commitment of love for those around
us.
          
            Virginia Durr:
          
          I have to explain that a few of the remarks just made about me,
which were absolutely beautiful, were not true. The only reason I went
to a prohibition meeting when I was age six is that my uncle, Malcolm
Patterson, who was the governor of Tennessee, was running on a
prohibition ticket. I went to hear him speak and ask people for votes,
which he didn't get.
          I got interested in the labor movement in Birmingham because my
brother in-law, Hugo Black, was the lawyer for the unions. He used to
have terrific fights with Forney Johnson who represented the big
corporations. Because they didn't have any workman's compensation,
Hugo would win big awards from juries. So I'd go to the courts
sometimes to hear him argue.
          I was delighted to hear that my father was a distinguished
Presbyterian preacher with the South Highland Church in
Birmingham. But my father actually was thrown out of the
church. There's a reason if you want to hear it.
          My grandfather, who lived in Union Springs, Alabama, was quite well
off. He thought the Civil War was the stupidest thing in the wide
world and the "fire-eaters" as he called them, William L. Yancey and
all, he couldn't stand. So he sent his cotton to Liverpool and told
the merchants there to save his money until after the War. Nearly
everybody else in Alabama had nothing but Confederate money--which
wasn't worth starting a fire with--but he had gold.
          I was brought up to be very much ashamed of him because he wasn't a
Confederate. My other grandfather had fought with General Nathan
Bedford Forrest and was in the last battle at Selma; he was the hero
of the family--this great dashing Confederate Colonel. But my
grandfather in 

Indian Springs was not mentioned very much except that
he was rich--"thank God."
          My father had the opportunity of a very good education. He went to
Southwestern, then to Hampden-Sydney, then Princeton, and on to
Edinburgh in Scotland. He travelled to Berlin and Heidelberg. He went
to the Holy Land. When he came back from his long tour he had some
slight doubts in his mind as to whether every word in the Bible was
literally true and dictated by God. He wrestled with it for a long
time but he never said much about it.
          In fact, I used to go to church, Sunday School, evening service on
Sundays, prayer meeting on Thursday night. We'd have morning prayers
every morning and I'd sit there praying for food.
          In those days, preachers sent you to hell at every meeting, and
hell wasn't just somewhere down yonder, it was right under the
floor. So I grew up in absolute terror of hell.
          My father preached hell fire and damnation but he did have his
doubts. One day the session of the Presbysterian Church came to him
and said they'd suspected he wasn't really very orthodox, in fact they
thought he was heretical. They told him he had to swear that he
absolutely believed that the whale swallowed Jonah and then spat him
up alive three days later just as happy and healthy as he ever
was. They said they'd give him a week to decide.
          My poor father came home and walked up and down for a week. We took
him coffee. My mother cried. I was only seven or eight, and I
cried. My brother and my sister cried.
          He was in a terrible fix for a man in his forties. He had a wife
and three children, and while his mother had that plantation down in
Union Springs, you know it wasn't as good as it used to be in the old
slavery days.
          At the end of the week he came back and said he didn't believe
it. They threw him out of the whole Southern Presbyterian Church and
declared him to be a heretic. And I swear to God that it was easier to
be raised in Birmingham as a communist than as a heretic.
          My father had to go into business, and of course he wasn't trained
to go into business. And, I hate to tell this, but my father had been
raised in the days just after slavery and he really thought every
black person had been born to wait on him. So to be poor and
struggling too, and he went into an insurance business where he sold
insurance to black people.
          Steve Suitts said in his introduction how aristocratic I was, well,
I can assure you the poorer we got the more aristocratic we became.
          But you see my trouble has been--and the reason that I have caused
so many rifts--is because I cannot differentiate between politics and
people. If I get into a movement, then I like the people or I don't
like them. So when I got into the civil rights movement, I liked the
people in the movement. I really adored Mrs. Mary McLeod Bethune. I
felt like they were fighting for me. I was fighting, but they were
fighting for me.
          Because to be a sweet Southern girl in the South during the days
that I grew up you were just like you were a prisoner. You couldn't do
anything. You couldn't even kiss the boys without feeling guilty. The
great ambition of a Southern girl's life was to marry well.
          I got into voting rights and civil rights almost by chance. I got
to Washington during the New Deal. My husband was working in the
Reconstruction Finanace Corporation. I was free to go into town and
take part in the women's division of the Democratic National
Committee. I was urged to do that by my brother-in-law, Hugo
Black. Hugo really believed that women's place was in the home; he
certainly believed that his wife's place was in the home. But he
encouraged me--I never knew why, but he did.
          So I went in and got thrown immediately into the fight to get rid
of the poll tax. I won't go all into that, but we did get rid of
it. Now everybody can vote. And, in Alabama, guess who they vote for?
Year after year after year? George Wallace. They voted for him over
and over and over and they'll probably vote for him this time if he's
breathing.

          Then came the question of the segregation and one heroine of that
era in the South was Rosa Parks. My husband went down and got her out
of jail.
          When you talk about heroines, you take a woman who makes
twenty-three dollars a week in Montgomery, who has a sick husband,
sick mother--she has to support these two people herself. Living in a
public housing project. And she's a very well-educated woman.
          As you know, there were a number of Yankee women who came South
after the Civil War and started missionary schools for black
women. The school that Rosa Parks attended there in Montgomery was
called Mrs. White's School. These Yankee school teachers taught these
black women reading, writing and arithmetic--but also to be
citizens.
          Rosa Parks claimed the right of being a citizen of the United
States. She sat there on that bus and was arrested and taken to
jail. But it was a beginning of the end of segregation.
          What we have to tackle now is poverty--no jobs, no money, nothing
for people to do. And infant mortality. Let me give you an example.
          Is anybody here a Baptist? Well don't get your feelings hurt when I
talk about the Baptists and what happened in Montgomery, Alabama.
          The Baptist Hospital in Montgomery, Alabama is the biggest hospital
in the city. It has a fine neo-natal care center and doctors who make
lot of money. It has a beautiful statue out front: Jesus holding out
his arms, saying, "Suffer all little children to come unto me." So
poor, pregnant women--many of them teenagers--began to bring the
little children unto them. They brought them from hither and yon, from
all over South Alabama.
          What did the hospital do? They closed the beds. Those big white
bellied Baptists closed those beds and said, "If they can't pay,
they've just got to die." And they didn't even take the statue of
Jesus down.
          Well, my son-in-law got real mad. He's a very nice guy, although he
is a Yankee, he's not as much a Yankee as he used to be. He led
several marches and helped get back some of the beds, not all of them
by any means. NQW this is a rich hospital with a rich bunch of
trustees and what they're doing is killing these children.
          Now people tell me, "You can't go back to the New Deal. The New
Deal is over. It's a new time."
          Well it may be a new time, but hell, the New Deal took people who
were without jobs--black and white--and put them to work. They had WPA
and CCC and NYA and PWA.
          And I think the government ought to give people jobs now. And if it
takes public ownership of the means of production--now that's a
serious phrase, that'll get you in jail every time if you say it at
the wrong place. But I believe that to let people be idle and let the
country go to hell while we put all our money into Star Wars is
insane.
          I believe all the nice things I've heard this morning about what to
do about food stamps, or about public housing, or 

about learning a new
skill. But what the hell use is it to learn a new skill when you can't
get a job?
          We've got to do something. Fiddling around isn't going to do any
good. I don't think we can just make it a little better here and a
little better there. We've got to do something more drastic.
          Now you all in Georgia have the lousiest bunch of
congressmen--except for Wyche Fowler--that I have ever known. We have
an even worse bunch of congressmen in Alabama. We have a crazy man, a
senator named Denton. I mean he's not just crazy in a polite sense of
the word, he's crazy in the medical sense of the word.
          And, of course, you cannot run for office in Montgomery, Alabama,
or anywhere unless you get on a television. And the people who get on
the television the most seem to get elected the most. In Montgomery
we've got Bill Dickinson, probably the worst congressman in the United
States. He's on the television every fifteen minutes because he's paid
for by the war contractors. He is the head of an armed services
committee.
          So, are we going to be run by this bunch of bastards or not? I mean
this is what we get down to. They're corrupt. They're stupid. They're
absolutely lacking in any compassion. And Reagan is the worst.
          Are we going to sit here and go to hell with the atomic bomb and
become specks of dust or are we going to get busy and get mad and do
something?
          I mean Meese, Reagan--they're just such terrible people, they're
not even real. They're just reflections of tv or movies. We've got to
get busy because the people who are now running the country seem
determined to destroy us. We've got to get together and stand up for
ourselves or we're all going to be dead.
          
            During the forty-first anniversary meeting of the
Southern Regional Council, held in Atlanta in early November, civil
rights advocate Virginia Durr spoke at a luncheon held in honor of the
publication of her autobiographical recollections. (Virginia Durr's
book, Outside the Magic Circle, edited by Hollinger Rarnard of
Birmingham, is available from the University of Alabama Press.) Below,
Southern Changes presents excerpts from Virginia's luncheon talk, as
well as the introductory comments of SRC executive director Steve
Suitts. Steve Suitts.
          
        
        
          The Origins of the Montgomery Bus Boycott
          By Garrow, David J.David J. Garrow
          Vol. 7, No. 5, 1985, pp. 21-27
          
          Jo Ann Gibson Robinson moved to Montgomery, Alabama, in the late
summer of 1949 to join the English Department at all-black Alabama
State College. A thirty-three year old native of Culloden, Georgia,
twenty-five miles from Macon, she was the twelfth and youngest child
of Owen Boston Gibson and Dollie Webb Gibson, landowning black farmers
who prospered until Owen Gibson died when Jo Ann was six years old. As
the older children moved away, operating the farm grew more difficult
for Mrs. Gibson, who eventually sold the property and moved into Macon
with her younger offspring. Jo Ann graduated from high school there as
the class valedictorian, and went on to earn her undergraduate degree
at Fort Valley State College, the first member of her family to
complete college. She took a public school teaching job in Macon and
married Wilbur Robinson, but the marriage, heavily burdened by the
death in infancy of their first and only child, lasted only a short
time. Twelve months later, after five years of teaching in Macon, Jo
Ann Robinson moved to Atlanta to take an M.A. in English at Atlanta
University and then accepted a teaching position at Mary Allen College
in Crockett, Texas. After one year there, Mrs. Robinson received a
better offer from Alabama State, and moved to Montgomery.
          Mrs. Robinson was an enthusiastic teacher and responded
energetically to her new position at Alabama State. She also became an
active member of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, which many Alabama
State professors attended, and she joined the Women's Political
Council, a black professional women's civic group that one of her
English Department colleagues, Mrs. Mary Fair Burks, had founded three
years earlier when the local League of Women Voters had refused to
integrate.
          It was a blissful fall, Mrs. Robinson later remembered. "I loved
every minute of it. " Just prior to Christmas she made preparations to
visit some relatives in Cleveland for the holidays. Storing her car in
a garage, she boarded a Montgomery City Lines public bus for the ride
to Dannelly Field, the municipal airport. Only two other passengers
were aboard, and Mrs. Robinson, immersed in holiday thoughts, took a
seat towards the front of the bus. Suddenly, however, she was roused
from her thoughts about her family by angry words from the driver, who
was ordering her to get up.
          "He was standing over me, saying 'Get up from there! Get up from
there,' with his hand drawn back," she later recalled.
          Shaken and frightened, Mrs. Robinson fled from the bus. "I felt
like a dog. And I got mad, after this was over, and I realized that I
was a human being, and just as intelligent and far more trained than
that bus driver was. But I think he wanted to hurt me, and he did
. . . I cried all the way to Cleveland."
          That experience convinced Mrs. Robinson that the 'Women's Political
Council ought to target Montgomery's segregated bus seating for
immediate attention. "It was then that I made up . . . my mind that
whatever Icould add to that organization that would help to bring that
practice down, I would do it," Mrs. Robinson recalled. "When I came
back, the first thing I did was to call a meeting . . . and tell 

them
what had happened."
          Only then did Mrs. Robinson learn that her experience was far from
unique, that dozens of other black citizens, primarily women, had
suffered similar abuse from Montgomery bus drivers. Over the previous
few years several black women, Mrs. Geneva Johnson, Mrs. Viola White,
and Miss Katie Wingfield, had been arrested and convicted for refusing
to give up their seats. Earlier in 1949, two young children, visiting
from the north and unfamiliar with Montgomery's practice of reserving
the first ten seats on each bus for white riders only, even if black
passengers were forced to stand over vacant seats, also were hauled in
for refusing a driver's command to surrender their seats. Some
oldtimers in Montgomery remembered how the black community had mounted
a boycott in the summer of 1900, when the city had first imposed
segregated seating on Montgomery's street cars, a boycott that had won
a refinement of the city ordinance so as to specify that no rider had
to surrender a seat unless another was available. Nonetheless, drivers
often made black riders who were seated just behind the whites-only
section get up and stand so that all white passengers could sit.
          Mrs. Burks thought black toleration of those seating practices and
other driver abuse, such as forcing black passengers to pay their dime
at the front, and then get off and board the bus through the rear,
side door, was scandalous. "Everyone would look the other way. Nobody
would acknowledge what was going on," Mrs. Burks remembered. "It
outraged me that this kind of conduct was going on," and that so far
no black community organizations had done anything about it.
          Black activism did exist in Montgomery, even though it had not yet
focused upon bus conditions, despite the widespread
complaints. Several years earlier Arthur Madison, a New York lawyer
who came from one of black Montgomery's most prominent families, had
returned home and tried to stimulate black voter registration, but
white legal harassment had forced him to return to New York. The
outspoken pastor of Dexter Avenue Baptist Church, Rev. Vernon Johns,
who had come to Montgomery in 1948, regularly denounced the bus
situation, but many blacks viewed Johns as too unpredictable and
idiosyncratic to assume a leadership role in the community. The brutal
rape of a black teenager, Gertrude Perkins, by two white policemen
earlier in 1949had led Rev. Solomon S. Seay to repeated efforts to
obtain justice in the case, but white officials had brushed off his
complaints.
          Another visible black activist was Pullman porter Edgar Daniel
Nixon, a member of A. Philip Randolph's Brotherhood of Sleeping Car
Porters and a local leader of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (NMCP). Nixon served as Alabama state
president of the NMCP in 1948-1949, and also devoted much time to his
Alabama Progressive Democratic Association, a black alternative to a
state Democratic Party that continued to discourage black
participation despite the 1940s' demise of the "white primary." Nixon
regularly mounted one initiative after another; in 1954 he succeeded
in winning 42 percent of the vote in a losing race for a seat on the
party's Montgomery County Democratic Executive Committee, a tribute
not only to the more than 1,500 black voters that Nixon and other
activists like businessman Rufus A. Lewis had helped register, but
also to the grudging respect that many whites felt for Nixon's
tireless efforts.
          Lewis, a well-known former football coach at Alabama State College,
had been especially active not only in encouraging black registration
but also in trying to unify black Montgomery's civic
activism. Although some colleagues viewed Lewis and Nixon as low-key
rivals for top leadership, Lewis' Citizens Club served as a regular
hang-out for politically-minded blacks; his Citizens Steering
Committee, formed in the fall of 1952, looked to find ways to exert
some black political influence over Montgomery's city policies.
          Equally if not more important to the political life of black
Montgomery than Nixon's Progressive Democrats, the NMCP branch, or
Lewis' Citizens Committee, however, was Mrs. Burks and Mrs. Robinson's
Women's Political Council. By the early 1950s Robinson had succeeded
Burks as president, and the core membership of regularly active
participants numbered at least thirty women such as Thelma Glass, Mary
Cross, Irene West, Euretta Adair, Elizabeth Arrington, and Zoeline
Pierce, who were either faculty members at Alabama State, teachers in
the local, segregated public schools, or wives of relatively
well-to-do black professional men. More than either Nixon's circle or
Lewis', these middle-class women were the most numerous, most
reform-minded group of black civic activists in Montgomery.
          The first notable opportunity for black political influence to make
itself felt came in November, 1953, in a special election to fill one
vacant seat on the three-member Montgomery City Commission. The
black-supported victor, Dave Birmingham, a genuine racial liberal, won
fifty-three percent of the vote in a contest that involved little
discussion of race and allowed Birmingham to construct an electoral
coalition of blacks and lower-class whites.
          Impressed by their success in representing the balance of power,
black civic activists, led by the WPC, met in late 1953 with
Birmingham and his two racially moderate colleagues, Mayor
W. A. "Tacky" Gayle and George Cleere, to voice three complaints about
the racial practices of the municipally regulated and chartered bus
company, Montgomery City Lines. Blacks having to stand over empty,
white only seats on crowded buses was a constant insult and
problem. So 

was most drivers' practice of forcing blacks to board
through the rear door. Additionally, while buses stopped at every
block in white sections of town, it was only every other block in
black neighborhoods.
          The three commissioners, Birmingham in particular, listened
politely, but nothing came of the session.
          Undaunted, Mrs. Robinson, who served as the WPC and black
community's principal spokesperson, obtained another audience with the
commission in March, 1954, and reiterated the three complaints. The
WPC, which historian of Montgomery J. Mills Thornton III has
accurately termed "the most militant and uncompromising organ of the
black community" in pre-1956 Montgomery, also presented the commission
with specific details of driver abuse of black passengers. This time
the city officials agreed to alter the bus company's practice of
stopping only at alternate blocks in black areas, but they and the
city's lawyers insisted there was no way, under Alabama's state
segregation statutes, that any changes or improvements could be made
in bus seating practices. Robinson and other black representatives
contended that elimination of the reserved, whites only seats, and a
halt to the practice of making blacks surrender seats to whites on
overcrowded buses would eliminate the most serious problems, but the
white officials rejected the WPC's proposal that the front-to-back
seating of whites, and back-to-front seating of blacks, with no one
having to stand over an empty seat or give one up after being seated,
would in no way offend the state segregation law.
          Mrs. Robinson and her colleagues were unhappy over the city is
refusal to show any flexibility. In early May, the Commission did
approve the hiring of Montgomery's first four black police officers,
but many black Montgomerians attached greater importance to the
ongoing prosecution of a black teenager, Jeremiah Reeves, who faced
the death penalty for the supposed rape of a white woman in 1951.
          Mrs. Robinson was already thinking of how to put more pressure on
the Commission to improve bus conditions when, on May 17, came a news
announcement that strengthened her determination. The United States
Supreme Court, in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka and five
companion cases challenging racially segregated public schools, ruled
that governmentally-mandated school segregation was unconstitutional
and that the sixty-year-old doctrine of "separate but equal" was no
longer valid.
          Four days after the landmark Brown decision, Mrs. Robinson typed a
letter to Montgomery's Mayor Gayle, with a copy to Montgomery City
Lines manager J. H. Bagley. She, thanked Gayle for the March meeting
and for the change in the buses' alternate block stopping practice,
but reiterated the WPC's great unhappiness at the ongoing seating
policies. Then she politely voiced the threat she had quietly been
recommending to her black leadership colleagues.
          
            Mayor Gayle, three-fourths of the riders of these
public conveyances are Negroes. y Negroes did not patronize them, they
could not possibly operate.
          
          
            More and more of ourr people are already arrangin
with neighbors and friends to ride to keep from being insulted and
humiliated, by bus drivers. There has been talk from twenty-five or
more local organizations of planning a city-wide boycott of buses. We,
sir, do not feel that forceful measures are necessary in bargaining
for a convenience which is right for all bus passengers. We, the
Council, believe that when this matter has been put before you and the
Commissioners, that agreeable terms can be met in a quiet and
unostensible manner to the satisfaction of all concerned.
          
          Mrs. Robinson pointedly noted that many Southern cities, including
Mobile, already were using the front-to-back, back-to-front segregated
seating plan that Montgomery refused to implement. "Please consider
this plea, and if possible, act favorably upon it," she concluded,
"for even now plans are being made to ride less, or not at all, on our
buses. We do not want this."
          Despite the extremely gentle and tactful language she employed in
her letter to Gayle, Mrs. Robinson was hoping that black community
sentiment would support a bus boycott to force the Commission's
hand. Another meeting with the white officials on June 1 registered no
progress, but Mrs. Robinson found only modest interest in her boycott
idea throughout much of the black community, and placed the idea on a
back burner for the time being.
          Next to bus conditions, the second civic concern troubling the WPC
and other black activists was the decidedly inferior quality of the
segregated parks and recreation facilities; available to black
Montgomerians. One step the WPG had identified as a partial remedy was
the appointment of a black member, such as WPC member Mrs. Irene West,
to the 

city's Parks and Recreation Board. Mrs. Robinson voiced this
request at a January, 1955, meeting of the City Commission, but
despite supportive comments from Birmingham and Mayor Gayle, nothing
happened. Instead, attention turned to the upcoming mid-March city
elections, and a public candidates' forum that E. D. Nixon's
Progressive Democratic Association held on February 23 at the black
Ben Moore Hotel.
          All three incumbents, plus their major challengers, Harold McGlynn
for Gayle, Frank Parks for Cleere, and Sam Sterns and Clyde Sellers
for Birmingham, attended the first-of-its-kind event and faced
questions about bus conditions as well as the Parks and Recreation
appointment. A majority of the contenders endorsed a black appointment
to the Parks Board, while others avoided any specifics on either
topic. Although the open soliciting of black votes by so many white
candidates seemed impressive, one of Birmingham's challengers, former
Auburn University football star and state highway patrol officer Clyde
Sellers, saw the convocation, and Birmingham's sympathy for black
concerns, as just the opening that was needed to cut into Birmingham's
previously solid white working class electoral support.
          Sellers' strategic desire to make race an election issue got a
coincidental boost on March 2 when a fifteen-year-old black girl,
Claudette Colvin, refused to give up her bus seat, well toward the
rear of the vehicle, so as to accommodate an overflow of
newly-boarding white passengers.
          Police officers were able to drag Colvin from the bus only with
considerable force. The incident immediately sent the black leadership
into action. Mrs. Rosa Parks, a seamstress and long time NAACP member
who was adult advisor to the NAACP Youth Council, to which Claudette
Colvin belonged, immediately began soliciting financial assistance for
the her legal defense, as did Mrs. Parkst good friend Virginia Foster
Durr, one of Montgomery's few racially liberal whites.
          Rufus Lewis' newly formed Citizen's Coordinating Committee, yet
another leadershipunity organization which included E. D. Nixon and
the WPC's Thelma Glass among its top officers, quickly sent out a
mimeographed letter, "To Friends of Justice and Human Rights," seeking
Colvin's acquittal, a reprimand of the bus driver involved, and
clarification of the oft-ignored city provision that no rider had to
give up a seat unless another was available.
          Nixon and Mrs. Robinson, thinking that Colvin's case might supply
an opportunity for a court challenge to the constitutionality of
Montgomery's bus seating practices, interviewed the young woman, but
concluded that her personal situation and the particulars of the
arrest precluded using the incident as a test case. Robinson and
others met, unsuccessfully, with city and bus company officials to
seek dismissal of the charges.
          Claudette Colvin was quickly convicted for both assault and battery
and violating the segregation statute at a March 18 trial, only three
days before the city election. When Colvin's attorney, young
Montgomery native Fred Gray--who had been one of Mrs. Robinson's
Alabama State students before attending law school in Ohio--filed
notice of appeal, the prosecutor indicated that he would pursue only
the assault and battery charge, not the segregation issue.
          On the 21st, Sellers narrowly bested Dave Birmingham, who declined
a possible runoff because of bad health, while Frank Parks, who had
received black support, defeated Cleere. Disappointed both by the
Colvin outcome and Birmingham's loss, the black leadership hoped for
other opportunities.
          In June, Mrs. Robinson, Gray and other black representatives met
once again with city and bus company officials. Despite Gray's
observations about Mobile's practices, the white officials,
particularly bus company lawyer Jack Crenshaw, adhered firmly to their
contention that no changes could be made legally in bus seating
practices. Popular complaints about the seating situation and driver
abuse remained at high levels, but no further organized initiatives
were undertaken.
          One relative newcomer to the city, Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr.,
who had succeeded Vernon Johns as pastor of Dexter Avenue Baptist
Church in mid-1954 and accompanied Robinson's delegation to the early
March meeting with the city, attributed a good part of the inaction to
what he later termed "an appalling lack of unity among the leaders"
and a "crippling factionalism." More of a problem than competition
among the active leaders, King thought, was the pervasive indifference
of many middleclass black Montgomerians to any political or civic
concern. Economic vulnerability and fear of white retribution
understandably inhibited some, but "too much of the inaction was due
to sheer apathy," King later wrote.
          Although Mrs. Robinson still husbanded her hope that the WPC could
at some point launch a boycott of the buses, the late summer and fall
of 1955 passed with relative quiet; the October 21 arrest of one black
woman, Mrs. Mary Louise Smith, for refusing to surrender her seat
became known to most of the black leadership only several months
later.
          On Thursday evening December 1, Mrs. Rosa Parks, the NAACP activist
who had assisted Claudette Colvin's defense, felt tired and weary from
her seamstress work at the Montgomery Fair department store when she
boarded one of the Cleveland Avenue route buses at Montgomery's Court
Square for her regular ride home. One stop later, after taking a seat
in the first row behind the ten whites-only seats, Mrs. Parks and the
three other black passengers in that row were ordered by the driver,
J. F. Blake, to get up so that one newly-boarding white man--who could
not be accommodated in the front section--could sit. Although the
other three people complied, Mrs. Parks silently refused, and two
police officers were summoned to place her under arrest and transport
her to the city jail.
          Word of the incident spread quickly. E. D. Nixon called the jail to
learn about the charges, only to be refused an answer by the officer
on duty. Knowing that attorney Gray was out of town for the day, Nixon
called white lawyer Clifford Durr, who like his wife Virginia, already
knew Mrs. Parks. The Durrs and Nixon drove to the jail to sign the
bond for Mrs. Parks' release. A Monday trial date was set for the
charge of violating the city's segregated seating ordinance.
          While attorney Durr explained to Nixon and Mrs. Parks that they
could win her acquittal since there had been no other seat available
for her to take when driver Blake demanded hers, Nixon argued that the
arrest of Mrs. Parks, 

a widely-known and well-respected person in
black Montgomery, was precisely the opportunity the black leadership
had long-awaited for challenging the entire bus seating
situation. With some hesitance Mrs. Parks agreed, and Nixon went home
to plan his next steps.
          Later that evening Fred Gray returned to town, learned of
Mrs. Parks' arrest and immediately called Mrs. Robinson, who he knew
to be the "real moving force" among the black
leadership. Mrs. Robinson in turn called Nixon. They quickly agreed
that the moment for launching the long-pondered boycott of the buses
was at hand.
          Nixon would make the calls to set up a black leadership meeting
Friday evening; Mrs. Robinson and her WPC colleagues would immediately
start producing and distributing handbills calling upon black
Montgomerians to stay off the buses on Monday, December 5. "We had
planned the protest long before Mrs. Parks was arrested,"
Mrs. Robinson later emphasized. "There had been so many things that
happened that the black women had been embarrassed over, and they were
ready to explode." They knew immediately that "Mrs. Parks had the
caliber of character we needed to get the city to rally behind us."
          Wasting not a moment7 Mrs. Robinson sat down at her typewriter with
a mimeograph stencil and typed the same message on the sheet several
times:
          
            This is for Monday, December 5, 1955
          
          
            Another Negro woman has been arrested and thrown
into jail because she refused to get up out of her seat on the bus for
a white person to sit down.
          
          
            It is the second time since the Claudette Colbert
(sic) case that a Negro woman has been arrested for the same thing
This has to be stopped.
          
          
            Negroes have rights, too, for if Negroes did not
ride the buses, they could not operate. Three-fourths of the riders
are Negroes, yet we are arrested, or have to stand over empty
seats. If we do not do something to stop these arrests, they will
continue. The next time it may be you, or your daughter, or
mother.
          
          
            This woman 's case will come up on Monday. We are,
therefore, asking every Negro to stay off the buses Monday in protest
of the arrest and trial. Don 't ride the buses to work, to town, to
school, or anywhere on Monday.
          
          
            You can afford to stay out of school for one day if
you have no other way to go except by bus.
          
          
            You can also afford to stay out of town for one
day. If you work, take a cab, or walk. But please, children and
grown-ups, don't ride the bus at all on Monday. Please stay off of all
buses Monday.
          
          The stencil complete. Mrs. Robinson called one of her Alabama State
colleagues, business department chairman John Cannon, who had access
to the school's mimeograph room and readily agreed to join her for a
long night of work. By daybreak they had run off thousands of sheets,
cut them into single copies, and organized the brief flyers into
batches for distribution to dozens of WPC members and their
friends. After teaching her first morning class, Mrs. Robinson and two
students set out in her car, dropping off the bundles to helpers all
across Montgomery. Thousands upon thousands of the leaflets went from
hand-to-hand throughout black Montgomery.
          While the WPC's network put the boycott into effect, E. D. Nixon
made dozens of phone calls to assemble the black leadership. Like
Robinson and her WPC colleagues, Nixon knew that for their protest to
win mass support, the city's ministers, not always in the forefront to
black civic initiatives, would have to be convinced to give the effort
their full and active support. The WPC's post-haste distribution of
the announcements, Robinson and Nixon knew, ought to short-circuit any
arguments that now was not a good time for a boycott, even before they
could be voiced. As Fred Gray later emphasized, "the ministers didn't
know anything about those leaflets until they appeared."
          Although the Friday evening leadership caucus had some difficulties
in overcoming the autocratic style of one black pastor, agreement was
reached on further publicizing the Monday boycott and on holding a
Monday evening mass rally to assess the first day's success. The
leadership would meet again Monday afternoon to plan the rally, and
amidst scores of weekend phone conversations between the various black
activists, a consensus gradually emerged that perhaps a new,
all-encompassing community organization ought to be created to oversee
this unique effort.
          Mrs. Robinson and the WPC membership knew that with the protest
going public, their state-payroll positions at Alabama State, and the
budgetary vulnerability of the college to white political retaliation,
required that they 

remain in the background. As Mrs. Burks later noted
in explaining why the origin of the boycott leaflets was treated as a
closely-guarded secret well into the 1960s, "the full extent of our
activities was never revealed because of the fact that we worked at
State."
          Monday morning the amazing success of the protest was readily
apparent as onlooker after onlooker observed no more than a handful of
black bus riders on Montgomery's largely empty vehicles.
          Also on Monday, Mrs. Parks, in a very brief trial, was convicted of
failing to obey-the driver's command to surrender- her seat. Hundreds
of black Montgomerians, in a remarkable scene, gathered at the
courthouse to show their support. That afternoon, when the black
leadership assembled, Rufus Lewis--to be certain that leadership did
not fall into unskilled hands--quickly nominated his pastor,
Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr., to be president of their new community
group, the Montgomery Improvement Association. A surprised King
hesitantly accepted, and the leadership agreed to make continuation of
the boycott beyond their one day success, contingent upon mass
sentiment at the evening rally.
          A huge and enthusiastic turnout for the evening event quickly and
convincingly answered that question. Now the community leaders turned
their efforts to organizing substitute means of transportation for the
thousands of black Montgomerians eager to forsake a transportation
system that most had assumed was an unpleasant but unavoidable fact of
daily life.
          Thursday morning, with the boycott four days old, more than half a
dozen MIA representatives, including King, Robinson and Gray, met with
city and bus company officials under the auspices of the bi-racial
Alabama Council for Human Relations. Even though King emphasized to
the whites that "we are not out to change the segregation laws," but
only to win the driver courtesy and first come, first seated
front-to-back and back-to-front seating policy that the WPC had been
requesting for well over a year, the white officials would not budge
from their insistent refusal that no changes in seating practices
could be implemented.
          The whiles' complete intransigence, in the face of a black
community effort of such impressive proportions, surprised the black
leadership, who had entered into those: first negotiations believing
that their modest demands ought to make for a quick settlement. Since
"our demands were moderate," King later recalled, "I had assumed that
they would be granted with little question." Only in the wake of that
unproductive meeting did the MIA leaders begin to realize that it was
the very fact of their challenge, and not the particulars of their
demands, that had meaning for white Montgomery.
          To the city and bus company officials such as Commissioner Clyde
Sellers and attorney Jack Crenshaw, the real issue was not which
precise seating plan was legally permissible, but the defense of
segregation's policies as an exemplar of the underlying doctrine of
white racial supremacy. On that question no compromise could be
possible; there either was superiority or there wasn't. "They feared
that anything they gave would be viewed by us as just a start,"
Mrs. Robinson later reflected. "And you know, they were probably
right."
          An often shy and resolutely self-effacing person. Jo Ann Gibson
Robinson is now almost seventy and lives quietly b. herself in
retirement in Los Angeles. Only with some gentle encouragement will
she acknowledge herself as "the instigator of the movement to start
that boycott." Even then, however, she seeks to avoid any special
credit for herself or any other single individual. Very simply, she
says, "the black women did it." And she's right.
          
            Sources and Suggested Further Reading
          
          First and foremost, my understanding of Montgomery is based upon my
personal interviews with many of the principals--Mrs. Robinson,
Mrs. Burks, Mr. Nixon, Mr. Lewis, attorney Gray, Rev. Seay, Mrs. Durr
and the late Jack Crenshaw, as well as Rev. Ralph D. Abernathy,
Juanita J. Abernathy, Robert D. Nesbitt, Robert Williams, Rev. Robert
S. Graetz, Maude Ballou, Lillie Armstrong Thomas (now Brown), Elliot
Finley, Rev. Robert E. Hughes, and Jack Shows. I have also benefitted
greatly from the interviews with some of the principals that are on
deposit in the oral history collections of the Moorland-Spingarn
Research Center, Howard University. Washington, DC; the Martin Luther
King, Jr., Center for Nonviolent Social Change, Atlanta; and the
Highlander Center, New Market, TN, as well as from the interviews that
have been shared with me by David Levering Lewis, Milton Viorst, and
Worth Long and Randall Williams. I also strongly recommend the
Statewide Oral History Program collection of interviews, compiled in
1973,by the Alabama Center for Higher Education, copies of which are
on deposit at all of Alabama's traditionally black colleges.

          There are a number of invaluable, unpublished manuscripts which
shed crucial light on the boycott, particularly Mrs. Robinson's "The
Montgomery Story," which the University of Tennessee Press will
publish later this year, and Ralph D. Abernathy's "The Natural History
of a Social Movement: The Montgomery Improvement Association," a 1958
M.A. thesis in Sociology at Atlanta University. Also extremely
valuable are Sheldon Hackney and Ray Arsenault's "The Montgomery Bus
Boycott: A Case Book"; Peter C. Mohr, "Journal Out of Egypt: The
Development of Negro Leadership in Alabama from Booker T. Washington
to Martin Luther King," B.A. thesis, Princeton University, 1958;
Thomas }. Gilliam, "The Montgomery Bus Boycott of 19551956,"
M.A. thesis, Auburn University, 1968; Gordon L. Hartstein, "The
Montgomery Bus Protest 1955-1956: What Precipitated, Sustained, and
Prolonged the Boycott," B.A. thesis, Princeton University, 1973;
Lamont H. Yeakey, "The Montgomery, Alabama Bus Boycott, 1955-1956,"
Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, 1979; Steven M. Milner, "The
Montgomery Bus Boycott: A Case Study in the Emergence and Career of a
Social Movement," Ph.D. dissertation, University of California,
Berkeley, 1981; and Donald H. Smith, "Martin Luther King, Jr.:
Rhetorician of Revolt," Ph.D. dissertation, University of Wisconsin,
1964.
          Among published works, the serious student will benefit from not
only chapter two of Dr. King's Stride Toward Freedom (New York: Harper
&Bros., 1958), but also Preston Valien, "The Montgomery Bus Protest
as a Social Movement," in Jitsuichi Masuoka &Valien, eds., Race
Relations (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1961),
pp. 112-27; Aleine Austin, "Behind the Montgomery Bus Boycott,"
Monthly Review 8 (September 1956): 163-67; and Ralph H. Hines and
James E. Pierce, "Negro Leadership After the Social Crisis: An
Analysis of Leadership Changes in Montgomery, Alabama," Phylon 26
(Summer 1965): 162-72. Far and away the most valuable and insightful
published analysis of the protest, and the place where anyone with
further interest should begin, is J. Mills Thornton, III's "Challenge
and Response in the Montgomery Bus Boycott of 1955-56," Alabama Review
33 (July 1980): 163-235.
          
            David J. Garrow is associate professor of political
science at the City College of New York and the City University
Graduate School. He is the author of Protest at Selma
(Yale,1978)and The FBI and Martin Luther King, Jr.
(Norton, l 981), as well as the forthcoming Bearing the Cross:
Martin Luther King, Jr., and the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference, 1955-1968, which William Morrow &Co. will publish
in the fall of l986.
          
        
        
          The Journey Is Home by Nelle Morton. Boston:
Beacon Press, 1985. 248 pp. $21.95.
          Reviewed by Heyward, CarterCarter Heyward
          Vol. 7, No. 5, 1985, 29-30, 32
          
          Among feminist theologians, the name Nelle Morton conjures up
images of courage, intelligence, and friendship. Morton was the first
(and for years only) woman on the faculty of the Theological School of
Drew University; a worker for civil and other human rights; and a
leader in the Southern Presbyterian Church and in the ecumenical
global community. She is a theologian whose book many of us have been
awaiting as if for the birth of a child. This remarkable book has
arrived at last.
          The significance of The Journey Is Home is not
primarily in the logic of either its structure (ten occasional
pieces--lectures and essays that span the 1970s) or its content (a
carefully crafted interplay of history, autobiography and theory that
focuses on language and metaphor). It is a well structured, deeply
intelligent book, but the power of its impact resonates beyond the
printed page. Beginning with its title, The Journey Is Home is a
metaphor--which, as Morton shows, is not something that can be
explained or analyzed discursively.
          Emphasizing the vital role of metaphor in feminist theology, Morton
writes that it "begins with the concrete and demands total presence."
[It] cannot be defined. It can only be actively followed on its
journey and perceived in its functioning.... [It] is not metaphor
unless it is on the way." It involves a "shattering of inadequate
image[s] . . . and [an] ushering in of [a] new reality." In these
words, Morton conveys a sense of how her own book affected
me. The Journey Is Home is the concrete, daily, lived
experience of one woman who is inviting open-ended participation by
others who cannot expect to have our way defined for us by the
author. We can only follow this woman's journey and see for ourselves
what happens.
          I was shaken as I read, which is why I often shut the book for days
at a time, saying to friends who asked what I thought of it, "I'm not
sure." One can be sure about what one thinks of most theological
works--including most feminist texts. But one cannot be clear in the
moment about a book that rattles the brain as it churns the gut,
pushing to expand even seasoned feminist sensibilities. In patriachal
time/space, one is not prepared, logically or reasonably, to meet the
theologian as an eighty-year-old white Southern woman whose "wild and
bizarre" blood cells are keeping her alive; whose "cunt" is sacred
space; and whose lifelong liberation journey with marginalized people
of different colors, classes, and creeds has plumbed new depths during

the past decade, carrying her to the point at which, in her own words,
"I am now in search of new positive images faithful to woman
experience."
          "Woman" experience is no grammatical or typographical error, any
more than it is, for Morton, an historical aberration. The journey
that unfolds in these pages is not merely about "women's" experiences
or the "women's" movement.
          
            "The women's movement" [implies] something tangible
and more organizational, such as NOW.... To say "the woman movement"
. . . opens up a whole, moving, pervasive way of perceiving--an
emerging, accelerating, enlarging, powerful, growing potential that
cannot be contained by the use of the possessive "women's".
          
          Morton's dynamic journey becomes, for her and for this reader,
woman home. She tells of the place that is no place--and every
place--for the woman who is shackled within the politics of
patriarchal logic and, in the same historical moment, is "heard into
speech" by those who are willing to listen to her find her own story
rather than attempt to tell her what it is.
          Nellie Morton tells us nothing about what feminists ought to
believe (which is one reason she suggests that this book is not
"theology"). She tells us what being Nellie Morton involves and,
through the lens of her particular life, something about what may be
the costs and consequences, losses and gains of being ourselves in a
world that is harsh with those whose love for life and justice knows
no bounds.
          
            Shaken in a woman world
          
          Many Christian feminists may be troubled by Morton's unequivocal
indictment of God the Father. Unless we see, however, that the turmoil
into which we may be spun is not Morton's fault, nor our own, but
rather is rooted in the contradictions of living life as
self-respecting women in a world/church that does not teach us to
value women, we will miss entirely the purpose of this woman book and
the power of this woman journey. Post-Christian and other
non-Christian feminists are likely also to be shaken by Morton,
specifically because her woman home includes the church. For her, the
Christian church is no place for feminists to get stuck--but it is a
place for Christian feminists to sojourn along the way that cannot be
contained within patriarchal fixtures of institutional space or
chronological time.
          Morton realizes what many feminists lust after--to be
empowered/empowering women in a woman community that cuts across lines
that divide us in patriarchal space. Christian/post-Christian,
lesbian/straight, "academic"/ "common," older/younger are categorical
pitfalls into which Morton does not fall. She sees that common women
are not to blame for the vicious consequences of patriarchal
structures, including those which separate woman from woman--such as
compulsory heterosexism, religious imperialism, racism, classism, and
sexism.
          Because Morton has been for several generations a public antagonist
to white supremacy and economic exploitation, I was surprised and
disappointed that she made no attempt in this book to integrate an
analysis of racism and classism into her compelling metaphoric
treatment of sexism and heterosexism. This is a serious problem--not
with Morton's life-journey, but with her analysis, since no structure
of oppression can be understood adequately without some analytic
attention to other structures that help hold it in place. What is
autobiographically apparent is Morton's awareness that the truths of
which she speaks cannot be measured adequately simply by those who
share her own race, class or gender. She recognizes the limits of her
own autobiography and does not pretend to transcend them. Moreover,
she has lived the struggle that moves beyond the lives of white middle
class women, and the resources from which she draws her book have been
cultivated by her engagement with the global work of liberation. She
sets several of her essays and lectures explicitly in this context,
not to "prove her credentials" but rather to help bring the written
word into the praxis of real human struggle.
          Morton makes no claims to speak authoritatively for or about the
universal and daily liberation work of all people who are
oppressed. She speaks with confidence only of that which she, a white
middle-class woman, believes. And, from her own struggle for justice,
what Morton has come to believe is that God the Father is the supreme
deity of racism, classism, sexism, and heterosexism, and that he is
the deadly foe of all truly human liberation.
          The last three essays of this book bear witness to Morton's most
recent spiritual sojourning. It is here that we are introduced to the
Goddess. She has come to Nelle Morton via a number of woman-loving
groups and occasions, and most especially through meeting, "in a river
of blood"--and becoming--her own mother. In this reunion,
Morton--already a strong, empowering woman to others of us--was reborn
into a "new child," able at last to respect herself (and her mother),
newly empowered to embody the heights--and depths--of her woman
being.
          Morton writes that no one whose imagination and creativity are
inhibited by the rationality of patriarchal theology will be able to
hear what she is saying, and she is correct. For here is an empowered
woman, a citizen of planet earth in a pervasively patriarchal
time/space, whose power is emerging full force through the aegis of
other women as she moves into and beyond her eightieth year. Here is a
formerly liberal Christian woman who was born again, if you will, in

meeting the Goddess. Morton has been moved to speech by a womanpower
literally unavailable within the limits of patriarchal reason. She has
experienced the creative power of God the Mother, not God the Father:
Wisdom, not Word; being heard to new life, not being taught new
insights. She writes, "[In] a sexist culture and sexist religion the
option for the Goddess may be the only, the only sane, redemptive
move."
          Morton is an honest woman who is speaking the truth not only of her
own life but moreover of the power of images in the life of the
world/church. The symbol of God the Father (which, Morton suggests,
has lost whatever metaphoric power it may once have had) does not
empower men to respect women or women to respect ourselves--no matter
how He is dressed up, not even if He is called "She." The metaphoric,
imaginative images of the Goddess--God the Mother, woman God, sister
God, lover God--may be indeed the "only sane, redemptive" spiritual
resource left for self-respecting woman.
          As we come into our power, regardless of our patriarchal
affiliations, we can begin to live as self-respecting, woman-loving,
life-affirming, justice-making women whom the institutions of our
lives have no power to break or destroy. Our strength to love
ourselves despite patriarchy does not derive from our escaping
patriarchy but rather from our Goddess-given knowledge that each of us
is more than simply herself. We are women connected to women. Our
power and community carry us beyond the boundaries of our own skins
into the past (which teaches us), the present (which presents us with
our life work), and the future (which we are co-creating, and which
belongs to us, although we may not, as individuals, live to taste the
fruits of the harvest we sow).
          Morton's faith rings with the same moral commitment and
metaphysical implications that characterize other theologies of
liberation, but her radical feminist bias reveals what is missing from
all nonfeminist liberation movements; a deeply woman-rooted,
woman-loving power. The Goddess' is with us, not above us. Her realm
is sexual, not disembodied; organic, not dualistic; inclusive, not
exclusively the domain of those who think right, look right, speak
right, or have the right genital structure. She is celebrative and
permissive, not morbid and proscriptive. Her spirit is rooted and
grounded in justice making, not in law and order. Most notably for
Morton, the Goddess is not merely another face of God. She is the
antithesis of everything that the patriarchal deity has come to
symbolize.
          If other women want to spend energy trying cosmetically to touch up
God the Father, to transform Him into an androgynous figure and
thereby to "create the false impression of having arrived," Morton
will not attempt to thwart us. It is simply the case that she herself
is moving on. Lest we imagine that her vision is too facile for this
oppression laden world, we should recognize that, for Morton, the
journey is struggle. It is as bloody, angry, and conflictual as it is
tender, playful, and celebrative.
          Nelle Morton has not only shaken me to the core of my patriarchal
remnants. She has also, with this book, made me a wiser, happier
feminist. For she is herself a metaphor, an image of what can happen
to little Southern girls who "go barefooted and take off our winter
underwear every spring" all the while aware that something bad is the
matter with the world into which our mothers have borne us. Many of us
have been there, and many are yet to come. Nelle Morton offers us
fresh water for the journey.
          
            Carter Heyward a native of Charlotte, N. C., is professor
of theology of Episcopal Divinity School in Cambridge Mass,  she is
the author of Our Passion for Justice: Images of Power,
Sexuality, and Liberation (Pilgrim, 1984). This review of
Nelle Morton's book is copyright 1985 by Christianity and Crisis, and
reprinted with permission.
          
        
      
    
  
