
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 8, Number 3,
	       1986
        
          The Poverty of Policy
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986, pp. 1-3
          
          In late August the casualty list for 1986 in America's half-hearted
war on poverty revealed that fourteen percent of Americans were living
in "official" poverty (an annual income of below $10,989 for a family
of four). As this year's Census Bureau statistics stood four-tenths of
a percent lower than a year egg, the White House proclaimed a victory
for its style of free enterprise. If the numbers had increased,
leading Democrats and others (with whom I have joined in the past)
would have bitterly indicted the Administration's cruel
policies. Either way, the announcement has come to signify a passing
moment of political theater and the continuance of very poor public
policy.
          The annual procession of poverty statistics each summer is becoming
a ritual without meaning, something like those troop counts for the
Vietnam War fifteen years ago. The harsh debate about slight changes
in each set of new figures obscures the continuing tragedy of our
national policies. And like the Washington officials in that war, both
Republicans and Democrats in the national debate over poverty today
find it is easier to count the poor than to address the policies
attacking poverty. Behind the war of words, we really have a standoff
in the war on poverty.
          Beginning with the assumption in 1980 that poverty in America was a
myth, the Reagan Administration has now stopped its direct attacks on
the programs of the poor-after six years of budget cutting. In part,
the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Balanced Budget Act constitutes a liveable,
temporary compromise for the Administration. Although programs such as
food stamps and AFDC are exempt from semi-automatic reductions, the
pressure to reduce the deficit at a pre-fixed rate gives the
Administration plenty of opportunity to shrink further these and other
poverty programs. The Democratic House of Representatives also has
decided 

to live with this arrangement, apparently believing it is
better than the higher cuts on poverty programs in previous years.
          A temporary truce is also in effect on the debate over government
policies concerning the poor. Overshadowed at the moment by
discussions on budget deficits and tax policies, poverty as an issue
does not now exist at the White House. It will not be an issue until
the Administration's special commission on welfare reform is ready to
release its newest arguments and recommendations. On this front, too,
the Democrats appear to welcome the hiatus; certainly in this election
year very few members of Congress have been asking the Administration
what it has done for the poor lately. And to all who oppose the
President's policies on poverty, Reagan's current posture of benign
neglect seems like a vast improvement.
          The momentary neglect, however, is not so very benign. Whatever the
August figures show, we know that we have lost substantial ground over
the last six years in reducing poverty. The effect of our neglect is
becoming frightening. One child out of every five is poor. Every other
black child under the age of six lives in poverty. Women now
constitute the largest segment of the adult population in
poverty-sixty percent of all poor over the age of eighteen. One out of
every three blacks is poor; Hispanics have equally high rates of
poverty. Three of four poor persons are women and children.
          For Southerners the most recent economic trends offer further bad
news which neglect won't help. The two Southern states that have
enjoyed a boom economy since 1980 have now gone bust. In Texas and
Louisiana unemployment has reached record high levels since late
spring, and food banks across these states may soon be incapable of
handling the rising need-a trend already seen in many other parts of
the South. While these problems in the oil states will not show up in
the poverty surveys until 1987, they are real and will not be solved
by official neglect in Washington.
          Of course, the Administration's silence is not forever. Within the
next twelve months the White House will announce its new poverty
policies when it releases a report from the presidential commission on
welfare reform. While others will be busy keeping food banks and
shelters open during the winter, the commission will be assembling its
arsenal of facts, figures and interpretations on poverty. Once more,
the public discussion on poverty will be framed and limited by the
Administration's own perspective, probably concentrating on fraud and
abuse. Once more, the debate will focus on the failures of the past
rather than its successes and potential. And the people of the South
and the nation will have to struggle with themselves once more if they
are to resist blaming the victims of poverty for its presence.
          Rather than debate over the latest count on poverty, we need to
construct a framework for future debates on policies. Although America
seems to hold few truths to be self-evident nowadays, the trends of
poverty over the last several years already tell us the direction that
we can take in developing new policies. At this point there are
several major propositions: First, the federal government must
increase the minimum wage for all workers in the United States. Today
the head of a family of three persons earning the federal minimum wage
and working full-time lives $1,300 below the threshold of poverty. The
current minimum wage is a subminimum wage. A fair change could remove
as many as four and one-half million people from poverty and would
require no additional administrative costs to the government. This is
a vital anti-poverty measure that could do more than any other single,
simple, act to 

reduce poverty.
          Second, the enforcement of anti-discrimination laws in the job
market must be strengthened. In part, the extraordinary poverty among
blacks, Hispanics ant women tells of the missed opportunities in the
workplace too often still caused by discriminatory hiring and
promotion. Fair employment practices for minorities and women mean a
reduction in poverty.
          Third, affordable child care must be provided for poor women who
work. With so many women and children among the poor, and with the
rise of single-parent families, nothing very realistic will be done in
the private or public arena to reduce poverty without affordable child
care. Five million children under the age of six are poor and almost
six million poor are of grammar school age. Without child care, the
want ads for many jobs will not and should not be answered by poor
mothers with infants and young children who find working a losing
proposition.
          Fourth, jobs should be available to all adults who can
work. Providing a job to an adult in poverty must not be a vindictive
act, a punishment for being poor. A job must help the individual with
income and work experience. Full employment at decent wages is the
most sensible way of virtually eliminating poverty.
          Fifth, non-institutional care must be available to those adults
incapable of caring for themselves. A small part of the general
poverty population and a large segment of street people are struggling
desperately, but fruitlessly, to help themselves. Non-institutional
care must be provided.
          These are simple principles; they do not trespass human dignity nor
propose to bankrupt the government. They suggest that personal
initiative and work should be seen for the poor not as punishment but
as opportunity. They are not the only principles on which a practical,
compassionate poverty program can be constructed, but they go a long
way in shifting the debate.
          The South and the nation must summon the will and resources to
arrest the current trends of poverty. We surely need to know where the
poverty statistics stand, this year and in future years. But more than
anything else right now, we need to enact policies that will bring
people out of poverty. Among all the numbers, that is whet really
courts.
          
            Steve Suitts is executive director of the Southern
Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Taking the Fifth
          By Davis, MarilynMarilyn Davis and Willingham,  AlexAlex Willingham
          Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986, pp. 7-9
          
          Two election contests have drawn much attention to Georgia this
year: a race crucial in determining the party alignment in the US
Senate, and a struggle between long-time allies that will send a
strong and articulate black Southerner to Congress. Indeed, the Senate
campaign helped prompt the congressional one.
          The race for the House seat took place in Georgia's Fifth District,
centered in Atlanta. Georgia, and the nation, have become accustomed
to the special nature of the state's Fifth District, since mid-century
one of the South's most volatile and visible political
theatres. During the last forty years, the Fifth has sent Georgia's
first woman to Congress, followed her with an arch-segregationist,
later with Andrew Young, and most recently, white liberal Wyche
Fowler.
          This year Fowler left his congressional job and won the Democratic
Party's nomination for the US Senate. In making the run for the
Senate, Fowler is testing whether a record built in his old district,
composed entirely of urban voters and a majority-black population, can
sit well with the citizens in rural, whiter and more conservative
areas of the state. Some answers were provided in the August 12th
primary. Fowler captured the Democratic party nomination against
leading contender Hamilton Jordan (once of the Carter White House
staff) without a runoff. Now, in one of the country's most important
campaigns, Fowler faces Reaganite incumbent Mack Mattingly this
fall.
          With Fowler gone, the action in the Fifth's Democratic primary
turned upon the rivalry of two civil rights veterans: Georgia state
aerator Julian Bond and Atlanta city councilmember John Lewis (both
age 46). Lewis was to eventually win the nomination in a
come-from-behind upset decided in the run-off primary on September
2.
          The Fifth District has a black population of sixty-five percent
(the black voting age population is sixty percent). Bond and Lewis
were hoping to become just the third black among the 138 members now
serving in the US House from the eleven Southern states (blacks make
up twenty percent of the population of the South).
          Lewis, son of an Alabama sharecropper, was a leader of the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) in the 1960s. At the 1963
March on Washington where Martin Luther King, Jr. made his "I Have a
Dream" speech, Lewis received national attention when march organizers
demanded that he censor and tone down his own public remarks. Two
years later, he was one of the main targets of police attacks at the
Edmund Pettus Bridge during the Selma to Montgomery March.
          Lewis later directed the Southern Regional Council's Voter
Education Project. His first attempt at public office came in 1977
when he made an unsuccessful attempt to win the congressional seat. He
was appointed head of the federal Action agency in the Carter
Administration. In 1981, he won election to the Atlanta city council
and became a chief advocate of ethics in government. In 1985 he was
reelected over token opposition.
          Bond is also a former SNCC leader (he was communications director),
active in voter education. He is one of three children of Horace Mann
Bond, the renowned educator and historian. In 1966, after being
elected to the Georgia General Assembly, Bond was denied his seat when
he stood firm in support of SNCC's anti-Vietnam War policy
statement. He was able to join the state legislature only after a
legal battle which drew international attention and support.
          Although still too young to accept the office, at the 1968
Democratic Convention in Chicago Bond's name was placed in nomination
as the party's vice-presidential candidate. Bond has been widely
sought as a gifted public speaker, particularly on college
campuses. He once hosted NBC's "Saturday Night Live."
          The contest between Bond and Lewis meant that Georgia would send to
Congress a civil rights activist with strong credentials appropriate
for a congressional district that has struggled for decades with the
declining traditional symbols and the new and complex strains emerging
in contemporary Southern politics.
          The beginning of that struggle may be dated from a special election
held in February of 1946, when Fifth District voters sent Helen
Douglas Mankin, Georgia's first woman to Congress to fill the
unexpired term of the recently resigned veteran Representative Robert
Ramspeck. That year's special election marked the first time Atlanta's
black voters had been allowed to participate in a congressional
election since 1929. Their participation had been prohibited by the
White Primary system under which voting in the nominating elections
conducted by the Democratic party was limited to white
citizens. Democratic nomination amounted to victory.
          When the time came for Mankin to run again, in the regularly
scheduled primary election of 1946, blacks gave her strong
support. She received an overwhelming vote in the Ashby Street
precinct that was to become a bellwether of black political
participation in Atlanta.
          Representative Mankin's tenure was short. She won a popular
majority in the regular primary, but was denied the nomination when
Democratic party leaders decided to make a "special exception" and
apply the rules of the county unit system--another of Georgia's
traditional disfranchising devices.
          The ultimate victor that year was James C. Davis, ally of the
openly racist Eugene Talmadge whose faction then controlled the
Democratic party and whose views could not have been more in contrast
to those of the majority of the Fifth's population.
          The county unit system insured the continued renomination and
reelection of Davis, although he drew consistent opposition and, in
1952, again lost the popular vote. Blacks always opposed Davis and his
segregationist views. In 1954, Morris Abrams, then flying the banner
of Southern liberalism, lost a party 

nomination to Davis. Abrams
received ninety-four percent of the vote at that Ashby street
box. When the county unit system was declared invalid in a 1962
Supreme Court decision, Davis did not seek reelection.
          In the following years, the Fifth was to elect a white Democrat,
Charles Weltner, who would be one of the few Southerners to vote for
civil rights legislation, and who resigned his seat rather than run on
a ticket with an avowed segregationist. Weltner was replaced in 1966
by one of the region's first Republicans Fletcher Thompson.
          In 1972, after an attempted gerrymander by the Georgia legislature,
the white majority district elected Andrew Young as the state's first
black congressman. Young was known as a close associate of Martin
Luther King, Jr. He then worked as director of the Atlanta Community
Relations Commission--a position that afforded him wide contact among
the district's voters and established his reputation as a
mediator. During Young's years of campaigning for Congress, he enjoyed
wide bi-racial voting support. He received a critical fourth of the
white vote in that first winning election and increasingly larger
proportions in his reelection efforts.
          Young served until 1977 when he accepted an appointment by
President Carter to head the US delegation to the United Nations.
          Despite the growing black population in the Atlanta area, the Fifth
District remained majority white. Boundary lines were drawn in such a
way as to split the black voters among three congressional
districts. During the 1980 reapportionment, an attempt was made to
redraw the lines. The Georgia legislature refused, but was eventually
forced, to improve matters when a federal court held the districts to
be discriminatory. New lines were drawn creating a majority black
population in the Fifth District in 1982.
          The Fifth elected, after Young, Wyche Fowler, a white who shared
the moderate views of Atlanta's black middle class. Fowler served and
won reelection as the racial make-up of the district was reversed.
          The idea of a white representing a black majority seemed to suit
the fancy of a district where a black had represented a white
majority. Black leaders praised Fowler's voting record and his
attention to serving constituents. He was adept at campaigning within
the black community. During the Reagan drive to dismantle social
programs targeted to urban and minority citizens, Fowler was a
dependable opponent.
          The arrangement became uncomfortable, however, as potential rivals
began to insist that the district select a black representative. In
1984, SCLC activist Hosea Williams and three other blacks challenged
Fowler, who nevertheless won handily. This year, perhaps seeing the
writing on the wall, as well as an opportunity to challenge the
freshman Mattingly, Fowler chose to make his move for the Senate.
          Although ten candidates entered the contest when Fowler decided not
to seek the congressional seat, the Fifth was really Bond's to win or
lose.
          National celebrities and politicians--including Rosa Parks and New
York mayor Ed Koch--came into the district to campaign, most of them
supporting Bond. Former New York Representative Shirley Chisholm, 

now
head of the National Black Women's Political Congress, came to endorse
Jan Douglass, one of five women candidates.
          The August primary in the Fifth developed within a broad consensus
on issues among the candidateds. Most opposed intervention in Central
America and supported effective sanctions against apartheid in South
Africa. On the whole, the candidates were sharply critical of the
Reagan effort to cirpple domestic programs, curtail civil liberties,
bloat the military, and politicize the government's civil rights
agencies.
          Bond's frontrunner status was taken for granted both by the other
candidates and the news media. He was the leading fundraiser among the
group and enjoyed wide recognition in the opinion polls. Consequently
he became the target of "negative advertising" by opponents who
perceived him as vulnerable among white voters.
          Specially-targeted radio spots said Bond would promote racial
division, an allegation based on speeches in Bond's 1972 A Time
to Speak, A Time to Act, a book which responded to the growing
racial and socioeconomic differences between the inner city and the
suburbs. Other radio spots claimed Bond to be delinquent in his
federal tax payments. No taxes are currently in arrears but in recent
years, the allegation said, some had been.
          Such charges exploited a stereotype of Bond as a media personality,
ineffective, disorganized, and lazy.
          Bond's defenders argued that his persona and glamour were further
reasons to commend him to voters. They pointed, also, to his twenty
years of perseverance in the Georgia legislature which should be seen,
they said, in relation to the hostility he encountered. A
conservative, white, "old boy," leadership not only despised Bond's
presence but often used its powers spitefully to limit his access. A
loyal constituency repeatedly resumed Bond to office.
          An opposite image from that of the flashy, glib, Bond dogged John
Lewis, a man whom the editors of Time once called a
saint. In this year's campaign he enjoyed the endorsement of the
Atlanta Constitution (as he did in 1977). Yet in '77
(and again in '86,) there were questions about whether he is dynamic
enough to give effective representation.
          Lewis' defenders pointed to a personal history marked by hard work,
sacrifice and principled dissent. They say his persistent advocacy of
ethics in government while on the Atlanta City Council illustrates his
best quality, integrity. Lewis's ethics proposals walked with leaden
feet among some of his colleagues (four of the current council members
have had brushes with the law), but he has pursued this knotty and
sensitive issue with characteristic courage.
          Some Atlanta voters, wondering at what spot the ethical footsteps
might trespass across the threshold of civil liberties were startled
when, in the strained final days of the first primary campaign, drug
testing was made an issue. Lewis and several others volunteered to
undertake drug testing at a local hospital. Bond refused. The action
set the tone for a Run-off campaign marked by considerably sharper
controversy. Lewis hammered away at the drug theme manipulating it,
and other conservative domestic and foreign issues as a strategy to
appeal to white voters.
          On the eve of the August 12 primary, Bond hoped to win outright. A
day later he received forty-seven percent of the vote to Lewis'
thirty-six percent (double what was granted to him in the pre-election
polls) forcing the September 2 runoff.
          Despite his failure to avoid a run-off, Bond demonstrated strong
vote getting power. Of the 242 precincts in the district, Bond carried
over seventy perecent on August 12. He outpolled Lewis in the black
precincts (getting as high as seventy percent of the vote and
averaging sixty-one percent), but came in third overall in the white
precincts. Bond also won a majority of the precincts (sixty percent)
in the run- off.
          In August and again on September 2, Bond won low income black
precincts by comfortable majorities. The crucial difference in the
election was the refusal of whites to vote for Bond in appreciable
numbers. Upper income whites, were especially reluctant to vote for
Bond. Precincts of affluent whites rarely gave him more than ten
percent of the vote. The extraordinary majorities Lewis enjoyed among
white voters furnished the key surprise in the voting and poses a new
set of questions about the quality of politics to be expected in a
district with such contradictory voter preferences between the
affluent white minority and the low income, inner city black
majority.
          Only seventy-thousand voters (twenty-nine percent of the 230,000
registered) came out for the August 12 primary--about the same number
as voted in the September runoff. The small voter turnout is a
striking irony given the roles these two men have played in voter
registration.
          Even in the Fifth District, black voters continue to suffer special
disadvantages in the political process, the results of a legacy of
underparticipation, of continuing disparities in social and economic
opportunities, and of growing doubts about the capacity of political
leadership. Despite fifteen years of black progress in office holding,
voter registration among Atlanta blacks reaches only about half its
potential.
          The 1980 census shows that in Fulton County (a major part of the
Fifth District) less than half of black youth live in two-parent
homes. In black, female-headed households with children, the median
annual income is $6,000, less than half that of similarly situated
whites. The county's $25,000 median income for white families is twice
that of black families. One census tract in a black community in the
Fifth District shows the median family income at $2,900. By contrast,
the highest median family income in the Fifth ($53,000) is in a white
neighborhood.
          No single election will change these disparities and
inequalities. They are a reminder of the challenge facing the Fifth
District. The competition between Bond and Lewis has been
uncomfortable for those who see them as pure symbols of the movement
years. The campaign has created definite expectations--and hope
--about the future. Despite the near-reverence for both men, it is
only realistic to admit that the problems that face the Fifth and the
country are much more resistant to symbolic and even electoral change
than they seemed in the days of Movement victories.
          
            Marilyn Davis teaches political science at Spelman
College in Atlanta. Alex Willingham is research associate at the
Southern Regional Council and a contributing editor of Southern
Changes.
          
        
        
          In Wallace's Wake--New Demagoguery for the Eighties
          By Williams, RandallRandall Williams
          Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986, pp. 10-12
          
          "Alabama has it all," brag the interstate billboards leading into
the Heart of Dixie. The slogan is aimed mostly at Florida- or
Louisiana-bound tourists but nowadays applies equally well to the
contest for the state's governorship.
          The Democratic primary and run-off were held in June, but the
party's nominee was undeclared until August due to legal challenges
and an order by a three-judge federal panel barring certification of
the apparent winner. Among the judges signing the order was Frank
M. Johnson Jr., known by many Alabamians over the past quarter-century
as the "real governor" of the state for the control he exerted in
orders on prisons, schools, mental hospitals, public hiring and civil
rights.
          In the 1960s and 1970s Johnson's legal activism was necessary to
fill the vacuum left by the inaction of Gov. George C. Wallace, who
always found it expedient to let the Federal courts force state
officials to do the politically unpopular. It seemed fitting that
Judge Johnson's latest legal entry into Alabama justice came as
another Wallace vacuum loomed.
          George Wallace, at last, is retiring from the office he has held
for four terms, five if you count the term of his first wife, Lurleen,
who was elected as his surrogate in 1966 when the law forbade
consecutive terms. Contending in Wallace's wake were Lt. Gov. Bill
Baxley, the favorite and the champion of a large but loosely knit
coalition of labor voters, blacks and Wallaceites; former Gov. Fob
James, well-liked by business ("the rich get richer and the poor get
Fobbed"); former Lt. Gov. George McMillan, darling of the
reform-minded and determined to avoid the "wimpy" image that may have
cost him the Governor's Mansion in 1982; and . . . Atty. Gen. Charlie
Graddick, the law-and-order dark horse who has emerged as the latest
demagogue in an Alabama lineage stretching back through George Wallace
to Cotton Tom Heflin and William Lowndes Yancey.
          Graddick is the New version of the Old Wallace. Many who remember
only the extremities of the past find it hard to call Graddick a
racist because he actually does nothing overtly against blacks; his
popularity with racists is due to the fact that he largely ignores the
quarter of the state's citizens who are black, and that he is a
demagogue for the Eighties, a subtle master of euphemisms and code
phrases that communicate racial meaning without the blatantly nasty
words of the previous generation.
          In winning the attorney general's office in 1978, Graddick
transformed himself from an unknown Mobile County district attorney
with a series of stark, loud television commercials claiming he would
get tough on crime. In a speech, he declared he wanted to "fry
[murderers] until their eyes popped out and you can smell their flesh
burn." Once in office, he waged a highly publicized prosecution of
"food stamp cheats" and feuded with the prison commissioner who sought
to relieve the state's growing inmate population through alternatives
such as work release and restitution programs. Critics accused him of
being a poor, frequently reversed prosecutor, indifferent to
white-collar crime and to such public nuisances as KKK paramilitary
training.
          Like former Gov. James, Graddick is an exRepublican who switched
parties to run a state-wide campaign. Although Alabama has become,
since the Second World War, one of the most conservative states,
giving large votes to GOP Presidential nominees, it has not elected a
Republican governor since Redemption. Alabama's junior Senator, former
admiral and POW Jeremiah Denton, is the first Republican elected to
statewide office in more than a hundred years. However, the Goldwater
sweep of Alabama in 1964 elected several Republican congressmen, and
in recent years a growing number of Republicans have been elected to
county and legislative offices. The GOP currently holds two of the
state's seven Congressional districts.
          Graddick and James owe their political careers to that still-small
contingent of Alabamians who have declared themselves Republicans and
to that large and growing block of voters who identify philosophically
with the GOP even though they still call themselves Democrats in state
and local elections. In short, the Reagan vote. Baxley, on the other
hand, stumped vigorously for Mondale and Ferraro in 1984, and he gets
his strongest support from the backers of that losing ticket.
          Baxley was a two-term attorney general before Grad lick, but there
is practically no other similarity 

between the two. Where Graddick
seems to evoke the old racial passions, Baxley repudiates them. A
decade after the fact, he reopened the case of the 1963 bombing of
Birmingham's 16th Street Baptist Church and convicted a former Ku Klux
Klansman for the murders of the four children. Baxley, a law student
in 1963, said he was motivated by his shame and anger that people
could do such a thing in his state and get away with it.
          As attorney general, Baxley was viewed as a tough, able prosecutor
but may have been most respected for the job he did recruiting a
talented crop of young Alabama lawyers, including some who had left
the state to work on Wall Street and the first black assistant
attorney general in Alabama history. He then prosecuted murderers and
white collar criminals with equal vigor.
          On the negative side, the bachelor Baxley had a reputation as a
playboy and a gambler who had made and lost large sums in Las Vegas
and in the commodities market. Though he had married before making his
first attempt at the Governor's office in 1978. the image stuck with
him, renewed in the recent campaign by intimations of an affair with
an Associated Press reporter who quickly resigned her job and left the
state.
          Baxley led the June 3 primary voting by eighty thousand votes, with
Graddick a strong second. Graddick then picked up the endorsement of
McMillan, causing Baxley aides to charge that McMillan--who had called
Graddick unfit to serve before the election--had offered to endorse
Baxley in exchange for payment of McMillan's considerable campaign
debt. Graddick probably did not need Fob James's endorsement; those
voters had no place else to go.
          Alabama does not require party registration, but voters in its
primaries do pledge to support the party nominees in the subsequent
general election. Alabama law expressly prohibits voters in one
party's primary from supporting another party's candidate in a
run-off.
          Graddick attacked Baxley as the candidate of special interests,
playing up donations of about $100,000 Baxley received from political
action committees supported by the Alabama Education Association and
on Baxley's endorsement by both of the state's black political
organizations. Graddick was the only candidate who did not seek the
black endorsements; in fact, he did not even campaign in the west
Alabama Black Belt. Graddick received more donations than Baxley,
mostly from businessmen, industrialists and business-related political
action committees. Among his biggest contributors were well-known
Republicans, including former Nixon Postmaster Winton Blount, and June
Collier, the "Buy American" auto parts manufacturer who was appointed
by Reagan to the Industrial Policy Advisory Committee.
          Two weeks before the June 24 run-off, polls placed Baxley and
Graddick almost even.
          The Alabama Democratic Party began a statewide campaign aimed at
discouraging the 33,000 voters in the June 3 Republican primary from
crossing-over to vote in the Democratic runoff; there was no statewide
Republican run-off and only token local contests. Candidate Graddick,
the state's top law officer, declared that cross-over voting was
legal. The day before the election, one of his assistants, the chief
of the voting fraud unit of the Alabama Attorney General's office,
after meeting with Graddick campaign officials, issued a letter
advising county election officials that they faced possible legal
actions if they attempted to prevent Republicans from voting in the
Democratic run-off.
          The run-off voting was the closest in recent Alabama history, with
Graddick on top by 8,756 votes, less than a percentage point of the
almost one million total. Graddick's campaign workers began answering
the phone "Governor-elect ..." the next day, but Baxley refused to
concede without a recount.
          Then Baxley supporters filed an election challenge to the state
Democratic Party charging that as many as 20,000 Republicans, far more
than Graddick's margin of victory, had illegally crossed over on June
23. After a few days of deliberation, Baxley filed his own concurrent
challenge. The charges made sense: In a television interview on
election night, Graddick thanked Republican voters and said the
crossover vote had made the difference in the run-off. Jean Sullivan,
a Republican National Committeewoman from Selma also had bragged to
the press that Graddick had been elected by Republicans, and, on the
weekend before the run-off, a series of television commercials had
been aired in which four Republican state senators stated that
crossover voting was legal.
          The party challenge was soon followed by a class-action federal
lawsuit filed by a black county commissioner and his wife alleging
that Graddick had violated Section Five of the Voting Rights Act by
advising voters that it was legal to cross over. Graddick had
illegally diluted the black vote by changing election practices
without preclearance from the Justice Department, the suit charged.
          On Aug. 1, federal judges Johnson, Truman Hobbs and Myron Thompson
ruled on the voting rights issue.
          In strong language, the Court concluded, "The June 24th runoff was
so close, the number of illegal crossover voters so great, and
Mr. Graddick's violation so flagrant, this Court cannot take the
chance that Mr. Graddick received the Democratic nomination as a
result of his illegal actions." The judges barred the Alabama
Democratic Party from certifying Graddick as its nominee and said the
Party could either certify Baxley (if it could be proved that he would
have won except for crossover votes) or could call a new runoff
between Graddick and Baxley.
          "It is absolutely clear," the Court continued, "that as a candidate
and, more importantly, as the Attorney 

General, Mr. Graddick made
every effort to get voters to violate the anti-crossover rule."
          The Court had no sympathy with Graddick's argument that the
anti-crossover rule was unenforced in the two previous elections,
saying, "We note also that during the entire time the crossover law
remained on the books and allegedly unenforced, Mr. Graddick was the
chief legal officer of the state of Alabama."
          With this directive from the federal courts, a five-member
committee of the Alabama Democratic Party began hearing the party
challenges. On August 15, the committee certified Baxley as the winner
based on votes legally cast, although the committee never actually
declared it had evidence showing how many crossover votes had been
cast nor what percentage of the crossovers went to Graddick. The
committee declared Graddick's actions amounted to "malconduct" and
that he had "abused the power of his office" and failed to maintain
"separation between his campaign efforts and the official acts of his
office." The subcommittee, as had the federal court, accepted
statistical evidence showing that almost all crossovers voted for
Graddick, more than enough to change the outcome of the election.
          Graddick then went into federal court himself but was rejected in
an opinion even more sharply worded than the first. The judges said
the attorney general showed "a complete misunderstanding of the
controlling legal principles of the case."
          In true Wallace style, Graddick bitterly attacked the federal
judges, comparing them to a piano player "on the first floor of a
house of ill repute" oblivious to actions on the second floor. He
called himself the "people's candidate" and charged that the election
had been stolen by the Democratic subcommittee, a "gang of five."
          Over Labor Day, Graddick traveled about the state raising funds for
a November write-in campaign. Political observers in Alabama say a
successful write-in campaign would be almost impossible due to the
complexity of the procedures and the effort required of voters, and
would help Baxley by taking votes from his Republican opponent.
          The Republican party leadership, while nervous about a Graddick
write-in, is jubilant over the Democratic in-fighting. The two-party
system has been born in Alabama, optimists among them have declared,
with the expectation that many nominal Democrats are now so disgusted
that they will make the jump to the GOP. The Republican candidate, Guy
Hunt, a quiet former probate judge who could not buy an audience two
months ago and is still often unrecognized as he works the shopping
mall crowds, is a classic case of the man in the right place at the
right time. Whether he has staying power depends on the depth of the
anti-Baxley and anti-Democratic Party sentiment, and on Graddick, who
is demagoguing around the state with the energy--if not the style--of
a young George Wallace. If Graddick drops the write-in campaign and
Hunt proves to be the dull but clean figure he seems, the Republicans'
odds of taking the statehouse will improve from none to possible.
          But November is a long time off, and Baxley can still win. He is a
skillful campaigner and a strong debater, and he has a large following
of loyal Democrats who will work hard for him and the party. His
immediate challenge is convincing the uncommitted that it was
Graddick— not a five-man Democratic conspiracy— who stole their votes
through his willful and greedy violation of the Voting Rights Act.
          
            Excerpts from booklet published during Alabama Democratic
Primary campaign by forces opposed to Lt. Gov. Bill Baxley and linked
to Atty. Gen. Charles Graddick. The comic book-style piece is
customized on the back cover (below) to attack Baxley, but is
otherwise a generic attack on the National Education Association. NEA
officials say the same booklet has been used in other states by
right-wing organizations.
          
          
            Randall Williams is the managing editor of
Southern Changes and a partner in the Black Belt
Communications Group of Montgomery, Alabama.
          
        
        
          CDC Study Reveals--South's Hysterectomy Rate Highest
          By Tullos, AllenAET
          Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986, pp. 13-14
          
          Nearly five million American women underwent hysterectomies in the
last decade, making this procedure one of the most frequently
performed operations for women of reproductive age and an important
public health concern. Since 1970, the Centers for Disease Control
(CDC) in Atlanta have provided epidemiologic surveillance of
hysterectomies performed on women from fifteen to forty-four years of
age. This summer the CDC released a report which examined, among other
factors, the influence of race and geographic section of the US on
hysterectomy rates for 1981-1982, and which updated the analysis of
hysterectomy rates for 1970-1980. The results of the survey contain
striking findings for women of reproductive age in the Southern
states.
          The data that was used for this surveillance effort was gathered
from 1970 to 1982 as part of the ongoing National Hospital Discharge
Survey. This survey samples hospitals throughout the US in order to
estimate the number of patients, their diagnoses and the surgical
procedures they undergo. The sample of hospitals is designed to
reflect an overall distribution of short-stay hospitals in the United
States. In most cases women will have a hysterectomy done in a
short-stay hospital. The CDC survey is a sample, not the actual number
of hysterectomies done in the US, and as such may contain unknown
biases.
          A 1983 analysis showed that the nationwide hysterectomy rate
declined from 1975 to 1980 among women of reproductive age. The
current study however, indicates that the noted decline may have begun
to plateau, although rates in 1982 were the lowest since 1970. The
average age at time of hysterectomy for women in the fifteen to
forty-four age group was similar in all geographic areas, ranging from
34.2 years in the South to 36.6 years in the Northeast.
          As in previous years, major differences in hysterectomy rates by
section of the country have persisted (see Figure 1). The South
continues to show the highest rates. The most striking differences
exist between the South and the Northeast. The hysterectomy rate for
women of reproductive age in the South was two and a half times that
for women in the Northeast.
          During 1979-1980, differences in hysterectomy rates between blacks
and whites declined noticeably. In 1981, however, the rates of blacks
and whites diverged, only to converge again in 1982. In 1982 (the most
recent year for which data is available), for the first time since
surveillance began in 1970, blacks had a lower hysterectomy rate than
whites.
          Variations in hysterectomy rates by section of the country have
persisted since 1970. Lacking more than the limited data from the
sample study, CDC researchers are quite cautious about speculating on
the regional differences. "As epidemiologists in the federal
government," comments Dr. Kathleen Irwin, researcher on the CDC study,
"we feel that our job is to present the numbers and let other people
speculate on them."
          The CDC study suggests only that "patient-related factors may
include regional differences in the incidence of gynecologic
conditions and in general attitudes toward surgery or sterilization
during the reproductive years. Physician-related factors may include
regional differences in trends in training and practice."
          "If there were true differences in the South compared to other
regions," asks Dr. Irwin, "what could these be? There could be a whole
range of differences. Our study looked at only one factor at a time:
race, region, age group for the United States. We didn't look at race
and region at the same time. It could be an age-related phenomenon:
that the age distribution in the South is different than in other
parts of the country among women who are likely to get
hysterectomies. It may be that there is a higher prevalence in the
South of certain diseases of the uterus which are treated with
hysterectomies. It could be that physicians in the South are more
liable to treat a given condition with a hysterectomy.
          "Because of the nature of our analysis," says Dr. Irwin, "we're not
in a position to say which one of those things or which combination it
could be."
          "It's disturbing to me," commented clinic administrator Lynn
Thogersen, of the Atlanta Feminist Women's Health Center, "as a
women's health care 

provider, and as a woman, to see the rate of
hysterectomies for women in general being so high, and especially to
see the difference for women in the South when compared with other
areas of the country. Certainly we wonder if all these hysterectomies
were necessary.
          "One thing that might have a bearing on the numbers in the South,"
continues Thogersen, "is the fact that in all of the Southern states,
unlike states such as New York and California, Medicaid no longer pays
for abortions, and hasn't since about 1981. We wonder if in fact women
are choosing hysterectomy as a way of controlling their fertility
because other options aren't available to them.
          "And I wonder if one reason that rates of hysterectomies have
dropped in other sections of the country is due to the availability of
tubal ligations as a method of sterilization. Sterilization, including
both male and female, is now the most used method of contraception in
the United States, but it's mostly women who are choosing
sterilization.
          "Statistics like these," concludes Thogersen, "make you want to ask
many other questions for which we have no answers. What, for instance,
is the difference in hysterectomy rates between black and white women
in the South? Between poor and middle-class women? What, if any,
significance can be read in this study about the traditional timidity
and acceptance of professional authority shown by women in the South
toward the largely white male ranks of physicians? Simply put, we need
to know much more about what lies behind these disturbing rates."
          
            The CDC study, "Hysterectomy Among Women of Reproductive
Age, Unites States, Update for 1981- 1982," was published in the CDC
Surveillance Summary, Vol. 35, No. ISS (June 1986). The
study was conducted by Kathleen L Irwin, M.D. and Herbert B. Peterson,
M.D. (both of the Epidemiologic Studies Branch) and Joyce M. Hughes
and Sara W. Gill (of the Research and Statistics Branch), Division of
Reproductive Health, Center for Health Promotion and
Education.
          
        
        
          Empty Rituals in the War on Drugs
          By Crowther, HalHal Crowther
          Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986, pp. 14-15
          
          Two months dead and Len Bias is still making headlines. When
cocaine claims a victim who's young and famous and a gifted athlete,
it has to be someone else's fault. Find the dealer--some other black
kid on a Washington street corner who might have made twenty sales
that same night, and who still may not know that he had the honor of
selling the coke that killed one of the most amazing atheletes I've
ever seen. Shake down all his friends, bring charges agains the kid
who rolled up the dollar bill, or the one who owned the little spoon
that carried the fatal spoonful. Fire his coach, Lefty Driesell, whose
greatest fault is that he always tries to protect his players when
he'd be better off protecting himself. Turn over the whole Maryland
athletic department, test a lot of urine, find some players who can
read.
          That's the way we do it here. They tried to pin first degree murder
on the poor woman who assisted in the messy departure of John Belushi,
a notorious glutton for drugs of any description. Because he was a
celebrity, I suppose, and her prosecution satisfied some kind of
national hunger for a scapegoat. Everyone who knew Belushi knows that
it would have taken a women's volleyball team to keep him away from
the drug, once it was in the same room with him.
          It's a waste of police work, an empty ritual like most of the
speeches that are mumbled over the dead. Bias and Don Rogers, like
Belushi and all the uncelebrated cadavers before them, took the drugs
because they wanted it, because they thought they needed it. Putting
the blame on their suppliers is just as dishonest as putting the heat
on Mexico, and on Panama and Columbia. It's the United States that's
the world's great cocaine consumer of the world, a market so rich that
the economies of several countries depend on our insatiable habit. We
are the John Belushi of nations. We should have Belushi and John
Delorean on our stamps and coins.
          While we threaten Mexico for its modest exports, our domestic
industry is in a growth spiral so colossal that thugs in Miami will be
purchasing Fortune 500 companies before the year 2000. With cash. In
the last two years agents have seized fifty major cocaine laboratories
in this country, some with a weekly capacity of one thousand pounds of
cocaine. The largest, in upstate New York, was discovered by accident
when a neighboring building caught fire. The cocaine hotline in a New
Jersey hospital gets fourteen hundred calls every day. The Coast Guard
in North Carolina admits that it's losing the battle against cocaine
smugglers. Monster profits have inspired unprecedented daring and
ingenuity among smugglers. Agents have found packets of cocaine under
the tongues of fish. A small boat can earn its owner $25,000 on one
major smuggling mission; a drop site for a major shipment is worth
$100,000.
          In New York City, dealing cocaine has become almost legal--only one
of three people arrested on felony drug charges is ever indicted, far
less jailed--simply because there are so many cases that the courts
can't begin to deal with them. New York's elite narcotics task force,
Operation Pressure Point, has made eighteen thousand arrests since
1984, fifty-eight hundred of them felony arrests. Fewer than twelve
hundred cases have resulted in indictments, and only 476 dealers were
sentenced to as much as a year in jail. Judges, with rapes and murders
backed up (last year they got through half of one percent of their
cases), tend to snarl at presecutors who waste their time with
cocaine.
          "A lot of judges feel narcotics cases are second-rate cases,"
complains the police inspector who runs Pressure Point. "They don't
care for low-level cocaine sales. At the plea-bargaining stages, they
ask "Why did you bring me this garbage?"
          Like bootleg liquor during prohibition, cocaine in America is
distributed on such a scale that law enforcement is becoming a
joke. It takes a lot of nerve to blame Mexico. If you were a Latin
American, with an attitude toward the United States that might range

anywhere from loathing to ambivalence, could you resist the
opportunity? They'll never stop us with money or rifles, but they can
help us burn ourselves up from the inside out. As much as anything
else, I think they're motivated by morbid curiosity about our capacity
for this terrible stuff. How deep is the American nostril? And it's
not as if the United States has ever neglected a foreign market on
moral consideration. When our scientists decided that cigarettes were
hopelessly poisonous, our tobacco companies raced to exploit the
foreign markets before word got around. The baby formula scandal, an
American company's attempt to eliminate breastfeeding in the Third
World, is still one of the classic stories of greed and cynicism. In
most years, the United States leads the world in the sale of guns and
armaments, which are somewhat more controversial than cocaine. In
countries where we have special interests, we give the guns away.
          Any Latin who sells drugs to Americans can call himself a
patriot. Cocaine is the "now" profession in the Western Hemisphere,
for any youngster with the courage to pursue it. Maybe it's only
timidity that keeps me from emulating John Delorean myself. To get
rich, and at the same time to contribute to the self-destruction of
affluent fools? It would be hard to imagine a more satisfying
career. Show me the philosophy that makes it more objectionable than
selling chocolate to the obese, or selling Wild Irish Rose to
wings.
          It's time Americans quit pointing fingers and owned up to their
habit, as individuals and as a society. Alcoholics don't cure
themselves by blowing up distilleries and bashing bartenders. Why
should we pay the police to protect us from ourselves? When a kid dies
on cocaine, the correct question isn't "Where did he get it?", it's
"Why did he want it?"
          Any progess has to start there. Cocaine has been around a long
time. When I tried to trace the authorship of the cocaine song that
Mike Cross sings ("Cocaine...runnin' round my brain...") the trail led
way back beyond Leadbelly and the Rev. Gary Davis, into dim unrecorded
music history. The song is in the public domain. Why is this
disreputable old standby the glamor drug of the Age of Reagan?
Overpriced, addictive, lethal, brief in its promise and long in its
revenge.
          It has something to do with risk, with gambling. A rational human
being, faced with the uncertainty of existence, will try to improve
the odds. Americans, with an increasing level of obsession, will try
to beat the odds. Supporters of North Carolina's Shearon Harris
nuclear plant wrote an incredible number of letters comparing the odds
against a nuclear accident to the odds against death by snakebite, or
yellow fever. You can't convince me that those letters weren't written
by morons, but I can see that they were distinctly American
morons. When the novelist A. G. Mojtabai visited Amarillo, Texas,
which sits on top of all the nuclear weapons assembled in the United
States, she found the locals more than happy with their odds. More
alarmingly, she found that the city was home to most of the
fundamentalist "Rapture" sects, which believe that Armageddon is
O.K. because the Lord is going to snatch them up just before the bombs
go off. Figure the odds those guys are playing.
          When reporters asked a bunch of street kids if the death of Len
Bias had changed their attitude toward cocaine, most of them said
"No." It was as if the death lottery was over, Bias had lost, and
their odds were just as good, if not better, for the next one. "I
think of Len Bias as a person who just had bad luck," said one kid in
Brooklyn.
          The spiritual capital of the United States is Las Vegas, and Las
Vegas is the spiritual armpit of the world. Gambling is a wide streak
in the national character that's being exploited as it was never
exploited before. The gambler's fatalism and machismo make a potent
speedball. It's the age of the quick fix, elation without foundation,
a bloated stock market where crazy gamblers thrive, windfall profits
at the expense of everybody's future. Cocaine is its drug. Sure things
and safe drugs are for old maids. Fly now, pay later. And don't be
afraid. The odds may be narrowing, but the odds are still on your
side.
          
            Hal Crowther writes for the Spectator of
Raleigh, N.C., from which this article is adapted.
          
        
        
          Uneasy Victories in the Supreme Court
          By Mcdonald, LaughlinLaughlin Mcdonald
          Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986, pp. 15-18
          
          During the 1985-1986 term, the Supreme Court decided eight major
race discrimination cases. Four involved employment discrimination and
affirmative action, three involved jury selection and the seventh
voting rights. In all eight, the basic positions (if not the specific
remedies) advocated by minorities prevailed, while the restrictive
interpretations of civil rights law urged by the Reagan Department of
Justice were decisively rejected.
          In the first of the employment cases, Wygant
v. Jackson Board of Education, the Court held that a school board
could not lay off non-minority teachers with more seniority than
minority teachers who were retained as part of an affirmative action
plan. The Court reasoned that "layoffs impose the entire burden of
achieving racial equality on particular individuals, often resulting
in serious disruption of their lives. The burden is too intrusive."
Although minority teachers were denied a measure of protection in
Wygant, the decision as a whole was a victory for affirmative
action.
          First, the Court indicated that race-conscious affirmative action
plans, including the use of hiring goals, are constitutional as part
of the nation's commitment to eradicating racial
discrimination. Second, the Court rejected the Department of Justice's
suggestion that affirmative action must be limited to 

specific,
identifiable victims of past discrimination. Since it is often
impossible to prove which particular minority would have been hired in
the absence of discrimination, the adoption of government's position
would have meant the end of meaningful affirmative action. Third, an
employer can justify an affirmative action plan by showing a
reasonable basis for concluding such a remedy is appropriate; an
employer need not have, in fact, discriminated in the past.
          In Sheetmetal Workers v. EEOC, the Court,
building upon Wygant, held that an affirmative
action plan to increase minority membership in a union could be
required in cases of "persistent or egregious discrimination" or where
necessary "to dissipate the lingering effects of pervasive
discrimination." In the third employment discrimination case, Firefighters v. City of Cleveland, the Court upheld a
voluntary affirmative action plan to hire minority firefighters even
though it may have provided broader relief than a district judge could
have ordered after a trial.
          Finally, in Bazemore v. Friday, the Court
ruled that the North Carolina Agricultural Extension Service had a
duty to eradicate salary disparities between white and black workers,
even though the disparities had their origin prior to the time federal
anti-discrimination laws were made applicable to public employers.
          The Court's employment discrimination cases are the most
significant setback to date for the Reagan Administration's five
and-a-half year crusade to eradicate hiring goals and restrict relief
to the few identifiable victims of discrimination. In rejecting the
Solicitor General's arguments, the Court frequently used strong
language accusing the government of "misconceiving" controlling legal
principles and "twisting" the meaning of applicable statutes. The
rulings of the Court suggest that the Department of Justice under its
present leadership has lost much of its institutional credibility, and
that its arguments were viewed as part of a rightwing political
campaign rather than as based upon the rule of law.
          The Supreme Court also significantly strengthened the protection of
minorities in jury selection during the last term. In Batson v. Kentucky, it held for the first time that a
prosecutor's use of peremptory challenges to strike black jurors in a
particular case violated the Fourteenth Amendment. The law prior to
Batson had been established, ironically enough,
in a case decided during the years that Earl Warren was Chief Justice,
Swain v. Alabama. Swain held that a prosecutor's
use of peremptory challenges was immune from judicial review, except
were blacks were removed in "case after case, whatever the
circumstances, whatever the crime and whoever the defendant or the
victim may be."
          The Swain standard, which was all but
impossible to meet, had been increasingly criticized by legal
commentators, while a number of lower courts had circumvented the
decision by ruling that the use of challenges by a prosecutor to
exclude blacks in individual cases violated the Sixth Amendent's
guarantee of a fair and impartial trial or could be prohibited by a
court in the exercise of its general supervisory powers. Despite the
enlightened trend of dissatisfaction with Swain,
the Solicitor General strenuously, and predictably, argued that a
defendant could not establish a constitutional violation by showing
"only" that blacks were systematically struck from the jury. The
argument failed to persuade the Court.
          In a second case, Turner v. Murray, the Court
held that a capital defendant accused of an interracial crime had a
constitutional right to have prospective jurors questioned about their
possible racial bias. In the final jury selection case, Vasquez v. Hillery, the Court reaffirmed existing law
that the exclusion of blacks from a grand jury was not harmless error,
but required a new trial no matter how old the original conviction
was.
          In the last of the racial discrimination cases, Thornburg v. Gingles, the Court construed for the
first time Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. Congress amended
Section 2 in 1982 to provide that voting practices are unlawful if
they "result" in discrimination. Prior to 1982, an election law could
only be invalidated if minority plaintiffs showed that it was adopted
or was being maintained with a discriminatory purpose. The Court not
only affirmed the constitutionality of Section 2, but significantly
simplified the test for determining if an election plan using at-large
voting was unlawful.
          According to the Court, an apportionment plan violates Section 2 by
causing impermissible vote dilution if the plan permits a bloc-voting
white majority usually to defeat the candidates supported by a
politically and geographically cohesive minority. Factors such as a
lingering history of discrimination, racial campaign appeals, a
depressed minority socioeconomic status, etc., which Congress had
indicated in the legislative history were relevant to a vote dilution
claim, were held by the Court to be supportive of, but not essential
to, a Section 2 violation.
          The new test adopted by the Court to measure vote dilution based on
race is analogous to the one-person one-vote formulation that measures
vote dilution based on population inequality. Both focus on racial
patterns in election returns and in census data. Both avoid excesive
investigation into historical and social factors and contain readily
ascertainable standards for the lower courts to apply.
          Thornburg also held that plaintiffs were not required to show that
white voters were voting purposefully to exclude minorities from
office to establish bloc voting, and that the election of a token or
minimal number of blacks could not be used to defend an appointment
plan which worked usually to dilute the minority vote. The latter
ruling was a specific rejection of the Solictor General's argument in
the case that Section 2 protected only token--not equal--minority
political participation.
          Despite the fact that the Court as a whole reiterated its
commitment to racial equality this term, there was a significant
degree of division among the individual justices. Seven of the eight
discrimination cases were ideologically polarized, i.e., Brennan and
Marshall (the left wing of the court) voted together and took a
different position from that of Burger and Rehnquist (the right wing
of the court) on one or more major issues. (See Table I)

          
            
              Table I: IDEOLOGICAL POLARIZATION IN RACE DISCRIMINATION
CASES
              
                JUSTICE   
                BRENNAN/MARSHALL   
                %
                BURGER/REHNQUIST   
                %  
              
              
                Stevens    
                7   
                100   
                0
                0   
              
              
                Blackmun   
                7   
                100   
                0
                0   
              
              
                Powell     
                3   
                43   
                4
                57   
              
              
                White      
                3   
                43   
                4
                57   
              
              
                O'Connor   
                3   
                43   
                4
                57   
              
            
          
          The margin for victory for civil rights resulted from the
consistent support of the Brennan/Marshall position by Stevens and
Blackmun, and the inability of Burger and Rehnquist to hold the votes
of White, Powell, and O'Connor more than about half the time.
          The importance of the White/Powell/O'Connor bloc can be seen from
the fact that these three justices were more frequently in the
majority than any other members of the Court. As Table II shows,
O'Connor voted with the majority 89 percent of the time, and Powell
and White 75 percent of the time. Burger and Rehnquist voted most
frequently in the minority. (See Table II)
          
            
              Table II: JUSTICES MOST FREQUENTLY IN MAJORITY OR
MINORITY*
              
                JUSTICE    
                MAJORITY    
                %
                MINORITY    
                %
              
              
                Brennan     
                7   
                70   
                3
                30
              
              
                Marshall    
                7   
                64   
                4
                36
              
              
                Stevens     
                7    
                70   
                3
                30
              
              
                Blackmun    
                7   
                70   
                3
                30
              
              
                Powell      
                6   
                75   
                2
                25
              
              
                White       
                6   
                75   
                2
                25
              
              
                O'Connor    
                8   
                89   
                1
                11
              
              
                Burger      
                4   
                50   
                4
                50
              
              
                Rehnquist   
                3   
                37   
                5
                63
              
              
                *This table treats opinions in which a justice concurred in part
and dissented in part as both a majority and a minority
opinio
              
            
          
          Brennan, the senior exponent of the Court's liberal philosophy, was
suprisingly influential on the term's discrimination cases. He wrote
four of the eight majority opinions and was more frequently aligned
with the other justices than any other member of the Court. As Table
III shows, Brennan, Marshall, Blackmun, Stevens and Powell voted
together at least half of the time. None of the other justices
approached that level of agreement. (See Table III)
          
            
              Table III: VOTING ALIGNMENT IN RACE DISCRIMINATION CASES
1985-1986 TERM*
              
                JUSTICE    
                BRENNAN   
                MARSHALL
                STEVENS   
                BLACKMUN   
                POWELL
                WHITE   
                O'CONNOR
                BURGER
              
              
                Marshall    
                88%
              
              
                Stevens     
                63%      
                25%
              
              
                Blackmun    
                50%      
                25%
                13%
              
              
                Powell      
                50%      
                13%
                13%        
                13%
              
              
                White       
                38%      
                13%
                13%        
                13%
                25%
              
              
                O'Connor    
                38%      
                0%
                0%         
                0%        
                38%
                25%
              
              
                Burger      
                13%      
                0%
                0%         
                0%        
                25%
                13%      
                13%
              
              
                Rehnquist   
                13%      
                0%
                0%         
                0%        
                38%
                13%      
                13%
                38%
              
              
                *To determine the frequency of agreement, the number of times
two members of the Court voted together was divided by the eight race
discrimination cases decided by the Court in which both justices
participated.  Justices were considered voting together only if they
joined the same opinion, concurrence or dissent.  Although justices
occasionally voted together more than once in a given case, their
alignment under such circumstances was given a value of
1. 
              
            
          
          The term's racial discrimination cases do not, of course, provide a
full picture of the Court's general treatment of civil and
constitutional claims. They also fail to show the Court's gross
disregard for the rights of politically more vulnerable minorities,
such as gays and Orthodox Jews. In Bowers
v. Hardwick, for example, the Court ruled that the Constitution
affords no protection from criminal prosecution to gays who
participate in homosexual acts in the privacy of their homes. In
another case, Goldman v. Weinberger the Court
held that the military could forbid an Orthodox Jew from wearing a
yarmulke, despite his sincere 

religious beliefs and the lack of any
service-related need.
          A court that turns its back on the deeply held beliefs of a
religous minority and leaves the regulation of intimate relationships
to the whim of a hostile majority, may in the long run provide scant
protection for the rights of racial minorities. President Reagan has
recently nominated the most ideologically inflexible member of the
Court, Justice Rehnquist, to be Chief Justice. He has also nominated
Antonin Scalia, another rigid conservative, to fill the vacancy
created by the resignation of current Chief Justice Burger. More
Reagan appointments would surely tilt the Court significantly to the
right, jeopardizing the continued constitutional protection of the
Nation's racial minorities.
          
            Laughlin McDonald is director of the Southern Regional
Office of the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation.
          
        
        
          Tombee: Portrait of a Cotton Planter
          Reviewed by Wood, Peter H.Peter H. Wood
          Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986, pp. 21-24
          
          Tombee: Portrait of a Cotton Planter by
Theodore Rosengarten. With the Journal of Thomas
B. Chaplin (1822-1890). New York: William Morrow and Company,
Inc., 1986. $22.95.  Drums and Shadows: Survival Studies Among 
the Georgia
Coastal Negroes by the Georgia Writer's Project. Athens:
University of Georgia Press, 1940; reissued with an introduction by
Charles Joyner, 1986. $26.00 (paperback $9.95).
          "All God's dangers ain't a white man." This memorable reflection on
the nature of Southern history came from a black sharecropper,
recalling the effect of the boll weevil on his cotton crop. The
listener was Theodore Rosengarten, a Brooklyn-born student of
"American Civilization," doing research in the late '60s on the
history of Southern tenant farmers. His book, All God's
Dangers: The Life of Nate Shaw, received the National Book
Award in 1974 and has become regarded as a classic in the realm of
oral history. Combining the best of the new social history with the
South's rich narrative tradition, the volume won an immediate place on
every shelf containing the important modern works 

about the region.
          Instead of using his first book for ante at the poker tables of
academia, Rosengarten settled near a small fishing town on the South
Carolina coast where he now lives with his wife and sons. There he has
continued to fish the waters of Southern history with the same
patience and satisfaction that he brings to shrimping and crabbing in
the tidal creeks of the Lowcountry. His most exciting historical catch
occured in 1979, when archivist David Moltke-Hansen at the South
Carolina Historical Society in Charleston showed him the lengthy
manuscript journal of Thomas B. Chaplin, a member of the antebellum
elite and the owner of Tombee Plantation on St. Helena Island near
Beaufort. After much careful work, Rosengarten completed a
three-hundred-page portrait of Chaplin, and with the assistance of
Susan W. Walker he edited and annotated the journal itself. The
historian's judicious appraisal and the fascinating primary source are
both included in Tombee, along with maps, genealogical charts, and
copious notes.
          It is hard, literally, to know where to begin in this massive book,
for the biographical treatment and the detailed journal go hand in
hand. The latter begins in 1845 when Chaplin, age twenty-two, already
controlled the lives of more than sixty enslaved Southerners, who grew
cotton for him on a 376-acre plantation facing Parris and Hilton Head
Islands. His wife Mary, also twenty-two, had already borne four
children and a fifth was on the way. The journal ends in 1858, seven
years after Mary's death and six years after Chaplin's marriage to her
half-sister, Sophy. By then, the diarist was approaching the end of
his volume-and the end of an era. But for twenty years after the Civil
War Chaplin occasionally looked back over his personal record and
added revealing afterthoughts and comments. At the beginning of 1886,
four years before his death, he inserted a three-page epilogue and
closed out his personal ledger for good. Dependent and morose, broken
both physically and economically, Chaplin was living with Sophy on the
farm of a relative, where he could "only work a garden & try to
raise poultry." He and his wife, Chaplin concluded, "are both feeling
the effects of age & can't stand much more thumping & tumbling
about, & I pray the remainder may be passed in peace and ease. So
this ends."
          Thomas Chaplin, like Nate Shaw, had a distinctive personality and a
complicated life. Both men lived close to the soil of the Deep South,
and each in his way endured a good deal of thumping and tumbling
about. Their worlds were determined by who owned the land and what
crops it could yield. They each witnessed, and were shaped by, the
region's travails over race, and they faced many of God's other
dangers as well. Both engaged in continuous and judicious observation
of their own place in society. Moreover, both had the good fortune of
ending up in the fine mesh of Rosengarten's casting net, so that their
unique character traits and archetypal qualities could be observed by
others. But here the similarities end. For Shaw, though a generation
younger, told a story that sounded strange and novel-if relevant and
disconcerting-to most modern ears. Chaplin's tale, on the other hand,
gains interest precisely because we inevitably hold it up beside
well-worn images of antebellum cotton planters.
          Naturally, he fits none of these contradictory stereotypes we have
inherited. Far from an opulent patriarch, he remained insecure about
his economic holdings and his personal status throughout his
life--though not so insecure as to become a Simon Legree. "My heart
chills at the idea, and my blood boils," he wrote in his journal in
1849 after seeing how a neighboring planter had whipped a crippled
slave and then chained him by the neck in an outhouse overnight to
choke and freeze to death. The more we get to know Chaplin, the more
he seems like a character out of a Chekhov play. And like most Russian
landlords before the abolition of serfdom, this member of the South's
rural elite has a very imperfect sense of the forces that are holding
him up and tugging him down.
          Occasionally, life imitates art so thoroughly that whole passages
from the diary read like notes from a fiction writer's journal. An
Ellison or Faulkner would beam to have created a protagonist who has
weak vision in one eye due to the burst of a rocket at a Fourth of
July celebration! Or consider Chaplin's entry for May 9, 1846. He was
sailing across Broad River with two other white men and four Negro
slaves when a sudden squall 

capsized their vessel and left them
clinging to the overturned boat. "One poor fellow named Monday could
not swim & though we got him on the boat twice the third time he went
down, never to rise again poor fellow...." The rest eventually managed
to right the boat and row to shore. Chaplin lost all his best hunting
and riding equipment and a set of gold studs, but he saved his
water-soaked pocket watch.
          "A broken watch is a small thing next to a life that's lost,"
Rosengarten observes, "but Chaplin did not see it that way....Faced
with great losses he clung to small things. Always aware of his class,
the things he recalled when he had been stripped of everything were
emblems of pleasure and ease." This applied not only to an overturned
boat but to an overturned land title, not only to a brief spring gust
but to the five-year storm of war that arrived at St. Helena with the
Union gunboats. "Thus, we find him," Rosengarten concludes, "missing
his old oak chair when what had passed out of his hands were his house
and land; and fretting over the loss of silver forks and spoons when
what had perished was the social order."
          In offering a portrait of the master of Tombee plantation,
Rosengarten also provides a picture of the social order of the Sea
Islands, or part of it. His narrative and notes trace networks of
kinship and debt back and forth across the Lowcountry from Beautort to
Charleston to Savannah with a care that should delight any Daughter of
the Confederacy. (References to various Chaplins take up more than a
page and a half in the index.) At the same time, the author displays a
consciousness toward the non-elites that most dedicated plantation
watchers still lack. But as Rosengarten himself points out in a
chapter on "The Chaplin Family," blacks outnumbered whites eight to
one on St. Helena Island during the antebellum period and by about
that much at Tombee.
          While it might not be fair to ask Rosengarten to take up the task
himself, it is worth remarking that a portrait of the local slave
community could now be undertaken with the same attention to
detail. One wonders whether the far-too-cautious Lyndhurst Foundation,
which supported Rosengarten with Coca-cola bottling money from
Chattanooga, would be willing to fund an equally well-crafted study of
members of the island's black majority? Hopefully, the current efforts
of the venerable Penn Community Center to bring St. Helena's black
history to life will soon bear fruit, though we must wait to see
whether the acclaim for Tombee will be used by funders to further such
designs.
          While they are making up their minds, they can examine another
challenging book that has appeared this summer: Drums and
Shadows: Survival Studies Among the Georgia Coastal
Negroes. It represents a collaborative effort by the Savannah
Unit of the Georgia Writer's Project, set up by the Works Projects
Administration, and it first appeared in 1940. At a time when
forgetful and careless bashing of the New Deal is sanctioned from on
high, it is a credit to the editors at the University of Georgia Press
that they have reissued this volume as part of their handsome and
selective "Brown Thrasher" series. It includes an informative
introduction by Charles Joyner whose recent book about the Waccamaw
Neck region of South Carolina, Down by the Riverside,
affords the best available study of a black community in the
Lowcountry.
          Drums provides an intriguing companion volume to
Tombee. It concerns Georgia rather than South Carolina;
it focuses on blacks rather than whites; and it uses oral history and
an ethnographic approach rather than archival research and
biographical techniques to make its points. But it describes a world
close to Thomas Chaplin's own in a hundred ways, and the impressive
photographs by Muriel and Malcomb Bell, Jr., help bring the
inhabitants of that world to life. Black and white residents of Tombee
would have had no trouble recognizing the "Wooden grave markers at
Sunbury: or the "Praise House at Sapelo" pictured here. They would
have felt thoroughly at home around Lewis McIver's fishing nets, Katie
Brown's mortar and pestle, Cuffy Wilson's tote basket, or Julius
Bailey's ox cart-more at home no doubt that some of these people's
far-flung grandchildren might feel today.
          The pictures from the original edition have been moved prominently
to the front and introduced with a note from the photographers. Though
somewhat darker and smaller than they were in the original, these
shots (clicked from under a black cloth, with a bulky Kodak camera on
a tripod) retain their freshness as strong portraits from a period
known for its impressive visual studies of everyday people. "We had
seen the Julia Peterkin / Doris Ulmann collaboration, Roll,
Jordan, Roll," the Bells recall. "The soft focus of the Ulmann
portraits was not to our liking, [but] Ulmann's remarkable 

ability to
capture an attitude and to reflect her subject's character we hoped to
emulate." For this edition the Bells have added some interesting new
images from their files, such as the picture of a "Goatskin-covered
log drum made by James Collier" that provided the cover design for the
original book and the sensitive photograph of Cuffy Wilson and his
granddaughter. Many of the previous images have been cropped less
tightly, and what is lost in the intimacy of a close-up face is gained
in the inclusion of background setting. Why some of these images have
been reversed in the current edition seems deserving of
explanation.
          "Our picture-taking expeditions were always led by Mary Granger,"
the Bells relate, and it would be useful, perhaps inspiring, to know
more about this "confident and cheerful" woman. (Joyner tells us only
that she "was a cosmopolitan and well-traveled novelist" with a
formidible intellect.") Granger was the district supervisor of the
Savannah Unit of the Georgia Writer's Project, and as its
"unquestioned leader," the photographers remember, "she told us of her
proposed study of African cultural survivals she believed to be extant
along the Georgia coast." In the late '30s this hypothesis remained
unfashionable on most fronts. As Joyner explains, dominant Southern
historians like U. B. Phillips were ignorant and disparaging about
African cultures, while northern sociologists like Robert E. Park had
accepted a "catastrophist interpretation of the black cultural
experience"--one that still receives nodding acceptance from many
mainstream scholars. The essence of this view had been stated in 1939
by the black sociologist E. Franklin Frazier: "Probably never before
in history," Frazier wrote, "has a people been so completely stripped
of its social heritage as the Negroes who were brought to America."
          But Granger had different ideas, and she put together a group of
advisors who could endorse, or at least tolerate, such research. The
work paid off, and though it was dismissed by critics at the time,
Drums and Shadows has come to be regarded as a
pioneering work, however dated or patronizing some passages may
seem. Even the controversial use of phonetic spelling in transcribing
interviews now appears useful on balance, as understanding of the
roots and logic of the Gullah dialect continues to grow. Meanwhile,
Granger's basic premise about African survivals has proven so true
that a new generation of scholars run the risk of dismissing it as
boring and old-hat at just the time when increased western knowledge
of historical African religions and cultures is opening up new layers
of potential research.
          Today we find ourselves thinking as much about Africa's current
events as about its past, and one can hardly read these two excellent
books without reflecting on political and cultural conditions in South
Africa. We glimpse that world through the narrow keyhole provided by
the American media, censored at one end by an embattled white minority
that would understand perfectly the gag rules of Thomas Chaplin's
South and at the other end by our own inertia, myopia, and
ignorance. With righteous officials still telling us which historical
comparisons we cannot make, the urge builds to contrast and compare on
our own, as shown by Steven Lawson's excellent essay here in
Southern Changes in May. If both these books make good
reading when examined alone, and better reading when considered
together, they may prove best of all when regarded in a wide
comparative context that links them to our present concerns.
          
            Peter H. Wood lives in Hillsborough, N.C., and teaches
Early American History at Duke University. He is the author of
Black Majority: Negroes in Colonial South Carolina from 1670
Through the Stono Rebellion.
          
        
        
          Steve Earle's Hope on the Highway
          By Orr, JayJay Orr
          Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986, pp. 19-21
          
          Steve Earle has caused a stir in the Nashville music industry with
the release of his debut album, Guitar Town, on MCA records. In
February 1985, I first saw Earle and his rock 'n' roll band, the
Dukes, in the basement of a high-rise residence hall at Vanderbilt
University. On that Friday night he played to a disappointing
turnout. Despite the small draw-fifty or seventy-five at most - Earle
appeared shy and retreating, but engaging all the same. His four
single releases on the Epic label had not achieved any commercial
success, and Earle's performance had a devil-may-care quality. Now he
has signed with the Nashville (read "country") office of another major
label, and Guitar Town, with its fetching combination
of rock rhythms, socially-conscious themes, and pedal steel and
twangin' guitars, has won the attentive ear of this town and the
nation.
          In his first single from Guitar Town, "Hillbilly
Highway," Earle sings in the voice of a character whose lineage has
always answered the call of opportunity. Grandfather left home and the
mines for a job in Detroit; as a young man, father also goes
away-first to college and then to a job in Houston; and the narrator
quits school to learn guitar and become a musician.

          Earle himself left school after the eighth grade for the same
reasons. From his home near San Antonio, Earle traveled around Texas
and Mexico, associating with and learning from older songwriters like
Townes Van Zant (for whom his son is named), Richard Dobson, Rodney
Crowell, and Guy Clark. He put in a stint as a bassist in Clark's
band.
          Earle moved to Nashville in 1974, where he worked at the usual odd
jobs (tennis court builder, billboard hanger, carpenter) while he
nurtured his musical ability in bars, honky tonks, and coffee
houses. He also went through three marriages in pursuit of his elusive
dream to become a successful songwriter.
          In 1982 a small independent Nashville label, LSI, issued Earle's
premier recording, a four-song disc entitled Pink and Black. He signed
with Epic in 1983, and that label released four respectable,
rockabilly-style singles over the next two years.
          During the lean years Earle did score as a songwriter. His songs
were recorded by Carl Perkins and Waylon Jennings, and by younger
artists like Vince Gill and Steve Wariner. Johnny Lee had a top ten
hit with "When You Fall in Love," a song from the early LSI ep, with
help from vocalist Kim Wilson of Austin's Fabulous Thunderbirds.
          Guitar Town appears when Nashville record offices are scrambling to
re-establish an identity that will appeal both to traditional country
audiences and to the record-buying youth market. "Urban Cowboy" chic
has faded, and country music sales figures show a corresponding
decline relative to the years of abnormal prosperity. Country label
executives have gone in search of artists like Gill, Wariner, Marty
Stewart, Dwight Yoakum (with whom Earle is frequently compared), Randy
Travis, Sweethearts of the Rodeo, T. Graham Brown, Rodney Crowell, and
Rosanne Cash, in hopes that the more progressive images of those
artists will help shed the rural, provincial stereotype associated
with country music. Of this crop of new artists only Earle has made an
aggressive charge at the problems confronting blue-collar youth in
rural communities.
          Some of Earle's compositions have a political and 

social
perspective that parallels the recent work of rock musicians Bruce
Springsteen and John Cougar Mellencamp. This might surprise some,
coming as it does from a Nashville artist who, in his MCA biography,
says of his music: "It's country 'cause I talk like this. And it's
country because I write lyrics, and I tell stories, and I record in
Nashville." Political statements by country artists and on Nashville
recordings have often distinguished themselves by their conservative,
reactionary attitudes rather than by any progressive urges. Songs like
Merle Haggard's "Okie from Muskogee," "The Fighting Side of Me," and
"Are the Good Times Really Over," and, more recently, Lee Greenwood's
"God Bless the U. S. A.," and Kenny Rogers's "The Pride is Back," have
extolled the patriotic status quo and made country artists popular
visitors to the White House during the Johnson, Carter, Nixon, and
Reagan administrations.
          Earle maintains a different music tradition, as common as the
penchant for jingoistic themes but seldom acknowledged by those who
would dismiss all country music as right-wing hayseed warblings. Like
recent releases by Hank Williams Jr. ("This ain't Dallas"), Alabama
(~40 Hour Week"), and Dwight Yoakum ("Miner's Prayer"), Earle
champions frustrated working men and women, and disillusioned young
people in anthemic couplets like the one in "Good Ol' Boy (Gettin'
Tough)": Gettin' tough /Just My Luck/I was born in the
land of plenty now there ain't enough/Get/in' cold/I've been
told/Nowadays it just don't pay to be a good ol' boy.
          In "Someday," the interstate highway hides a small town from
motorists bound for Memphis, but it also promises a way out for the
narrator who frets over the narrative possibilities:
          
            There ain't a lot that you can do in this town/ You
drive down to the lake and then you turn back around/ You go to school
and you learn to read and write/ So you can walk into the county bank
and sign away your life.
          
          Earle also writes of the personal reverberations of life in a
changing and uncertain time. "Goodbye's All We Got Left," "My Old
Friend the Blues," "Think It Over," and "Down the Road," (Earle's
closing song in live performances) touch emotional places left tender
by daily anxieties. "Little Rock 'n' Roller" will affect all who have
had to communicate over miles with a little loved one.
          In an interview with Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times, Earle
offered an assessment of the role he hopes his songs can fill:
          "In the end, you either cheer people up [with your songs] or help
them exorcise some problems they have--and people need a bit of both
right now. The mood of the country as a whole is that things aren't as
they are being advertised. Lots of people are going hungry. Even more
have had to downscale their expectations. They are confused. They
remember everything they heard about this country in school and they
wonder what happened to it."
          With the help of a strong band, bright production, and appealing
melodies, Earle's powerful lyrical offerings do cheer and exorcise at
once.
          Guitar Town has won acclaim from pop music's critical heavyweights,
and Earle has toured nationally with another group of critics'
darlings, the Replacements, a hard-edged rock band from
Minneapolis. In his interview with Hilburn, Earle promised that his
next album, "will lean more toward social observation and commentary
than [Guitar Town]." Good news for those of us who hope Nashville and
country musicians can continue to produce music with regional,
cultural, and social importance.
          
            Jay Orr works at the library of the Country Music
Foundation in Nashville.
          
        
        
          The Shame of Contra Aid
          By Finlator, W.W.W.W. Finlator
          Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986, pp. 18-19
          
          The Old Testament prophet called down woe upon those who said that
darkness was light and light was darkness. We today fall within the
shadow of that prophetic judgment since, led by our super-patriotic
President, we have come to call what is truly American, un-American,
and what is truly un-American, American. Consider the contras and
Nicaragua, for there, our President would have us believe, the former
Somoza death squads can be likened to George Washington's freedom
fighters at Valley Forge.
          To achieve such self-deception requires a leadership skilled in the
art of misconstruing the American dream. From the Monroe Doctrine, to
the Good Neighbor policy of Franklin Roosevelt, to the present crisis,
we have been assured that our relationship with Central and South
American nations has been one of justice, freedom, and
democracy. Actually, we have treated these countries as US
colonies. We have set up and maintained repressive, despotic,
governments. We have frustrated and defeated movements by the people
of these countries to achieve justice and freedom for
themselves. Nowhere has America, while believing its motives pure and
unmixed, been so cynically and systematically un-American than in its
dealings with these nations. Nicaragua is now exposing the sham and
shame to the world.
          Millions of Americans are waking up to these dark chapters to our
history and we are angry at what our militaristic President is doing
to the people of Nicaragua, angry that a spineless Congress supports
him and, in the South, particularly angry that our timid
representatives fall such easy prey to his jingoistic rhetoric. It is
for us to hold these Southern politicians to strictest account, as one
day all of us surely will be held in account for what we are doing to
that suffering nation.
          But, it is what we are doing to ourselves in the name of
Americanism that concerns me for the moment. In supporting the contras
and keeping alive the war and destruction in Nicaragua we are
violating the heart and soul of our nation, in several ways.
          First, we are in violation of the spirit and letter of our
Declaration of Independence when we try to crush the yearning and
striving of Nicaraguans for justice and 

freedom. It is as though the
loyalists, following the American Revolution, and after leaving or
being driven out of colonies, had regrouped on the Canadian border and
with reenforcements from a hostile European nation, resumed the
conflict as "freedom fighters."
          Secondly, we are in violation of the spirit and letter of our
Constitution and its Bill of Rights. Rather than attempt to understand
and support the strivings of Nicaraguans who wish to "establish
justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defence,
promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty" to
themselves and their families," we support a war of terrorism while
hypocritically decrying a communist take-over and international
terrorism. When you think of the kidnappings, tortures, burnings,
maimings, pillage and murder, you have to spell it terrorism, pure and
simple, underwritten by the US Government. This is not only deceitful
and hypocritical, it is also plain un-American.
          Thirdly, we are in violation of the spirit and letter of the
Charter of the United Nations. The World Court, which we helped to set
up and have appealed to in the past, has found our involvement in
Nicaragua in violation to the UN Charter. We have become, as it were,
an international outlaw to our own structure for justice and
peace. The Oval Office seems to exult in this outlaw posture.
          The final violation is theological. Millions of our citizens insist
that America is a "Christian" nation. That such a designation
contravenes the state-church separation principle is an argument I
should like to push on another occasion. But, assuming, for the
moment, that we are a "Christian nation" we have to define what is
"Christian" and then we must decide who does the defining. This could
lead to endless mischief and controversy. Perhaps most Christians
would agree on the centrality of John 3:16 where we are told that God
so loved the world that he sent his Son into the world to save
it. From this we deduce that Jesus in His incarnation identified
himself with all people, and apparently with a special option for the
poor and lowly. The classic passage for this is the one in which Jesus
tells us that he was hungry and we fed him, he was thirsty and we gave
him drink, naked and we clothed him, sick and we visited him,
imprisoned and we came to him, and then he added that inasmuch as we
did these things for others, even the least, we did them also to
him.
          It takes no effort of imagination to see that these are literally
the same basic needs of the vast majority of the people of Nicaragua,
and indeed of all nations south of our border and the third world. But
they are needs that neither their government, nor their church has
met. When at long last the people have undertaken for themselves to
achieve a just and peaeful and compassionate society, "Christian"
America is prepared to use every means to prevent them. We are, I say,
in violation of our religious faith!
          For these reasons a moral outrage in America is in order. And this
is why we cry shame, shame upon so many of our Southern members of
Congress and why we must hold them to strict account.
          
            Rev. W. W. Finlator is the retired pastor of Pullen
Memorial Baptist Church in Raleigh, N. C.
          
        
        
          Cells for Sale
          By Wray, Harmon L., Jr.Harmon L. Wray, Jr.
          Vol. 8, No. 3, 1986, pp. 3-6
          
          The rush to transfer government services and functions from public
to profit-making hands has lately found its way to the "field" of
incarceration and corrections. The current leader in this new growth
industry is the Nashville-based Corrections Corporation of America,
chartered in January of 1983 and financed by Hospital Corporation of
America founder Jack Massey of Massey Burch Investments, Inc., the
South's largest venture capital company. According to CCA president
and former Tennessee Republican Party Chairman Tom Beasley, the
Corrections Corporation of America alma to ~be to jails and
prisons...what Hospital Corporation of America has become to medical
facilities nationwide."
          Declaring that "the market is limitless," Beasley (age 43) hopes to
"solve the prison problem and make a lot of money at the same time."
CCA currently has seven contracts to own and/or manage detention
centers, treatment facilities, jails and workhouses for federal and
local jurisdictions in several Southern states--three in Tennessee,
one in Florida, two in Texas (for illegal aliens), one in North
Carolina. But this is small potatoes compared with what CCA intends to
do: take over the entire prison system of particular states, and
prepare for a bid on the federal system. "The private jail market is
ripe," reports Barron's, the business weekly. "And it
is brokers, architects, builders, and banks-not the taxpayers-who will
make out like bandits.. In less than a year, CCA has more than doubled
the size of its staff, now at 500.
          The proposal CCA made to the State of Tennessee in the fall of 1985
was the boldest move yet in prisons-for-profit and showed why the
company is considered the most aggressive and well-connected of the
capitalist corrections firms. CCA initially proposed to buy out and
operate the state's prison system, under federal court order since
1982, as well as build and manage two new prisons (later expanded to
five new institutions). Thanks to effective lobbying by the American
Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) and the
American Civil Liberties Union of Tennessee, the CCA bid was tabled
last year by the Democratically-controlled state legislature. The
action came during a special session called for the prison crisis by
Republican governor Lamar Alexander, a CCA supporter who once rented a
garage apartment to law student Tom Beasley. Alexander has spent seven
years overseeing an unconstitutional prison system but has never set
foot inside one of his state's prisons.
          This year, the General Assembly, under the influence of nine
full-time, high-powered CCA lobbyists paid an estimated $100,000,
passed a more moderate privatization bill. Before the session Tom
Beasley had 

said, "I intend to get a chunk of this system." Soon he
will: the 180-bed Carter County work camp opens September 1, probably
under CCA operation. But the legislation (which AFSCME plans to
challenge in court) prohibits further privatization of Tennessee
prisons for three years.
          The ambitions of Beasley and other prison entrepreneurs are not
limited to Tennessee. In fact, once CCA lost its bid for all Tennessee
prisons, it pursued a smaller "chunk" primarily in order to avoid the
embarrassment of having no home-state contracts to advertise in its
sales pitch to other jurisdictions. Last December Beasley said that if
the Reagan administration decided to sell the federal prison system
(as the The Wall Street Journal had just reported it
might), CCA would make an offer. CCA was one of three firms bidding
for the multi-million dollar Moundsville, W.Va., prison, site of a New
Year's Day prisoner rebellion. Reportedly, CCA has been working on
proposals for state prison systems in Florida, North Carolina, Texas,
Georgia, Louisiana, Misissippi, and Kentucky, as well as several
western states. At this writing, CCA contracts to operate jails are
pending in Sante Fe, N.M., and Key West, Fla. Meanwhile, CCA's
Tennessee competitor, Corrections Associates Inc. (CAI), recently
landed Tennessee and Alabama county jail contracts and a prison
consulting contract with the Alexander administration. CAI's good
fortune came on the heels of the resignation of its new president,
Hubert McCullough, as Governor Alexander's finance commissioner.
          The McCullough-Alexander connection is only one of many personal,
business, and political linkages evident in the prisons-for-profit
field. Like CAI's McCullough, CCA lobbyist Tom Ingram, 39, a former
journalist and social worker, has been a prime mover with the
anti-labor Tennessee Business Roundtable. Ingram also managed
Alexander's two winning gubernatorial campaigns and served as his
chief-of-staff for four years before forming his own public relations
and business consulting firm. Others in the CCA-Alexander circle
include CCA stockholders who are current and former Alexander cabinet
officers, CCA administrators who are former state GOP chairpersons, a
CCA lobbyist who was a Democratic state senator, and two prominent
public figures who in 1985 sold their CCA stock to avoid the
appearance of conflict of interest: Honey Alexander (the governor's
wife held $5,000 of stock) and House Speaker Ned Ray McWherter
($33,000), the Democratic nominee to succeed Alexander. In this fall's
general election, McWherter faces former Republican governor Winfield
Dunn, a Memphis dentist who became a multi-millionaire as an executive
for Hospital Corporation of America. Both Dunn and McWherter have
called for the state to experiment with private operation of some
prisons.
          Another connection is the US Military Academy. Before graduating
from Harvard's law and business schools, CCA treasurer and major
investor Doctor R. Crants was Beasley's West Point roommate. CCA
stockholder Samuel W. Bartholomew, of the Nashville law firm Donelson,
Stokes &Bartholomew, was their classmate ('66).
          Three of Bartholomew's children are also stockholders. Another West
Point alum and major CCA investor is T. Don Hutto, the corporation's
executive vice-president. Hutto, an ex-prison guard who became
commissioner of corrections in Virginia and Arkansas, has since 1984
been president of the American Correctional Association, which
oversees prison accreditation standards. Unlike other
corrections-related professional associations-the National Sheriffs
Association, the National Conference of State Trial Judges, the
National Association of Criminal Justice Planners, and the American
Bar Association--the ACA under Hutto's tenure has supported prison
privatization.
          While the prisons-for-profit trend has national dimensions, CCA
leadership has focused much of the attention onto the South, where all
of CCA's current contracts and most of its financial backers are
located (investors include Vanderbilt University, Hospital Corporation
of America, and that symbol of public service delivery, the Tennessee
Valley Authority, itself often the target of privatization
initiatives). Many members of CCA's management staff have worked in
corrections departments in Southern states, including Virginia,
Louisiana, Texas, and Alabama.
          Critics of corporate punishment have raised a number of issues
which call the privatization trend into serious question. Tennessee
Attorney General Michael Cody and the ACLU National Prison Project
note that the state would retain ultimate legal and fiscal
responsibility for assuring private prisons' compliance with state and
federal constitutions and court orders. It also appears clear that
governments cannot contract their civil liability to private
concerns. Noting CCA's lack of a track record in operating a state
prison for long-ternm adult offenders, Cody also questions its
estimates of operating and capital expenses and doubts the state's

ability to buy back its prisons in case of a private firm's
bankruptcy, incompetence, or unwillingness to continue. Cody suggests
that privatization might encourage the public to believe, mistakenly,
that Tennessee can solve its corrections problems simply by building
more prisons.
          A 1985 Tennessee legislative report points out that privatizing
does not mean that construction costs are not a liability of the
state; rather, the liability has been deferred." Mark Gray of AFSCME
wonders if an artifically low cost presented in an initial contract
would lead to government dependency on the private firm, making it
"impossible to resume operations in the future without huge capital
investments. The private contractor is then in a position to raise its
prices" in order to maximize profits. Former Minnesota corrections
chief Ken Schoen has pointed to "defense" contractors' use of similar
tactics as a way of "capitalizing on the public's fears to assure an
ever-expanding system, while the basic insecurities remain."
          Closely associated with such economic concerns is the question of
just how a private firm will be able to operate prisons as
inexpensively as it claims. Public employee unions like AFSCME and the
Tennessee State Employees Association point to workers' loss of civil
service rules and benefits under private prison managers, along with
the possibility of lower wages, a minimal workforce, an anti-union
atmosphere, and inadequate training of correctional officers. It may
be no accident that corrections capitalists' favorite hunting ground
for contracts has been the historically low-wage and under-unionized
South. And, whether they are called "prison guards" or "correctional
officers," those workers who staff our society's cages are already
among the lowest paid of all government employees.
          Certainly, prisoners themselves could suffer harmful effects from
possible cost-cutting for the sake of profit maximization. CCA's
initial proposal to Tennessee proclaims the intention of developing a
"full-employment economy within the correctional system." Given the
history of Tennessee's and other Southern states' "privatization" and
"profitization" of prisons, one might be excused for expecting some
contemporary variations on the old convict lease systems and chain
gangs. Journalist Ronnie Dugger's discomfort over the proposed
privatization of the Texas prison system might also apply to other
Southern states: "In the company prison, we will be putting
state-sentenced inmates under the command of the employees of the
corporation and forcing the state-sentenced inmates to labor for the
profit of the corporation. What will keep a privately-owned Texas
prison from being in its very nature a state-created system of slave
labor for private profit?" Constitutionally, slavery is legal as
punishment for crime, and our Southern prison populations are, of
course, overwhelmingly poor and disproportionately black and
Hispanic.
          Apprehensions on the part of prisoner advocates and those who abhor
slavery may not be unfounded when one considers the professional
history of T. Don Hutto, the man CCA touts as its foremost corrections
expert. The CCA's executive vice-president's career includes a stint
as warden of the Ramsey Unit in Huntsville, Texas, in the 1960s, when
the system of using inmates to guard and discipline other inmates,
later outlawed in federal court, was "at its strongest," according to
the Texas Observer. A 1985 article in The
Nation reported that during Hutto's tenure as corrections
commissioner in Arkansas the US Supreme Court ruled that state's
prison system unconstitutional and found that officials "evidently
tried to operate their prisons at a profit." "Inmates were required to
work on prison farms ten hours a day, six days a week, often without
suitable clothing or shoes, using mule-drawn plows and tending crops
by hand....Punishment for minor misconduct included lashing with a
wooden-handled leather strap...and administering electric shocks to
'various sensitive parts of the inmate's body.' The trial court called
the prisons 'a dark and evil world completely alien to the free
world.'" When confronted with this criticism, a CCA offical responded
that The Nation essay was "a libelous article" and that
Hutto had in fact cleaned up the unconstitutional Arkansas system.
          The questions raised by Hutto's track record and by a look at the
history of profit-making out of the hides of prisoners were echoed by
Michael Walzer in The New Republic: "Helpless men and
women have never fared well at the hands of profit-seeking
entrepreneurs. The incentive system is all wrong. Who will look after
the interests of prisoners? Who will be watching the prison owners as
they run their 'own' business?"
          Prisoners and their advocates in many Southern states lock at the
decades of class-action litigation efforts to remedy their
unconstitutional prison systems (now ten years in Tennessee) and
wonder how much longer it would have taken had the prisons been

privately owned during that time. The potential for foot-dragging and
buck-passing would surely increase substantially under private
ownership and implementation of state functions. The Tennessee Senate
Speaker's favorable response to the privatization concept speaks
volumes: "If somebody else ran it, somebody else would be in court. We
wouldn't."
          An analogy with recent corporate mobility trends, another point
made by Walzer, is especially striking when seen in a Southern
context: "This is probably the chief economic advantage of
privatization-that it offers a (temporary) escape from the enforcement
of constitutional norms. The resulting savings are like the profit
added when a factory moves from a union to a non-union territory. If
the union catches up, the old situation is restored. Similarly, if the
courts catch up, we will find oursleves again where we are now, with
judges struggling to do what state legislatures and Congress ought to
do-reform the prison system."
          Perhaps the most critical flaw in the privatization move is that it
is inherently expansionist. A corporation paid per prisoner and per
diem will look to lock up more and more people for longer and longer
stretches. Recall the historic Southern practice of determining the
county sheriffs' pay according to their jail counts. CCA's Tennessee
proposal assumed a steadily expanding prison population (despite the
falling crime rate), and its preferred per diem method of being paid
has already led to cost overruns for local taxpayers at its
Chattanooga penal farm.
          The US locks up a larger percentage of its population than any
country in the world, with two exceptions: South Africa and the Soviet
Union. Some of our Southern states rank even higher than those
nations. We ought to be reducing our costly, ineffective, cruel, race-
and class-biased overreliance on incarceration in favor of
community-based alternative sentences for non-violent offenders, such
as victim restitution programs. Other effective alternatives to
incarceration include intensive probation, community service work,
victim-offender mediation, and required drug and alcohol treatment,
GED preparation, vocational training, and job placement. Such options
are used frequently with white collar criminals, but perpetrators of
street crimes are scarce in these programs.
          Organizations such as AFSCME, the American Civil Liberties Union,
the National Sheriffs Association, the Vera Institute of Justice, and
the National Association of Criminal Justice Planners have all voiced
the fear of an inevitable expansionism in this new "growth industry."
Vera Institute's Michael Smith, noting that "the private sector has an
enormous investment in stimulating demand," fears corporate
advertising campaigns to heighten the public's fear of crime and
trigger a "lock 'em up" reaction resulting in an increasing number of
cages, captives, and dollars.
          NACJP director Mark Cunniff, calling CCA's Tennessee takeover
proposal "incredible," points out that "private contractors can lobby
in ways that a public agency cannot." When those doing the lobbying
are close friends and political advisers of governors and legislators,
many of the traditional lobbying techniques will be unnecessary.
          Perhaps Ken Schoen has put it best: "Private operators whose growth
depends upon an expanding prison population may push for ever harsher
sentences. With the public's unabating fear of crime, and the
lawmakers shrinking from any move that appears to be soft on
criminals, the developing private prison lobby will be hard to
resist. Any drop in the crime rate will be attributed to long prison
sentences. An increase will add weight to the call for more
prisons. And the taxpayers will finance the profit-makers while
double-locking their doors at night."
          Michael Smith says that the scenario sketched out above "worries me
enough so that I want to look first at making government innovative
and responsive." This points toward a possible third option, between
the inefficient and incompetent status quo and the CCA-type
prisons-for-profit. Walzer suggests, "...we should deputize
nongovernmental agencies to perform some prison-like functions....we
all might benefit, prisoners, too, from a little flexibility,
unorthodoxy, experimentation. But this will have to be the work of
nonprofit agencies, with publicly recognized programs and explicit
authorization. We should not be contracting out, as if these were not
our prisoners; we should be bringing new ideas into the orbit of
public service."
          The most reasonable conclusion to be drawn from all this is simply
that the citizens and legislatures of our Southern states should avoid
the new "dungeons for dollars" game like the plague. The privatization
debate distracts us from the real issue of our society's failure to
deal with crime in any way other than a knee-jerk, repressive
fashion. This is especially true in the South, which tends to have the
highest incarceration rates, the longest sentences, and the most
executions.
          Most citizens-white and black, rich and poor, male and
female-regularly report that crime and punishment constitute one of
the most salient and urgent issues in their lives. Almost no one,
however, is satisfied with our criminal justice system as it is.
          As I have suggested, there are alternative approaches to the issue
of crime and punishment, but only a few prisoners, lawyers, academics,
and prison reform advocates seem to know or care much about them. As
in the field of health, our society's primary approach to crime ought
to be a preventive, environmental, "public health" strategy. The
implications of this approach reach beyond even such a necessary
action as the denial of easy handgun access. We must resist and recast
the media glorification of violence, insist upon economic and
political equality irrespective of race and sex, confront the climate
of national militarism, and reconstruct an American culture and
economic system propelled by human greed. Meanwhile, we will continue
to have to lock up violent, dangerous offenders, but, for the many
others, our motto should be "from the cage to the community," which is
largely where the problem is and must be dealt with. We must refuse
the exploitation of public hysteria and institutional fatigue by the
entrepreneurs of captivity.
          
            Harmon L Wray, Jr., lives in Nashville where he is a
staff consultant with Project Return and teaches prison ministry at
Vanderbilt Divinity School.
          
        
      
    
  