
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 8, Number 1,
	       1986
        
          Southern Liberal Journalists and the Issue of Race,
1920-1944 by John T. Kneebone. Chapel Hill: The University of
North Carolina Press, 1985.
          Reviewed by Sullivan, PatriciaPatricia Sullivan
          Vol. 8, No. 1, 1986, pp. 22-24
          
          The term "liberal" often obscures more than it explains. The
adjective "southern" is certain to add to the confusion.
          There is an implicit assumption that "southern liberal" means white
southern liberal. The image of a southern liberal between the two
world wars, the period John Kneebone addresses, evokes an ambivalent
figure. The system o~ legalized white supremacy was firmly intact, and
many "liberals" endorsed Mark Ethridge's 1942 statement that "there is
no power in the world-not even all the mechanized armies of the earth,
Allied and Axis-which could now force the Southern white people to the
abandonment of the principle of social segregation."
          Thus, John Kneebone feels compelled to qualify his definition from
the start. "Southern liberalism," he explains, "must emphasize the
adjective. Downplaying the southernness of these people tends to
identify them with national racial liberalism that takes its traction
from a history emphasizing the ideals of Jefferson's declaration, the
abolition movement, the Radical Republicans during Reconstruction, the
abolition movement, and Negro protest in the twentieth century." The
liberalism Kneebone writes about has limitations which time brings to
the fore. His is a provocative study of a particular style of
"southern" liberalism which came of age in the 1920s and 1930s and was
moribund by the end of World War II-a victim of its own inner
contradictions, underscored the emerging black protest movement.
          Southern Liberal Journalists and the Issue of Race,
1920-1944 is organized around the lives and careers of five
men: Gerald W. Johnson (1890-1980) of the Baltimore Evening
Sun, George Fort Milton (1894-1955) of the Chattanooga
News, Virginius Dabney (1901-) of the Richmond
Times-Dispatch, Ralph McGill (1899-1969) of the Atlanta
Constitution, and Hodding Carter (1907-1972) of the
Greenville (MS) Delta Democrat-Times. Hardly two
generations removed from the period of the Civil War and
Reconstruction, the past was very much present in the minds of these
journalists. They maintained that the slavery system bore the seeds of
its own demise, and, therefore, the Civil War was an unnecessary
war. The journalists focused their attention on Reconstruction as the
event which traumatized the process of change in the South, and caused
the political and social unrest that disrupted the region through the
turn of the century. The Progressive era brought back a semblance of
order through the enactment of segregation and disenfranchisement law
in the South. A delicate balance had been restored, and the subjects
of Kneebone's study dedicated themselves to maintaining social harmony
while nurturing the progress promised by increasing urbanization and
industrializtion.
          These men came of age professionally during the post World War I
period. Southern journalists of the 1920s won national acclaim as the
voices of reason and tolerance in a region that seemed woefully
lacking in both. They applied a critical eye to the southern social
scene and challenged the excesses of fundamentalism, the Klan,
lynching and prohibition. By the end of the decade, Kneebone explains,
an identifiable southern journalism existed. The journalists had
assumed their "class" responsibility as social reformers with a
twofold mission: to educate the southern white masses, and to explain
the South to northerners in order to discourage "outside" interference
in southern affairs. They further refined their position during the
Agrarian debate of 

the early 1930s when they held forth as proponents
of progress through "regulated industrialization."
          Race relations remained largely on the periphery of the
journalists' concerns during the 1920s. In 1930 the number of
lynchings, which had been on the decline during the previous decade,
increased dramatically. The Commission on Interracial Cooperation
(CIC) responded with an investigation which reinforced the belief that
these evils were uniquely lower class in origin. The key to
establishing and maintaining good race relations, then, was to modify
and cultivate the behavior of the white southern masses. The
Scottsboro case also failed to raise any serious questions about the
base injustice of legalized white supremacy. While striving to curb
its excesses, the journalists worked to insure that the segregation
system worked. They were confident that urbanization would contribute
to better race relations, and adopted Robert Parks' model of vertical
segregation as their goal in realizing a more equitable society. Black
folk remained an invisible people whose patience, endurance and
submission were taken for granted as white reformers promoted gradual
change within the limits of Jim Crow.
          Events during the 1930s tested the position that the journalists
had secured for themselves. They enthusiastically endorsed Franklin
D. Roosevelt during his first term as the embodiment of Rational
Leadership, a true statesman who stood above partisan squabbles. His
aggressive legisla. tive program met the crisis of the depression and
implemented programs to provide for the larger social good. By 1937,
however, their view of the President had begun to sour. Roosevelt's
second term victory was based on a coalition of labor, black and urban
voters, suggesting a class appeal which countered the journalists'
ideal of social harmony. The President's court-packing plan and his
attempt to purge conservatives from the Democratic Party in the South
completed the disillusionment. Outside interference in regional
affairs could never be justified, even if it intended to mobilize
political support for New Deal programs the journalists favored. By
1938 their opposition to FDR and the New Deal paralleled that of the
South's most conservative representatives in Congress.
          The Depression and the New Deal had released forces for change in
the South which challenged the moderating influence of Kneebone's
subjects. Just as they retreated from Roosevelt, another group of
Southerners rallied to demonstrate their support of the President in
founding the Southern Conference for Human Welfare (SCHW). As Arthur
Raper, a founding member of SCHW, explained to me a few years ago, the
events of the 1930s had shaken the foundation of southern society. "A
lot of folks were up on their feet and talking and expecting things
that they had never expected before .... Here was ... a very basic
ferment, and people needed to respond to it in some way." The SCHW
went beyond the CIC (which addressed itself to the "better" elements
of the community as agents of gradual change), and made a mass,
interracial appeal. Organized by southern New Dealers and labor
activists, the SCHW hoped to build a broad-based constituency for
progressive political action in the South. The organization
concentrated on eliminating voter restrictions which kept the great
majority of southerners from the ballot box, and later joined the CIO
and NAACP in promoting voter registration and education drives
throughout the South. The SCHW acted on the assumption that an
expanded electorate, which included working class and black voters,
was essential to liberalizing the South. This approach contradicted
the basic premises shared by the southern journalists. They believed
in cooperative endeavors led by the elite class, and they strongly
opposed any type of racial or class activism. These men lacked a basic
faith in the "democratic" process, and did not promote enfranchisement
of the masses as part of their reform program. They eschewed politics
in favor of Howard Odum's ideal of social planning by "nonpartisan"
leaders as the means for advancing the general welfare.
          By the end of the 1930s, the journalists were on the
defensive. Events overseas, however, seemed to provide a reprieve from
pressing social concerns. "Dr. Win the War" had replaced "Dr. New
Deal" and the journalists enthusiastically endorsed the war against
fascism. World War 11 caused them to abandon the anti-war doctrines
which had served as the intellectual foundation of the southern
liberal program for gradual reform. Their support for the war undercut
an earlier notion that the Civil War had demonstrated the futility of
war for principle. Hitler had changed 

all of that. There were moral
issue worth fighting for. Gerald W. Johnson acknowledged that "the
principle of freedom is a unit to the extent that when any man's
freedom is attacked every man's freedom is threatened." George Fort
Milton proclaimed, "the world cannot endure half slave and half free."
The war became their cause-and their undoing. For when black Americans
internalized wartime rhetoric, and publicly endorsed the
indivisibility of freedom and democracy, the journalists were forced
to confront the color line. When they did, they qualified those very
principles which justified the war against Hitler. By the end of the
war, the journalists had become apologists for the segregation system
and relinquished whatever leadership role they might have played in
the emerging civil rights movement.
          Kneebone demonstrates quite convincingly that the black protest of
the World War II period caught his subjects totally off
guard. Clearly, there had been very little communication of
consequence between most whites and blacks in the South prior to the
war. As Kneebone points out, his journalists along with the rest of
the CIC leadership had very limited relations with a very limited
number of black leaders, and always with the assumption that "white
southern liberals would determine the agenda and set the pace for
racial reform." Charles S. Johnson and others were consulted for their
endorsement and cooperation, not for their critical judgment or
unqualified participation. The journalists had effectively insulated
themselves from the ferment within the black community. This ferment
took on sustained momentum and direction during the 1930s when Charles
H. Houston and a team of black lawyers around the South began
coordinating the legal attack on the segregation system which would
culminate with the Brown v. Board of Education decision of
1954. Building on the protest surrounding the Scottsboro case, Houston
used the courtroom as a classroom to further educate, politicize and
organize local blacks. These preliminary efforts helped to revive and
expand NAACP membership in the South, which boomed during the war
years. The fact that Charles Houston is not mention in Kneebone's
study further suggests the extent to which Kneebone's subjects ignored
the dynamics for change emerging within the black community.
          John Kneebone has written a compelling study of the evolution of a
predominant strand of southern liberal thought between the wars, and
its ultimate demise. However, it is important to note that as
Kneebone's subjects were turning inward, southern liberalism was
blossoming through the lives and careers of a number of their
contemporaries. Hugo Black, Claude Pepper, Clifford and Virginia Durr,
Clark Foreman, Aubrey Williams, Lucy Randolph Mason, C.B. Baldwin,
Frank Graham, Palmer Weber, Arthur Raper, Josephine Wilkins and others
were also rooted in the southern past. But they looked beyond the
Civil War Reconstruction period to the Jeffersonian ideals of the late
eighteenth century. These individuals concentrated on givng the
democratic process full play in the South, and in the nation. Their
concerns complemented the efforts of Charles Houston, Ella Baker,
E.D. Nixon, Charles Gomillion, and a host of black leaders throughout
the South who were motivated by the promise of the
Constitution. Virginia Durr's Outside the Magic Circle,
and Robert J. Norell's Reaping the Whirlwind are
important companion pieces to Kneebone's Southern Liberal
Journalists. Together they help demonstrate the broad range of
"liberalism" that should be suggested by the adjective "southern."
They also direct our attention to the New Deal-World War 11 period as
an exciting and important era in the history of the South--and of the
Civil Rights Movement-and one which historians have just begun to
explore.
          
            Patricia Sullivan is Associate Director of the Center for
the Study of Civil Rights and lecturer in history at the University of
Virginia.
          
        
        
          Women and Children in Poverty 
          By Pearce, DianaDiana Pearce
          Vol. 8, No. 1, 1986 pp. 1-2, 16-20
          
          
            Two out of three adults in poverty today are
women. Three-fourths of America's more than 34 million poor consist of
women and their children. Over half of children in poverty live in
women-maintained families.
          
          We truly have a new poverty problem, a new kind of poor. It is not
just that the demographics have changed. The very nature of poverty has changed. And that calls for a
change in the nature of the solutions. We should not just reinstitute
the New Deal and the War on Poverty, for they were not intended to
deal with women's poverty.
          The femininization of poverty means that in the last two decades
women-headed families have increased from thirty-six to fifty percent
of all poor families. There are now more than three and a half million
families maintained by women alone whose income is below the poverty
level.
          Although women are poor for some of the same reasons that men are
poor-because they're in high unemployment areas, because of racial
discrimination, and because of physical handicaps, there are two
characteristics of women's poverty that distinguish it from the
poverty experienced by men: children and labor market
discrimination.
          First, women often have the economic as well as the emotional
burden of child rearing. Most people are aware that the rise in the
divorce rate and the increase in the number of children born out of
wedlock has increased the number of single-parent families, primarily
woman-headed 

families. When a family with children breaks up, or when
children are born to an unmarried couple, the man frequently becomes,
or remains, single and the women becomes a single parent.
          The circumstances of a woman alone in America, struggling to
maintain a household, is highly correlated with poverty. The current
system of child support in this country is a disgrace. Forty-three
percent of children who have absent parents--usually absent
fathers--get child support. Only half of these children receive the
full amount awarded. The average child support awarded is $2,100 a
year per family, not per child--that's less than ten percent of the
median income.
          More disgraceful is our lack of public support for children who are
without sufficient income from either parent. I've compared the Aid to
Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) support rates to the support
standard for foster children-a good standard to use because that is
what the state determines it costs to take care of a child. Nationwide
in ]974, foster parents received three times as much as the natural,
single parent mother (receiving AFDC) to take care of a child. In
1982, the ratio was four-to-one. That is, if you go from two children
to three children, the average increase in AFDC payments in 1982 was
forty-nine dollars a month Compare that with the the average state
payment for a foster child: almost two-hundred dollars a month. In
some states the ratio is seven or eight to one.
          Some mothers living in poverty have come to feel that the best way
they can provide for their children is to give them up to foster
care. Because the foster mother can get at least four times as much
money as the natural mother to provide food, clothing and shelter, and
sometimes more, the children would be better off, at least
materially.
          The other distinctive characteristic of women's poverty is the
disadvantage that women experience in the labor market. This is the
familiar "fifty-nine-cents-on-a-dollar," and the fact that women
college graduates still earn less than men who are high school
dropouts. Those figures however, only compare men and women who work
full-time, year-round.
          Only forty-eight percent of women workers work full-time,
year-round. The majority of women workers only manage to get part-time
or part-year work, or both. Women find themselves unable to get
full-time jobs. Only thirty-eight percent of women who maintain
households alone are able to get full-time year-round work. Their
wages are even less than the fifty-nine cents on a dollar--considerably
less if they are minority women.
          Women disproportionately fill jobs that are set up to be
part-time. These jobs are in the most rapidly expanding
industries. Employers deliberately create these jobs as part-time so
that they don't have to provide fringe benefits or sick
leave. Sometimes people don't even get breaks or lunch hours. They
don't get paid vacation. They don't get paid holidays. They don't get
many of things that the full-time worker gets. Women are bearing the
brunt of the expansion of part-time jobs and are being kept poor
because of it.
          Many women work at the minimum wage--eighteen percent compared to
eight percent of men. Even if you work full-time, year-round, at a
minimum wage job you do not earn enough to support yourself and one
child above the poverty level for a two-person family.
          The minimum wage, until 1981, had remained pretty close to the
poverty line for a family of three. But today if you are a minimum
wage worker, you have to work fifty hours a week to support yourself
and two children at the poverty level. Deductions for social security
add another three or four hours. Pretty soon you're working seven days
a week. The minimum wage is no longer a living wage. And women are
disproportionately minimum wage workers.
          So we have the two sources of women's poverty: poverty from
children, poverty from disadvantage in the labor market. We have a
welfare sytem, however that was designed not for the problems of poor
women, but for the problems of poor men. I call that system a Dual
Welfare 

System, for our welfare programs can be grouped into two very
different groups, a primary sector and a secondary sector.
          Most of the resources spent by the welfare system are devoted to
programs in the primary sector that are geared to one's being, or
having been, a full-time, year-round, worker: programs such as
unemployment compensation, social security, worker's
compensation. These are relatively generous.
          When unemployment compensation was established, the rhetoric used
then spoke of "regular workers" versus "casual workers." Unemployment
insurance was set up to protect workers who had worked full-time for a
number of years, and then were laid off through no fault of their
own. But, as we have seen, women workers don't fit this "regular
worker" model. Many women work part-time. They don't make the minimum
earnings or the minimum hours to qualify for unemployment
compensation.
          Women often leave employment for reasons that don't have to do with
their competence on the job. Sometimes they leave because they cannot
fulfill their domestic obligations and work their job. What happens,
for example, if an employer shifts an employee who is also a single,
working mother from a day to a night shift? What if she cannot arrange
for nighttime child care and is, as a result, forced to leave her job?
The law says that's her fault, not the employer's. The result is that
she can't get unemployment compensation.
          In many states, if you leave work voluntarily because you have been
sexually harassed by your employer you can't get unemployment
compensation.
          Disproportionately, because women do not fit the Male Worker
(regular worker) Model of unemployment compensation, or of other
welfare programs that provide support or give access to job training
programs, they have to turn to the secondary welfare system.
          The secondary welfare system contains the "means-tested" programs
that are stigmatizing, penurious in benefits and that push women back
into employment as quickly as they can, no matter how inappropriate or
how insecure the jobs are. These secondary welfare sector programs are
built upon what I call the Male Pauper Model.
          The Male Pauper Model grew from the English Poor Laws, and from the
nineteenth century work houses. In this model, poor people are viewed
as able-bodied persons who are just lazy and need to be forced to go
to work. Benefits are set so low that anybody who possibly can work
will be pressed into the labor market as quickly as possible. If
neccessary they are forced through compulsory programs we now call
"workfare."
          Thus, the US welfare system now consists of a primary set of
programs that women find themselves ineligble for and a secondary set
of programs that women find demeaning, impoverishing and that push
them into competition for low-skilled, low-paid employment.
          By the way, ninety percent of women presently on welfare have
worked. Before the Reagan budget cuts, many poor women worked while
they were also on welfare. That's very difficult to do now because you
are allowed to earn so little before you are forced off welfare.
          What about job training programs in the secondary welfare system?
We have two major ones: WIN (Work Incentive Program) and to some
extent JTPA dote Training Partnership Act).
          Each of these programs are so small as to be considered
tokenism. They essentially ration jobs. But women do enter into
them. Women constitute fifty percent of the people who take JTPA
training programs. Yet, even here, they are shunted into the programs
that pay the least. For example, JTPA on-the job work experiences
which offer non-paying job training is sixty-two percent female. Paid
on-the-job training is fifty-eight percent male. When it comes to
wages, women too get shortshrift; their average wage of $4.20 an hour
(remember, this is the secondary sector) is eighty-five percent of the
wages received by men graduating from the same program, and on a
full-time basis puts their income at about the poverty level for a
three-person family.

          Women are forced into a cycle of alternating between very poor jobs
and going on welfare. As soon as a job ends, women find they're not
eligble for unemployment compensation. They didn't earn enough money
or they didn't work long enough--so they go back on welfare. Once on
welfare they're forced through the programs and are sent back out into
a poor job again. Never getting anywhere. Never getting to the point
where they have enough job training skills, enough work experience to
get out of poverty in any permanent way.
          We have a gender-differentiated way of thinking about welfare
programs. We think about "income support" for women and children. We
talk about "jobs" and "job training" and "equal opportunity" for
men. The reality is that everybody is expected
to--and must, work. By talking about work and welfare in this gender
differentiated way, and yet forcing women into unequally-paid work,
women's poverty is perpetuated and institutionalized.
          There's been some talk about re-instituting programs from the
1960s' War on Poverty. Think carefully back to all those
programs. They analyzed and concentrated on relieving poverty among
the "able-bodied." Basically, they were intended to help men, black as
well as white. And they did. Particularly young men.
          As it was originally written, the Job Corps legislation excluded
young women. It was amended so that they could participate, but it was
not intended for them and did not have much effect on them. The same
thing is true for many of the programs that are under discussion
now. They do not address the nature or needs of women in poverty.
          Among our most successful programs during the 1970's in reducing
poverty were those for the elderly. We asked, "What is the nature of poverty among the aged?" One of the problems was fixed incomes, so we
indexed Social Security. A second problem was medical expenses. As
people get older, their health problems increase, but there was no way
they could increase their income to deal with rising medical
expenses. So we created the Medicare program. It has never been
adequate, and the Reagan Administration has cut it back, but we
created a program that dealt with the problem.
          A third problem was housing. We said, "A lot of people who aren't
able to buy a house are finding themselves without housing when they
are older." So we created subsidized housing for the elderly. With
these and other programs we substantially reduced poverty among the
aged.
          Now, we have to do the same thing with regard to pov-

erty among
women. We have to ask, "What is the nature of women's poverty?"
Then we have to devise and develop programs that meet the nature of
that poverty. I'm going to suggest six principles that I think
should guide us as we develop an agenda for women's poverty.
          The first one is: dual systems are inherently
unequal. Services for poor people alone tend to be poor
services. We need universal programs. We need universal income support
programs. We need universal health care programs.
          There is, for example, a great deal of talk about people who are
uninsured for health care. Do you know what is being proposed? That
for middle class people we develop health insurance programs, and for
poor people we develop charity hospitals. Hospitals and doctors will
be given a pot of money to dole out health care-on their terms-to the
poor. That is the wrong way to do it. Dual systems are inherently
unequal.
          They will always end up being poor services for poor people. We
need a non-stigmatizing, universal, system. And there are many ways to
pay for it out of the tax system.
          Second principle: while programs need to be universal in
terms of application, they need to be targeted at specific needs of
the poor. Instead of providing a few subsidized child care
spaces for a few people, we need universal child care system, much
like our public education system. Women-maintained families,
especially, need child care.
          We emphatically don't need employer-controlled child care. We've
had enough experience with company doctors and company stores to know
what happens when you have services in control of the same people
whose primary motives is profit.
          We need programs that address the specific labor market
disadvantages faced by women workers as women. We need job training
programs that prepare women for non-traditional jobs. We need to
prepare women for sexual harassment and sex discrimination so that
they know how to handle these situations. Almost no job training
provides that unless they're ones run by women's organizations.
          The third principle is that we need to get rid of the
destructive dual system rhetoric when we talk about social welfare
programs. We make false judgments and distinctions between
dependent and independent. I don't know any "rugged individualist" who
is not socially dependent.
          Another false distinction for most women workers is that of being
"at work" and "being at home". Most women know that such dual rhetoric
is destructive of self-esteem and that it doesn't make any sense for
their lives. There's work for pay and there's work at home.
          The fourth principle insists that we need to develop programs
that value the work that women do. If a young man gives two or
three years to serve in the US armed forces, he is rewarded in many
ways. He receives education benefits, health care benefits for the
rest of his life, and burial benefits. He is given social esteem.
          If a woman gives one year or a few years to having children, she is
castigated and ultimately punished for having interrupted her
career. We need to value her gifts of her time-perhaps with Social
Security earnings sharings, parental leave, or something like
veteran's preference points which would credit women for the time they
spent out of the labor force raising children. Women should not be
impoverished for making the choice to have children.
          Our fifth principle is that we should value children as the
precious resources and as the future of this society that they
are. Just as no children today should be denied equal access to
education or health care because of their race, we need to declare
that no children should be denied equal accesss to education, health
care, shelter, because of the marital status of their parents.
          Sixth, programs should recognize and value--equally-different
family forms, and not try to solve poverty by imposing one
model on all of us. Two parent families-other things being equal-may
be preferable. I don't think all the evidence is in, but clearly
"other things" aren't always equal. For many families the choice is
between a two-parent family which is psychologically and physically
abusive of the mother  and children, and a single-parent family that
is not. Often, even with the great economic costs, a one parent family
is preferable.
          The problem of joblessness among young black men is a problem that
ought to be solved in its own right. If that problem were to be
solved, and if the man's wages were to be shared (through marriage or
child support), it might contribute to reducing women's poverty, but
it is not the solution, or even a major solution to women's
poverty.
          Now some specifics. We need a universal income support system to recognize women's
work as valuable work.
          Anybody who wants to work and can work, but can't find work. should
have access to income support as an unemployed person. In the United
States, about forty percent of the women who are unemployed are either
new entrants or reentrants to the labor market. That means they cannot
get unemployment insurance, nor access to the various job service and
retraining programs that are available to people who are the "insured
unemployed." Likewise, unemployment insurance systems in Europe
provide for young people who graduate from high school, have never
worked, but can't find a job.
          In the US, we have a false distinction: a woman with children who
receives public assistance is considered to be a "welfare mother.' She
is not considered "unemployed", even though ninety percent have
worked, and some even work while on welfare. She may be looking for a
job to support herself and her family, but she does not have a right
to unemployment insurance--an income support program whose benefits
are often several times as high as those of welfare programs. This
makes a big difference. If you don't have enough  resources, you can't
do much about solving your problems.
          We should have one income support system. One that is
not stigmatizing. We should include everybody who is not working and
everyone who has a job but whose earnings are inadequate. For example,
in some states-but nowhere in the South-we have "short-time
compensation." Someone whose full-time job is cut back to half-time
can get unemployment insurance coverage for that halftime they are not
working.
          However, if you are a part-time worker, already working only four
hours a day. you're not eligible for the program. '['hat doesn't make
any sense. The person who can't get a full-time job is usually in as
much, if not more, need than the person who has been cut fron1
full-time to part-time hours.
          We need anti-discrimination-against-women
provisions in our job training programs. Currently, if you run a
job training program. You're rewarded for how many people you place in
jobs. A white man comes in and needs only two weeks of training to get
a job. A woman comes and needs child care, remedial math (she dropped
out of high school), and more time and experience to get a job. That
takes more resources. The job training program which opens itself
fully to women's needs is going to be castigated for not getting as
many people jobs as another program which is more concerned with mere
body counts-that's called "creaming". And it's been a characteristic
of job programs since they started.
          Why not reward programs for placing people according to how
difficult they are to place?
          We need to raise and index the minimum
wage. The minimum wage was intended to be a minimum living
wage. We should restore that commitment. We have not raised the
minimum wage since 1981.
          We need to create more jobs both in the
private and public sectors. We have a system where we subsidize
capital, where there are real incentives for an employer to add a
machine to increase his capital investments. (It's not for nothing our
system is called capitalist.) We need incentives for employers who
want to expand production-not to add a machine or to add overtime
hours for present workers-to give them an incentive to hire new
workers.
          If everybody who is working today worked only forty hours, had just
one job and no overtime, and if we took those overtime hours and hired
new workers-and did so by public policy that would subsidize it in the
employer's interest-we would create enough new jobs for every person
who is now unemployed. The jobs are there, but not available to those
who need them.
          And, we should create new jobs. We started to
do this under CETA and then cut back. There are a lot of services we
need. We need educational excellence. We need teacher's aides. We need
library aides. We need social workers. We need child care. We need a
lot of services for a better society.
          We should have universal fringe benefits. We
need to make sure that all jobs provide not only the minimum income,
which is what raising and indexing the minimum wage would do, but
minimum security against income loss due to health crisis,
unemployment, disabilty, and so on.
          We need a system of universal health
insurance.
          We need to make sure that unemployment insurance covers everybody
who is a worker. We need to make sure that disabilty covers everybody
who is a worker, including women during pregnancy.
          We need decent housing. The absence of shelter
is becom-

ing an increasing crisis for women and their children-the
hidden homeless. You don't see women and their children on the streets
nearly as much as you see homeless men. But if you look at the lists
for public housing, people who have been found eligible and are
waiting, you will see that we have a crisis of shelter for women and
children. This crisis is exacerbated by increasing discrimination in
the private market against families with children. Twenty-five percent
of rental units across the country exclude chidren altogther. Another
fifty percent restrict them-only two children, no children over eight,
no children under six, and so forth. In some cities, eighty percent of
the new rental housing excludes children.
          This trend is growing. Gentrification and the building of
condiminiums are further reducing the supply of moderate income
housing. In public housing, we've cut back on rent subsidies. We've
cut back on construction. Congresswoman Pat Schroeder (D-Colorado)
estimates that there are now three million single parent families that
are doubling up.
          How do we get from where we are to where we want to go?
          First, we have to use our imagination and out of our experience
devise and revise programs that will work. This means the development
of programs at the local level as models for national programs and the
changing of national programs--such as income support programs. We
need to rethink from the ground up.
          But, I don't think we're going to get simply because of good ideas,
or obvious next steps. We have to organize and make demands. We must
push for the election of people who realize we have a crisis and who
are willing to work on these issues. And frankly, I think that means
we need more women to raise the issues and concerns of the new
poor.
          
            Diana Pearce is Director (and founder) of the Women and
Poverty Project, and visiting professor of Sociology at American
University in Washington, DC. She has written and spoken widely on
poverty issues, and coined the phrase the "feminization of poverty" in
1978. She has also researched housing discrimination and school
desegregation, including serving as an expert witness in the Yonkers
(NY) Ouachita Parish (Monroe, LA) cases.
          
        
        
          American Poverty, World Poverty
          By Marshall, RayRay Marshall
          Vol. 8, No. 1, 1986, pp. 3-7
          
          For poor people in this country, and in the world, the outlook is
not good. And because the lives of the poor are joined together with
ours, their problems and poverty are ours-directly and indirectly, in
our communities, through international trade, and through
immigration.
          Rising unemployment is a worldwide phenomenon. Joblessness in the
Third World is fifty percent, and climbing. The International Labor
Organization estimates that to keep that figure from going up by the
end of this century for people already born we'll need to create 700
million new jobs.
          There are not 700 million jobs in the whole industrialized world
today. Things are going to get worse.
          
            The Greatest Economic Policy Mistake
          
          The American economy is losing its competitiveness across the
board, not just in the smokestack industries but, as a presidential
commission reported in 1985, in seven out of ten high-tech
industries. Our ability to maintain jobs in this country is being
eroded.
          The main reason for the loss of competitiveness and for our loss of
two million jobs is the over-valued dollar-which comes about directly
because of Reaganomics. The 1981 tax cut was the single greatest
economic policy mistake in US history. Historians will leave no
doubt about that.
          To give you some idea of the magnitude of the damage that has come
from the tax cut decision, Ford Motor Company estimated in
1983--before things got as bad as they are now--that of the $2,000
differential between American and Japanese automobiles, $1,400 was
because of exchange rates. The Caterpillar Company estimated that on a
$200,000 piece of equipment, they ought to have a $30,000 advantage
over Komatsu. They've got a $30,000 disadvantage.
          So what do they do? They leave the country. They're moving the jobs
to other countries. Not because of inefficiency in the United States,
not because we can't be more competitive in real terms. They're moving
those jobs from the United States because with differentials in
exchange rates of that magnitude they simply cannot compete. They
cannot produce in the United States. Ninety-five percent of all the
increased capital goods final demand over the past business cycle came
from imports. Ninety-five percent.
          Our capital goods industries--our machine tools and basic
production capability--are in shambles. And although we also have
structural problems, the fundamental problem is the over-valued dollar
that came about because of high real interest rates, that came about
because of the enormous budget deficit, that came about because of the
1981 tax cut.
          
            Corporations Beyond the Rule of Law
          
          There are other problems. What to do about multinational and
transnational corporations? (Transnational companies are owned by
people from different countries. Multinationals
are American companies operating in different countries.)
          Transnationals and multinationals are driven by profits. Whatever
is second to profits is a long way behind. They will move the jobs
wherever they can make the greatest profit. Ordinarily that means to
where they can get the lowest wages. So they are able to whipsaw
countries. And whipsaw workers.
          I've seen no effective means to bring multinational and
transnational corporations under the rule of law, to make them
responsible for their actions. I think it can be done, but I see no
organization now to do that.
          Many of the jobs in the South are on their way to the Third
World. We will not be able to keep them. Many of them came here
because of low wages. And this is their last stop in this country. In
the Third World, Mexico is a high-wage country and their wages are
about one-fifth of ours.
          
            American Poverty
          
          The US poverty figures remain high. The little improvement among
some categories last year was very little. We have to be very
discouraged about the overall decline in the national poverty rate
from 15.2% to 14.4%
          Income is being redistributed in the United States. The top ten
percent of income recipients have never received a larger proportion
of the income at any time since we've been keeping numbers than they
did in 1984. (see Tables l and 2) The bottom forty percent of income
recipients in the country have never received a lower proportion of
income than they did in 1984. The lowest ten percent of income
recipients in the country have lost about $400 since 1980 while the
richest ten percent have added $5,000 to their median income.
          Programs to help the poor have been drastically reduced. You know
those numbers. Most discouraging, most alarm-

ing is what is happening
to children. Poor children are much worse off now than when the War on
Poverty started. There are more of them. Their numbers are increasing
while the resources to deal with their problems are diminishing.
          Over one-half of poor children live in families headed by
women. These children's futures are inextricably bound up with the
conditions of women in poverty. They will never escape from that. If
they don't get proper nutrition as infants and children, they and we
are damaged by that forever. These programs have been drastically
reduced despite evidence that they save the government three dollars
for every dollar spent.
          Among our most important anti-poverty programs are our
anti-discrimination laws. But, now we've got an administration intent
upon weakening civil rights enforcement. In their attitudes about
discrimination against women and blacks, they would send us back to
the 1940s.
          Many of the organizations that might help poor and near-poor people
are either weakened or are looking the other way.
          Unions are weakened and under full-scale attack. The National
Association of Manufacturers has formed a Council for a Union-Free
Environment. They wouldn't have dared do that twenty years ago. I
don't think they will pull it off. But in the process they have
greatly weakened unions and unions' ability to represent the interests
of workers. 
          Community-based organizations and civil rights groups have been
weakened.
          The government--which in a just and humane society should always be
concerned about the least fortunate--is looking the other way. They
have convinced themselves that there's no problem or, that it's the
poor's own fault that they're poor.
          The Democratic Party seems unconcerned about the poor. It has not
even demonstrated the concern that would be in its own self-interest:
by registering the poor to vote. We could only get six out of over
thirty Democratic governors involved in encouraging community service
organizations to register voters.
          We've also got the "neo-liberals" who are disaffected. They believe
that the programs that tried to help the poor failed. They believe
that if we just let the market work and have the proper macroeconomic
policies we don't need jobs programs and we don't need most of these
programmatic interventions. That strikes me as looking the other
way. Denying a problem that clearly exists.
          
            An Intellectual Code of Nonsense
          
          We are seeing a weakening of the intellectual support for human
resource development programs. Having such intellectual support during
the New Deal was one of the reasons we were able to make progress.
          People used to believe that a just and humane society took care of
the least of these our brothers and sisters. And, that in so doing, we
were helping the country. We did not believe we could prevent
depressions and have lasting prosperity unless all major goups shared
in that prosperity.
          We still say that people are our most important asset. And it's
unquestionably true. But many people who know that, don't understand it.
          So we have cut programs for education that have demonstrated their
effectiveness. And we have cut programs like WIC, the women's, infants
and children nutrition program which returns three dollars to the
government for each one it spends.
          In the past, we believed that these programs were not costs but
investments. Public education was an investment in this country. So
was the GI Bill. We didn't only look at the cost of doing things.
          Creating a just society once meant something pretty concrete. It
meant a bias in favor of the disadvantaged. Nothing was more unjust
than the equal treatment of unequals. We felt an obligation to the
poor and the disadvantaged.
          All this now is being challenged by an intellectual code that
contains several parts. The first is Reaganomics, an economic theory
of sheer nonsense. I don't think anybody of sound mind and any
training believed that supply-side economics--the doctrine that was
used to justify the 1981 tax cut-ever had a chance. You remember what
this promised--that by cutting taxes by 750 billion dollars and
increasing defense spending to 1.6 trillion, we would so stimulate the
economy that we would balance the federal budget by the end of
1983.
          The result was the creation of a budget deficit so huge that people
now view balancing the budget as the most important thing we can
do--even if it means cutting out education and nutrition for
children.
          As former Reagan budget director David Stockman said in his famous
interview, you couldn't sell trickle-down out loud, so you called it
supply-side. That's all Reaganomics was and is: the myth that if you
make the rich richer, we'll all be better off.
          Well, we made the rich richer. And we made the poor poorer--they
have been trickled down on. Investment went down. Savings went
down. And the result is a budget deficit larger than that produced by
all the preceding administrations combined.
          Beyond Reaganomics, other doctrines have undercut intellectual and
popular support for economic justice. One idea--put forth by Charles
Murray in his book Losing Ground--is that government
assistance programs are 

counterproductive. Murray's view, which
continues to be surprisingly well-received, holds that social spending
makes the receipients dependent and the problems worse. Murray says
that as a result of the War on Poverty and the rest of the
government's social spending programs, poverty went up.
          A variant of that argument is, "The programs didn't work." That's
the easiest one to deal with. Because the evidence is overwhelming
that the programs did work. And produced rich dividends for the
country.
          But let's look at the ideas of Reaganomics and then at the notions
of Murray. First, is the budget deficit our most important problem?
Not really. The budget deficit is not likely to cause a recession. It
is troubling. Its real effects are on interest rates, the exchange
rate, and in creating an obstacle to economic growth. But bringing the
deficit down will not necessarily reduce real interest rates.
          There are various reasons for that. First, in the deregulated
financial environment, competition for deposits keeps the interest
rates up. There used to only be competition on one side of the
market. Moreover, with very low corporate profits, corporations are no
longer as sensitive to interest rates. So there is likely to continue
to be high demand for money. Also, there's simply a lot of
speculation, which causes rates to be high and volatile.
          By trying first to balance the budget by 1987, we could end up with
a deeper recession than that of 1981-82. It's the wrong time to do
it. And the worst possible way to do it would be to make further cuts
in domestic spending. We need to reduce the budget deficit as much as
possible by raising revenues, cutting military spending, restoring
many of the cuts in human resource development programs, raising taxes
and reforming the tax system.
          Now, let's look at Charles Murray's arguments. The evidence is
overwhelmingly against the idea that government domestic spending is
counterproductive. Bet me just tick off a few reasons.
          First, there is the assumption, underlying Murray's view, that the
poor don't want to work. Nonsense. If you have had any experience with
these programs you know that if you make a few lousy jobs available,
you get inundated with applicants. Secondly, Murray doesn't exclude
the elderly from his federal expenditure numbers, but he excludes them
in terms of how their lives have improved. The elderly have benefitted
tremendously from government programs. They have received 86% of
social welfare spending. Poverty among the elderly has declined from
over 25%, at the beginning of the War on Poverty, twice the overall
level, to fourteen percent in 1983.
          The neo-conservative argument ignores the fact that a relatively
small part of social welfare spending goes to the non-elderly. We are
told by Murray that black male teenage crime is a result of government
spending. What government program is for black teenage males?
None. There's no social spending on black teenage males. Indeed I know
of no human resources development program where conditions got worse
because we spent more money.
          Even from looking at Murray's own statistics, the only conclusion
you can come to is that social program spending reduces
poverty. When we quit spending and reduce 

programs, poverty
went up. Problems get worse because of changing conditions or poor
program design, not because we spent money. There is overwhelming
evidence that programs like the Job Corps that have had time to grow
and learn from their mistakes have greatly improved the employability
of the young people they were designed to help and are good
investments of public resources.
          Things have gotten worse for many people because we have
discontinued the programs, not because we adopted them. We have
serious problems of a secular rise in unemployment; growing
inequality, which will greatly weaken an already fractured national
unity; and the development of a self-perpetuating social and economic
underclass-made up disproportionately of minorities, but including
many whites as well.
          One manifestation of this self-perpetuation is the teenage
pregnancy problem. Unwanted pregnancies among children is a serious
national problem with devastating long-run consequences. Its causes
are not well understood, but they can be understood with study and
attention. I would guess that a good bit of the problem relates to
unemployment and social isolation of very poor young people. In the
black community, joblessness, racism, the movement of middle- and
working-class people out of predominantly black areas (thus removing
role models and sources of social stability), and growing unemployment
among young black males, all have contributed greatly to a
self-perpetuating system of helplessness and despair.
          I believe we should make the elimination of this growing underclass
a high national priority.
          Many object to the costs of programs to change this situation, but
we will pay dearly if we do not deal with it.
          Most of the work force growth between now and the first two decades
of the twenty-first century will be among women and minorities By
about 2015, there probably be a combined minority population of 91
million in the US; this will constitute about 34% of the population
and well over forty percent of the work force (because white males are
older and more likely to retire).
          How well prepared these young people are for twenty-first century
jobs depends on what is happening to them right now. And the evidence
is not encouraging. Most eighteen year old minority males are not
sufficiently literate to function in even the emerging low-wage
jobs.
          Probably less than ten percent of our growing prison population can
function at the twelfth grade level. The fact that it costs between
$25,000-$30,000 to keep somebody in prison for a year is only part of
the cost of inadequate human resource development.
          If there is any one fault with what we did in the past, it was that
we paid too much attention to income transfers and not enough
attention to making people self-sufficient. For the poverty problem is
going to be solved by poor and near-poor people themselves. The rest
of us (and organizations like the SRC) can help, but programs must be
designed to give people greater ability and incentives to help
themselves.
          So what can we do? It's very clear that we need a new international
economic order. That we've got to renegotiate GATT (the General
Agreement on Trade and Tariffs). We've got to have much better
coordination between the economic policies of the major industrial
countries.
          We've got to say to Japan and Germany and other countries, "You've
got to help. We've got to move together. And what you ought to do now
is to start stimulating your economy. What we all ought to do now is
relax our monetary policies to bring real interest rates down. And
we'll start doing some things to balance our budget."
          Within the US, we need a full employment strategy. We need to
create enough jobs at decent wages to provide one for everybody who is
willing and able to work. We can and ought to do it. We can't do it
through monetary-fiscal policies alone, but we can create jobs There's
a lot of useful work to be done.
          We know that a full-employment policy would be good business. With
a jobs program, $15 billion could save the federal government $30
billion. We've demonstrated that in the past. The main reason we don't
do it now is the neoconservative mythology that it didn't work. We
ought not let them get IJY with that. The contrary evidence is
overpowering.
          We need to greatly strengthen our human resource development. Our
education, our health care. We must educate people, get them
trained.
          Worker ownership of industry has already started in 

other
countries, and is beginning in the United States. We ought to develop
policies to facilitate worker participation in and ownership of
industry.
          We must strengthen collective bargaining.
          We need to strengthen community-based organinzations that assist
people in gaining greater control of their own destinies.
          We must get ready, for our time will come I think the country will
be looking for new answers by 1988 when many of Ronald Reagan's
chickens come home to roost and the consequences of his policies are
more obvious.
          What should we do? We must keep the faith. We must do what we think
is right. We ought not be stampeded into doing things simply because
they are popular. We especially should avoid the trap that balancing
the budget should take priority over everything else-an idea t hat
seems to be very popular with many Democrats. We ought to learn. We
ought to act We ought to challenge. We ought to develop strategies and
tactics to improve the conditions of the poor. We ought to
organize. We ought to register voters. We ought to form coalitions.
          We ought to present our analysis and the realities of life under
Reaganomics to as wide a popular audience as we can, using the most
modern and accessible forms of media. We should make clear what life
for the working poor is really like. We should present the examples of
young people who have been trained in the civil rights movement or in
community-based organizations who are now assuming positions of
leadership in the country. We should present the lives of young women
who have been able to escape from welfare and poverty because of
government programs which support training and childcare. We should
present the very real stories of adults who have learned to read and
write because of an adult literacy program.
          We should not let people make abstractions of human
suffering. Above all we should not be afraid to experiment, to try new
approaches to dealing with our human problems. We should not be afraid
to make mistakes and we should learn from our mistakes.
          Rather what we should fear most, as citizens of the richest nation
on earth, is the judgment of the world community and of history that
we were unwilling to tee good and faithful stewards of our resources,
that we deliberately decided not to use our resources to try to
improve the human condition.
          One of the reason that I am proud to have been associated with the
Southern Regional Council is that this organization can stand that
test. Whatever else historians may say about the SRC, I am confident
that they will say we at least tried to use our resources to make the
South a better place for all of our people.
          
            Ray Marshall holds the Audre and Bernard Rapoport Chair
in Economics and Public Affairs at the University of Texas at Austin,
and is  vice-president of the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Casualty Count.  The War Against the Poor
          By Greenstein, RobertRobert Greenstein
          Vol. 8, No. 1, 1986, pp. 7-10
          
          If you look at the statistics of American poverty today, one
set--the figures for children's poverty--hits you over the
head. Fifteen years ago the child poverty rate was between thirteen
and fourteen percent. Last year it was over twenty-one percent. The
poverty rate for children is a full one-third higher than in the late
1970s when the unemployment rate was at the same level as it is
today.
          And, while there has been a very slight recent reduction in the
overall poverty rate during the past year, and in the overall child
poverty rate, all the reduction in child poverty has occurred among
white children. None of it has occurred among black or Hispanic
children.
          The poverty rate for black children under the age of six now has
reached just over fifty-one percent. One out of every two black
children under the age of six in the United States lives in
poverty.
          Nor do we expect any substantial further reduction in poverty
soon. Real wages (wages adjusted for inflation), which are an
important predictor of the poverty rate, remain unchanged from a year
ago. Inflation isn't going up very fast, but wages are going up even
less than inflation. The 

real purchasing power of wages did not
improve in 1985.
          
            Why is this happening?
          
          Before the scant decline in the poverty rate was announced,
Secretary of Commerce, Malcolm Baldrige, hailed the improved
unemployment figures and predicted that the poverty rate for 1984
would go down to thirteen percent.
          It didn't happen.
          Meanwhile, several economists at the Institute for Research on
Poverty in Madison, Wisconsin, were forecasting the 1984 poverty
statistics almost exactly on the mark. What were the differences
between how the Reagan Administration and the Wisconsin researchers
analysed the circumstances of poverty?
          The Administration assumed the major issue was the economy:
unemployment goes up, poverty goes up, unemployment comes down,
poverty comes down.
          The economists at the Institute for Research on Poverty recognized
that changes in the economy are important, but found that the domestic
budget cuts since 1981 also have played a role and have had a
long-lasting effect in increasing the number of families with children
who are poor.
          They also found the benefits of the current economic "recovery" are
less evenly distributed than those of any previous economic recovery
of recent decades. The gap between rich and poor is growing. In fact,
the gap between upper and lower income families in the United States
is wider today than at any time since the US Census began collecting
data on income distribution in 1947.
          The poorest forty percent of all US families now have a smaller
share of the national income than at any time since 1947.
          The richest forty percent of all US families now have a larger
share of the national income in any time since 1947.
          What's more, if you examine median family income since 1980 you'll
find that the a family in the poorest forty percent of the population
had nearly $500 less in annual income by 1984 than in 1980 (after
adjusting for inflation). By constrast, the median family of the top
forty percent was $1,800 richer in 1984 than in 1980. And the median
family income in the top ten percent of the population had increased
by $5,000 in those years. That's before-tax income--even before the
effects of the Reagan help-the-rich tax cuts.
          These figures have implications for rich and poor, and for black
and white. Nearly two-thirds of black families fall into the bottom
forty percent of the overall population. Only one of every five black
families falls into the top forty per cent. Or to put that another
way, while white median family income is a tad higher now than in
1980, black median family income is over $500 lower after adjusting
for inflation.
          What the figures also show is that not only has the number of poor
grown (in 1978 there were about 25 million people below the poverty
line, today there are nearly 34 million), but that those who are poor
have gotten poorer. The typical poor family is farther below the
poverty line.
          
            The Working Poor
          
          Another factor of recent years affecting the rise in poverty is a
very serious decline in wages. Larger and larger numbers of people who
work remain poor. The number of people who work full-time year-round
and are still poor has increased by two-thirds just since 1978, and
now exceeds two million persons.
          The increasing numbers of working poor are related to the growing
weakness of labor unions, foreign competition and the shift from
manufacturing to service jobs. Just as important is the unprecedented
stagnation of the minimum wage. The minimum has not been adjusted now
in nearly five years. The minimum wage has fallen twenty-five percent
in relation to inflation since January 1981.
          What does a declining minimum wage mean if you work forty hours a
week, fifty-two weeks a year for $3.35 an hour? In 1978 if you were a
member of a family of four in which one wage-earner worked full-time
and year-round at the minimum wage, your family would have been $1,150
below the poverty line. The same situation in a family of three would
have put that family above the poverty line.
          Today, a family of four with a single wage-earner working forty
hours a week, fifty-two weeks a year, finds itself $4,000 below the
poverty line. Today, a family of three--for instance, a minimum wage
earning mother of two children--working full-time, year-round, is
$1,600 below the poverty line. A family of two (a full-time working
mother and one child) is about forty or fifty dollars below the
poverty line. These families are falling further below the poverty
line each year because the minimum wage is not being adjusted for
inflation.
          And, it's not just the minimum wage. Many workers are paid fifty
cents or a dollar above the minimum. Families are working, they are
trying, but they are remaining in poverty.
          
            The Unkindest Cuts
          
          Now, these are some of the basic situations that confront us. And
what has the federal response been? To cut the very programs which
give the most help to the working poor while, at the same time, using
the money cut from domestic programs to finance the continuing
military build-up.
          While the programs affected are many in number and their effect is
often life-saving--Medicaid, Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC), food stamps, SSI, low-income housing, low-income energy
assistance, legal servi-

ces and so forth (about thirty programs in
all)--their budgets are actually quite small. If you add together all
of the programs targeted for low income persons, you're talking about
one-tenth of the federal budget. Yet that one-tenth of the federal
budget bore thirty percent of the budget cuts enacted from 1981
through 1983, when the bulk of the domestic reductions were made. In
other words, the low income programs shouldered three times their
share. No other part of the federal budget has been cut as
deeply. And, many of these programs stand to be cut deeply again in
fiscal year 1987, if the Administration has its way.
          Let's take a couple of areas and highlight what has happened.
          In the AFDC program, the Reagan Administration says the cuts have
been "successful." Yet, this past July, the General Accounting Office
came out with a major report on the impact of the cuts in AFDC. The
GAO found 440,000 families-nearly all of them working, female-headed
families-had been cut from AFDC. Many of those families were poor even
before being cut. Many more were made poor.
          In many states the families cut from AFDC also lost Medicaid
coverage. An estimated 700,000 children lost Medicaid coverage.
          When the GAO looked further, it found that the average family that
was cut from AFDC had lost between $1,500 and $2,500 dollars a year in
benefits. The GAO determined that between twenty and fifty percent of
the families that were cut now have no health care coverage for
themselves or their children.
          About half the families reported having run out of food at least
once and having no money to buy more. Over one-quarter of these
families had some utility shut-off at least once after being dropped
from AFDC.
          This GAO study did not even examine the effects of all the cuts in
the AFDC program, such as the denial of AFDC 

benefits during the first
five months of pregnancy to a woman pregnant with her first
child. This, despite knowledge that prenatal care during early periods
of pregnancy is quite important to healthy growth.
          And then, there are other program areas. The cuts that have been
made in low-income housing are truly staggering. Not only did we raise
the rents for everybody in public and subsidized housing twenty-five
percent or more, but in many cases we cut their food stamps and their
AFDC benefits as well. We cut back on federal support for construction
and rehabilation of low-income housing units. We are now losing about
a half a million low-income units a year nationwide, due to rent
increases, condominium conversion, abandonment, decay and so forth.
          As recently as the mid-1970s, federal money was paying for the
construction or rehabilitation of over 300,000 units a year. That's
been cut by two-thirds. The 1987 budget as proposed by the Reagan
Administration provides no funds for any further construction or
rehabilitation of low-income housing.
          Nor has most of the impact of past housing cuts yet been felt. The
shortage of low-income housing today is nothing like it will be ten
years from now, when the forward-funded housing of the Ford and Carter
administrations trickles out. The low-income housing situation is
expected to will be substantially worse ten years from now.
          Despite statements of Reagan Administration officials that their
proposed 1987 budget will protect low income Americans, the proposals
included in the President's latest budget request will, if enacted,
represent the deepest cuts in programs for the poor since the large
reductions enacted 1981. An analysis of the 1987 Reagan budget reveals
that spending for programs for the poor would be cut $8.2 billion next
year from current levels. Virtually every low income entitlement
program would be cut. Two million elderly persons living below the
poverty line would be required to pay more out of their own incomes
for Medicare.
          The President's 1987 budget calls for "recisions" (cancellations)
of $7 billion already appropriated by Congress in fiscal year 1986 for
some fifteen low income programs and for the elimination--next year--of
fourteen low income programs. Among those set for extinction and of
particular importance to poor people in the South are legal services,
community services block grants, rural rental housing loans, rural
home ownership loans, rural water and sewer grants.
          And, while the 1987 budget proposal would exact a substantial toll
on poor families and low income elderly persons, appropriations for
the military would increase by $34 billion--a rise of eight percent
after inflation. As in past years of the Reagan Administration, cuts
in domestic programs in the 1987 budget would not only bear nearly all
of the brunt of reducing the deficit, they would also finance the
ongoing military build-up.
          
            Robert Greenstein is director of the Center on Budget and
Policy Priorities. For more information about the Center and its work,
write to 236 Massachusetts Ave., NE, .Suite 305, Washington, DC
20002. 202-544-O591. Mr Greenstein's remarks printed here are revised
from his talk at the 1985 annual meeting of the Southern Regional
Council.
          
        
        
          In Country, a novel by Bobbie Ann Mason. Harper &Row 247 pp. $15.95
          Reviewed by Egerton, JohnJohn Egerton
          Vol. 8, No.1, 1986, pp. 20-22
          
          The tumultuous decade of the 1960s still hovers over us like a
great gray cloud, a mighty shadow of lingering hope and despair and
wonder. We look back now with amazement bordering on disbelief at the
exhilarating and traumatic ascensions and plunges that our society
somehow survived in those years-black liberation and the movements it
spawned for women and other minorities, the war in Southeast Asia,
multiple assassinations, moon landings, urban and environmental
crises, the drug culture, and much more. It may be emotional
exhaustion as much as anything else that has slowed the runaway
roller-coaster since then; in any case, the rumble of revolutionary
thunder seems now to echo less frequently and more distantly.
          Trying to make sense of those times, to tote up the gains 

and
losses and chart new directions, is a complex and unending task. We
look to participants and eyewitnesses, to politicians and
commentators, to scholars and creative artists for a better
understanding of what went on and what the consequences will be. The
picture is not yet clear, though, and may not be for a long time to
come. Most historians regard the period as still too recent for
definitive interpretation and analysis (some would call it both
literally and figuratively too close for comfort). Novelists, on the
other hand, may feel no such constraints; armed with literary license,
they can probe selectively, explore at will, blend reality with
imagination, and finally give us sweeping or tightly focused visions
of our former selves.
          Bobbie Ann Mason's In Country, a novel, looks back
to Vietnam from the vantage point of a small town in western Kentucky
in 1984. Her characters are working-class white people living in the
present. On the surface, hers is a simple tale briefly told. But in
the spare and unadorned language we stumble upon some unexpected and
disturbing images: of Vietnam's continuing legacy, of mass culture
seeping into the pores of the society, of an out-of-the-way country
place that could be Anywhere USA, of ordinary people like us who seem
harmless and even at times humorous but also aimless and
immobilized.
          An eighteen-year-old girl named Samantha Hughes--Sam to
everyone--is the central figure. She lives with her thirty-five-year
old uncle, Emmett Smith, a Vietnam veteran whose only regular
activities are having breakfast at McDonald's with some of his old
army buddies and watching M*A*S*H reruns on TV. When his father asks
him why he doesn't get a job and "stop fooling around," Emmett
answers: "Ain't nothing worth doing. Most jobs are stupid."
          Sam's father was killed in Vietnam, and her mother has remarried
and moved away. Her grandparents live nearby, but she seldom sees
them. She has finished high school and is thinking about going to
college-either that or going back to her counter job at Burger
Boy. Her current boyfriend, Lonnie Malone, is a bag boy at Kroger, and
her closest friend is a girl named Dawn who has just discovered she is
pregnant.
          Emmett has health problems that Sam believes are caused by residual
poisoning from Agent Orange, the chemical defoliant we used so
extensively in Vietnam. She wants to know what really happened in the
war, to know how her father died and what Emmett and his companions
experienced there, but no one seems able to tell her anything: "She
knew very well that on TV, people always had the words to express
their feelings, while in real life hardly anyone ever did. On TV, they
had script writers." In Hopewell, Kentucky, a.k.a. Anywhere USA, no
one seems to grasp what is happening, let alone have the words to
explain it.
          Sam and Emmett and their friends seem utterly shackled by
contemporary culture. Their reference points are in television and
music videos, supermarkets and shopping malls, processed foods and
packaged entertainment. History to them reaches only as far back as
the sixties, "a much better time to be young than now." Far from being
dangerous or menacing, they are simply ineffectual, even impotent. If
they have jobs, the work is routinized and low-paying and dead-end; if
they have family ties, the connections are tenuous and habitual.
          Emmett and the other veterans, physically or mentally scarred by
their war experiences, seem destined never to recover; now in their
mid-thirties, they have been old men 

since they came home fifteen
years ago. But Sam and her friends also seem old before their time,
though they are still teenagers, and when the two generations come
together, they find common ground in stereo music and cable TV, in
Bruce Springsteen and Johnny Carson, in HBO, MTV, Cinemax. Whatever
can't be captured in a half-hour sitcom or a seven-minute music video
is not likely to be seen and heard, let alone remembered.
          The Southeast Asian experience, whether terrifying of thrilling, is
the only thing different in the lives of the older men. Those who were
"in country"--in Vietnam--know it is all that sets them apart; some of
them resent that, others take pride in it. Sam's concern for Emmett's
health and her curiosity about her father's death are the only
compelling interests she seems able to sustain.
          Set as it is in 1984 (the same year it apparently was written,
since it was published in 1985), In Country is full of
the most contemporary and immediate references--Reagan, Mondale,
Ferraro, and so forth. Even so, the book portrays characters who are
isolated and adrift, lost in inner space with no apparent hope of
rescue--or even a clear sense that they are lost. The bleakness of
their plight is all the more poignant because they seem so real, so
believable, so familiar.
          One of the marks of Bobbie Ann Mason's skill as a writer is her
ability to disguise intent. Is she telling us, like Jean Paul Sartre,
that our destiny as human beings is to wander aimlessly in a
meaningless universe? Is she describing reality as she sees it in one
little corner of the globe? Has she simply invented a few fictional
characters who can't "express their feelings" because they don't have
TV script writers to give them a voice? Is she poking fun at
lower-middle-class white people in the small-town South, or being
critical of them, or showing sympathy for them, or celebrating
them?
          Who's to say? You pay your $15.95 and you take your choice. Along
the way, you may encounter some people you'll think you've met
before--friends, neighbors, relatives--or even catch a glimpse of
yourself. Bobbie Ann Mason's strength is in fashioning familiar
characters out of plain, direct, straightforward language. I am moved
by her power to do that. I only wish her people were sometimes able to
rise above themselves and do something really wild -cancel the cable
subscription, sell the stereo, boycott the shopping malls, or even,
heaven help us, break the habit of dining daily under the golden
arches.
          
            John Egerton lives in Nashville. He is author of many
essays and books, including Generations (Univ. Press of
Kentucky) which won the Southern Regional Council's Lillian Smith
Award in 1984.
          
        
      
    
  
