
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 8, Number 4,
	       1986
        
          Women in the Rural South: Scraping a Living from Two-bit
Jobs
          By Smith, Barbara EllenBarbara Ellen Smith
          Vol. 8, No. 1, 1986, pp. 5-8
          
          Southern working class women are survivors. No message emerges as
vividly from the stories in this booklet, Picking Up the Pieces. All
of these women scraped their livings out of rocky soil and two-bit
jobs; all got by on little but their own muscles and wits. Many bore
children at a young age, and struggled for the better part of their
lives to put food in their mouths and shoes on their feet. All endured
the personal insults, self-doubt and, in several cases, physical
violence that are the lot of women in this country; many faced the
additional barrier 

of racial abuse and discrimination. Their stories
are not romantic or pretty; poverty is neither. But they are stories
of great courage, humor and strength in the face of formidable
odds.
          These women are but one generation in a long succession of southern
women with similar stories to tell. The history of women's survival in
the South is bound up with the history of agriculture, which remained
the foundation of the region's economy until well into the present
century. The first women to eke their livings out of the southern
earth were of course Native American. Encroachment and enslavement by
European settlers shattered their traditional way of life, but members
of the Cherokee, Lumbee and other tribes have survived, especially in
North Carolina and Oklahoma. Native Americans were the first of many
rural people in the region to be dispossessed of their most precious
economic resource--land. They were also among the first to be enslaved
in the labor system for which the South became known.
          The eighteenth century saw the flourishing of plantation
agriculture in the South, based on the labor of African women and
men. Although slavery was formally abolished in 1863, the
reorganization of agriculture into the sharecropping system ensured
the continued poverty of most black families. Concentration of land
ownership in the hands of a white upper-class minority denied economic
opportunity to successive generations of rural
Southerners. Women--both black and white--labored long and hard in
cotton fields and on tobacco farms, but remained for the most part
landless and in debt.
          Industrialization came to the South on a large scale during the
last quarter of the nineteenth century. Mines, mills and factories
proliferated amidst regional fanfare over the construction of a "New
South." Allocation of the new industrial jobs according to race and
gender established a pattern of occupational segregation that is
visible to this day. Hard pressed to secure an adequate labor force in
the rugged Appalachian mountains of the upper South, coal operators
sought workers of all races and nationalities--but hired no women. In
the more densely settled piedmont to the South, textile mill owners
preferred the low-wage labor of rural white women and originally
children. They refused to hire black workers, save for a few menial
jobs, though certain other southern employers, such as tobacco
processors, relied heavily on black labor. All segregated their
workers by race and gender into distinct physical locations and job
categories. Coupled with enforced social separation under Jim Crow,
occupational segregation maintained a divisive hierarchy of
opportunity among Southerners who were increasingly members of the
same working class.
          Southern women's present economic status reflects the persistent,
detrimental impacts of their segregation into low-wage, often
labor-intensive jobs. In the coal-dependent economies of east
Kentucky, southern West Virginia and areas further south, women are
largely excluded from the most important source of high-wage
employment industry, the mining industry. As a result, they have few
economic opportunities and extremely low labor force participation
rates: in 1984 in West Virginia, 39.2 percent of adult women were in
the labor force, the lowest rate of any state in the nation. Over the
last ten years, women have fought successfully to gain access to
mining jobs; today, however, many coal miners--including most
women--are unemployed.
          In the piedmont counties of North Carolina, South Carolina and
Georgia, women remain concentrated in the low-wage manufacuring
industries where they were first employed one hundred years
ago. Nearly two-thirds of southern textile and apparel workers are
women, and the great majority are rural. Today, women of all races
find employment in the mills, but they receive some of the lowest
wages in the country for their efforts. In 1983, average earnings in
the apparel industry were $5.37/hour, about half the average in
manufacturing industries like chemicals and primary metals, where men
predominate.
          As is true throughout the United States, the rapid growth of the
southern service sector has been based on the labor of women. For
black women, dependence on service jobs is nothing new; they were long
consigned to domestic service, the lowest wage job in the nation. As
recently as 1960, nearly half of all employed black women in the South
were domestic servants. Many now engage in a commercialized variation
of the same activity; they are cooks in restaurants, maids in hotels,
laundresses in hospitals. Over one-third of all employed black women
in the South work in the service sector.
          Southern white women, by contrast, are more heavily concentrated in
pink collar ghettos of retail sales and office work. In the urban
South, slightly more than half of employed white women are cashiers,
secretaries, 

and related workers. In the rural areas of the region,
the larger role of manufacturing somewhat offsets dependence on these
sectors, though nearly 40 percent of employed rural white women are
secretaries and sales clerks. The higher status of this pink collar
work does not necessarily bring a higher wage or greater job
satisfaction. Southern women of all races often earn scarcely more
than the minimum wage: in 1984, half of those with any income at all
received less than $6,700 a year; among those who worked full-time the
entire year, half earned less than $14,312. Median earnings of black
and Hispanic women were over $2,000 a year lower than those of white
women.
          As the lowest paid workers in the lowest wage region of the
country, southern working class women bear a heavy burden of
poverty. Their role as caretakers of children magnifies their economic
needs and spreads the implications of their poverty to the next
generation. Poverty is most severe among those who experience the
intersecting discrimination of class, race and gender: working class
black women who are single mothers with young children. Over sixty
percent are poor. Other southern women of all races live constantly on
the margin between destitution and survival--one month unemployed and
down to the last dollar, another month with a small paycheck and an
uncertain job, yet always without genuine opportunity.
          Women survive despite their lack of economic resources by using
skills passed down for generations. This is true not only of those who
live in remote areas on the margins of the wage economy, but also of
women in "developed" locations who work hard for wages yet always
remain poor. Both produce and circulate with their neighbors the goods
and services necessary for their families' survival: they patch and
sew, swap child care, watch for sales and clip coupons; in rural
areas, they also garden, raise chickens and perform other agricultural
tasks. In general, women have learned to substitute their own hard
work for the commodities that they cannot afford to buy.
          Women who have made much out of little may have to do with even
less in the future. Current economic trends do not bode well for
southern women, especially those in rural locations. Fueled by
international competition and the loss of markets, US corporations are
engaged in a global search for reduced production costs; their
strategies include technological innovation, relocation to lower wage
areas, and sometimes a combination of both. For workers, the domestic
impacts of this economic transformation include unemployment,
irregular work and lowered wages. Labor-intensive manufacturing has
been especially hard hit; this is precisely the industrial sector that
once favored the rural South and the labor of southern women.
          These trends are apparent in mining and manufacturing industries
throughout the South. In West Virginia, for example, the unemployment
rate has topped all other states' for over two years. Technological
innovations in underground mining, coupled with declining markets for
certain grades of coal, have drastically diminished employment in the
coalfields. Women who once worked in the mines now stand in
unemployment lines with former waitresses and secretaries from the
boarded-up businesses of rural county seats. Further south, women who
worked in the textile and apparel industries also find that jobs are
scarce. Bankruptcies, plant closings and layoffs have swept through
the piedmont during the past ten years. Between 1973 and 1983, the
work force in textiles and apparel dropped nationwide by over
500,000. Although advocates for protectionist trade policies assert
that "unfair competition from producers in Southeast Asia" is the
source of declining employment, the situation is far more complex.
          Large corporations in the textile industry have transformed the
production of cloth from fiber. Since the mid-1970s, they have brought
robots, electronic knitting machines and other technological
innovations into the mills; the result has been rapidly rising
productivity and wide-spread displacement of workers. Although it is
true that textile imports have boomed in recent years, they are by no
means the sole cause of unemployment. The US textile industry is
undergoing a massive shakeout: less productive mills are closing; less
well-capitalized companies are going bankrupt. Meanwhile, the larger
producers are concentrating production in modern, relatively automated
plants. Manufacturers of apparel have taken a different approach to
the pressures on international competition. Although some have
invested in new, highly productive technologies, many have roamed the
globe in search of cheap labor, and have found it among poor women in
Hong Kong, Mexico, Taiwan and elsewhere.
          Some producers have even found they no longer need to leave the
United States to take advantage of Asian and Hispanic women's cheap
labor; there is evidence that rising immigration and high unemployment
rates have enabled a return of the sweatshop to cities like New York,
Chicago, and Los Angeles.
          Women laid off from textile mills and garment factories rarely find
a job in the new manufacturing industries that have recently located
in the South. Since 

World War II, businessmen in heavy industries have
been drawn by the region's low wages, nonunion work force and
accomodating political tradition, which equates "economic development"
and the "right to work." Particularly for capital-intensive
operations, in which long-term security of expensive plants and
equipment is a serious concern, the political conservatism and
stability of the South give it an edge over alternative locations in
the Third World. Manufacturers of chemicals, machinery, rubber and
other products have all constructed plants in the South. Location of
the Saturn automobile plant in rural Tennessee is only a recent and
relatively well-publicized example of this larger trend, which has
generated considerable regional rivalry, especially during periods of
recession in the North. These so-called "emerging" or
"non-traditional" industries bring opportunities for some of the
highest wages paid to southern workers. But for women, they bring very
little: employers in these industries rarely turn to women for their
production work force, which is over seventy percent male.
          The growth industries in which southern working class women find
employment are primarily in the ubiquitous sectors of services and
retail trade. The more fortunate land a relatively secure job with the
government, which in the postwar era has been an important source of
service sector expansion and increased job opportunities for
women. Nearly one-fourth of all employed women in the South now work
for the government; among black women, public employment is even more
significant, accounting for nearly one-third of all jobs. In much of
the service sector, however, jobs for women may be plentiful but
genuine opportunities are few. Pay in the lower ranks of service
employment rarely matches even the $5 an hour that women received in
manufacturing. In rural areas where tourism has generated a boom in
shops, motels and restaurants, earning a living wage is yet more
difficult. Jobs for women in tourist-dependent businesses are
frequently seasonal, the hours are often part-time, and the wages are
almost invariably low.
          Most southern women will no doubt survive the present economic
crisis, as they have done for generations back. That does not diminish
the injustice of their situation, however. There is a shameful gap
between the economic contributions of southern working class women and
the economic resources that they actually control. The southern
economy has long been dependent on the labor of women. Black women
were essential to southern agriculture, white women were central to
southern industrialization; and now, women of all races are primary
workers in the key growth sector of the economy--services. Moreover,
as the unpaid laborers in families and households, women have long
maintained the southern work force, and made possible survival in a
regional economy premised on subsistence-level wages. Women's poverty
is no indication of their contribution to the southern economy;
indeed, it is a terrible indictment of the southern economy. Working
class women must share in the benefits of southern growth and
prosperity. Justice decrees it, equity requires it and, increasingly,
southern women demand it.
          
            Barbara Ellen Smith is director of research and education
of the Southeast Women's Employment Coalition, Lexington,
Kentucky. Her essay is the introduction to Picking Up the Pieces, a
new booklet by the Highlander Research and Education Center, in which
thirty women from ten communities throughout the South talk about
their lives--their growth as community leaders, their struggles for
integrity and economic survival. Picking Up the Pieces is $5 per copy
plus $1 postage from Highlander Center, Route 3, Box 370, New Market,
TN 37820.
          
        
        
          Women in the Rural South: Toward Economic Equity
          By Lilly, LeslieLeslie Lilly
          Vol. 8, No. 2, 1986, pp. 5, 8-11
          
          There is a sense of place and time about the South that distorts
even as it amplifies its outward character to the nation. We are a
region of great diversity even as we pursue the rejection of that
diversity. We market our stereotypes at the same time we deplore
them.
          We are haunted by an historical wishfulness to act and think in
terms of privilege.
          Our geography is that of rural and small town communities. Our
economic progress has been confounded by this ruralness. We have been
used as a hinterland--our timber, our coal, our minerals, our water,
our agriculture, and even our people exploited as export
commodities.
          Our political experience is distinguished by a rigid
conservatism. Its most ardent expression has been the need to defend
and explain about the South. Generations 

of racial role-playing have
left a terrible legacy of poverty and powerlessness among the
disfranchised. The inertia is seductive. There is a hopelessness about
thinking that things can ever be any different. Our self-blame is
deeply ingrained. We are primarily a poor and working class people, a
people for whom change has meant hard, bitter, and often violent
confrontation.
          Proclamations demanding rights for women found few initial
supporters in the South. What movement there was had a delicate nature
due to the hothouse of its growth--an old confederacy of geographic
circumstance, steeped in a unique regional history, dominated by a
rural and agrarian political economy. If the "southern question" had
troubled national politics for more than a century, it was no less a
barrier to women working to improve the status of women. From the
earliest era of activism in behalf of women's rights, to the more
recent struggle to win southern states' ratification of the Equal
Rights Amendment, the enrollment of a southern constituency has been
problematic.
          Ironically it seems that political support for women's equity in
the South could not be pursued on the basis of equity. To have done so
would have raised an issue that is still controversial: to whom is
equity entitled? The implications of this issue are nothing short of
revolutionary. That racism should overtake the vision for universal
equity was preordained in the South. Alliances across race and
privilege were divided by political tactics that required the
oppressed to settle first on which oppress-

sion was of greater priority
in the determination of specific reforms.
          There is one lesson to be learned from this history. Racism,
classism, and sexism mean that women always lose. This reality is
nowhere more stark than in the South. Women's historical inheritance
is economic subjugation. Their children must necessarily share in this
experience since their role of women as bearers and caretakers of
children has not significantly changed.
          But it isn't as though women haven't fought injustice. Women have a
history of struggle as leaders, fighting to end slavery and lynching,
as workers in the labor movement, as citizens fighting for franchise,
as advocates against child labor, as organizers to achieve civil
rights, as supporters of social welfare reforms, as entrepreneurs in
development, as voices in behalf of global peace and justice. Racism
and sexism are not mutually exclusive, and privilege cannot substitute
for the right of self-determination. We came to know this about
slavery. We are only now beginning to know this about women.
          We are an organization devoted to this struggle. We believe
economic equity is at the heart of the effort to achieve civil
equality in the United States. Civil equality has limited meaning in
the absence of economic resources sufficient to ensure basic quality
of life. The issue of economic equity is paramount for
women especially. Female-headed households are the fastest-growing
segment of the poverty populations in this country. Children are
carried on their mothers' breasts throughout households that can't
adequately provide educational opportunity, food, shelter, clothing,
or health care. Gender, race, and class are the most powerful
ingredients in the formula which determines who shall be poor. The
final ingredient is geography. In the South and Appalachia, there are
few who enjoy escape from the destiny that their birth to this
equation implies.
          We believe that this report, Women of the Rural
South, will underscore the extent to which change must be
advocated. We believe that women have the burden of leadership in
calling for that change, and that their responsibility to do so is
clear. The problem of economic injustice is not solely a women's
issue, however, nor will resolution be achieved by women alone. But
there is a change of attitude that must be cultivated, and some
intellectual reckoning that must occur.
          Social movements cannot be sustained if they fail to support the
participation of women. Women cannot develop leadership nor mobilize
to follow leaders without recognition of the special responsibilities
they also have in regard to children. Poverty and vulnerability are
inherent in roles of dependency--forced or voluntary. Improvement to
the quality of life for all Americans and challenges to the causes and
sources of poverty cannot succeed in the absence of an analysis about
the economic and political status of those citizens for whom change is
being sought. Women of the Rural South is an attempt to provide the
anatomy of the problems women are facing in the rural South so that we
can more clearly understand the nature of the struggle before us, and
the depth of reform that will be required. Strategies to achieve
social and economic justice must explicitly recognize the political
economy of women if they are to succeed.
          And, if we do succeed? Ours is a vision for economic development in
the South that is inclusive of women and 

minorities. It is a vision
for an economy that is self-sustaining, and that has the capacity to
distribute the income necessary to enhance the quality of life
throughout our communities, but most especially among women and
minorities. It is development that inspires rejuvenation of the old
and innovation of the new, and a respect, regard, and appeciation for
the human resource upon which economic development depends. It is
development that is integrally rooted in a wider sphere, with
self-reliance at the heart of its purpose, and with education,
community, and independence as parts of its vision. In that spirit, we
call on: Policymakers to repudiate the century-old policy
of promoting economic growth on the cynical guarantee of low wages and
poverty among southern workers. Specifically, we urge them to:
          * Allocate fifty percent of state economic development funds to
projects benefitting primarily women, and additional funds to projects
benefitting people of color in direct proportion to their
representation in the state population.
          * Earmark a specific portion of economic development funds for
rural areas, directly proportionate to the distribution of the state
population.
          * Establish affirmative action requirements for the civil service
and for private contractors rendering services under contract with the
state. Initiate strong enforcement of laws guaranteeing
nondiscrimination in private and state workforces.
          * Arrange immediately for a job evaluation/comparable worth
analysis of the state and local civil service systems; and appropriate
the funding necessary to close the gaps between workers of different
race and gender who perform jobs requiring comparable skills and
responsibilities.
          * Establish a more favorable political climate in support of
working people, and repeal the right-to-work law in your state.
          * Bring public assistance payments, specifically AFDC, up to the
national average.
          * Subsidize locally-owned, quality child care in rural
communities.
          * Provide vocational education extension courses in rural areas
that currently lack opportunities for training, and actively recruit
women for nontraditional vocational courses.
          * Identify and actively recruit women into positions of policy and
decision making at every level.
          Grantmakers, especially those in the South, we ask you
to evaluate your present funding priorities according to criteria of
social responsibility, and to revise your policies
accordingly. Specifically, we urge you to:
          * Allocate at least fifty percent of your total annual budget to
projects that organize and empower the economically disadvantaged.
          * Allocate at least half of that amount to projects that address
the needs of women, particularly women of color.
          * Recruit women from the ranks of community leadership as staff
executive officers, board members, and trustees in philanthropic
endeavors.
          * Collaborate with women community leaders in a process that will
eliminate attitudes and beliefs that are barriers to working together
in addressing issues of poverty.
          * Develop peership with grantseekers on issues of strategy, and
build a process for mutual evaluation that reveals the strengths and
weaknesses in our collaborative attempts to foster change.
          Leaders of Southern Churches and Synagogues, we call
on you to speak out for economic justice, and to minister to the
economic needs of low-income people, especially women. Specifically,
we urge you to:
          * Educate your congregations as to the economic injustice
experienced by women and people of color in the South.
          * Provide food pantries, soup kitchens, shelter, transportation and
other services needed by the poor.
          * Provide active support for local efforts to organize and empower
women.
          * Encourage the leadership of women in all areas of religious
activity.
          * Build on the vision of liberation theology and apply it to the
responsibility of your church among the poor and disfranchised in your
own communities.
          Southern Education Institutions, we call on your
faculty, staff and trustees to incorporate the experiences and
contributions of women into all areas of the curriculum, and to
address the needs of women as students and as employees. Specifically,
we urge you to:
          * Hire faculty with expertise in women's studies, particularly in
the areas of southern working class women and women of color.
          * Evaluate existing curricula, especially in the social sciences
and humanities, as to their coverage of the experiences and
contributions of women and people of color.
          * Develop and implement new curricula to remedy identified
deficiencies.
          * Recruit women and minorities as students.
          * Seek scholarship funds and establish financial 

aid policies that
enable the attendance of low-income.
          * Establish and enforce strict affirmative action procedures for
hiring, salaries and promotion, including the granting of tenure,
among all faculty.
          * Arrange for an evaluation of the comparability of all staff jobs,
and revise pay scales according to the principle of comparable
worth.
          * Establish and enforce affirmative action procedures, hiring, and
promotion of staff.
          * Establish programs that make the educational, research and other
resources of your institution available to the local community,
expecially to low-income members, in order to serve needs that they
themselves identify.
          Finally, we call on Southern Women to come together across the
barriers that historically have divided us. Unite! Organize! This
report will justify your anger, and support your resolution to act. A
single voice can become a mighty shout in the presence of a shared
vision among women about what must be different in our lives. No one
else can "give" us equity or set us free! We have nothing to lose in
this struggle but our poverty and the diminishment we experience
because of our oppression. We are powerful and we are needed. Let your
children be your inspiration, your sisterhood be your sustenance, and
a movement for race and sex equity, your vision. We have generational
responsibility to uphold and the strength and capability to meet its
challenges. Stand up, reach out, and let the future unroll as if you
mattered. In this movement, every person counts!
          
            Leslie Lilly is executive director of the Southeast
Women's Employment Coalition. This essay is taken from an extensively
researched report: Women of the Rural South. For order
information see page 6.
          
        
        
          The Risks at Oak Ridge
          By Thompson, JoanneJoanne Thompson
          Vol. 8, No. 2, 1986, pp. 15-16
          
          Ever since World War II, under the protective umbrella of national
security, nuclear facilities at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, have operated
with minimal outside scrutiny. Companies under contract with the
federal government have been able to get legislative and agency
waivers to continue operations, while at the same time refusing to
disclose their methods of handling and disposing of radioactive and
toxic materials. Only in the recent past have citizens been made aware
of the true extent of the problem. In 1983, local media exposed the
fact that the Y-12 weapons facility illegally released over 2.4
million pounds of mercury into the environment during the many years
the facility had been in existence. Mercury poisoning causes nerve and
brain damage, and birth disorders.
          The transformation of Oak Ridge from a backwoods community to the
center of weapons research and production of weapons was never
questioned at the time. In the 40's, the country was at war. Security
was tight and who could argue with 80,000 federal jobs being brought
to east Tennessee. Oak Ridge and surrounding communities became
dependent on the federal government to sustain the local economic
base. With Oak Ridge jobs now down to 10,000, former workers
developing cancer, and landfills contaminating groundwater supplies,
the price of national defense is only now being realized.
          The recognition of the federal government's failure to be
accountable to its citizens comes at a time when the Department
of Energy is proposing to make Oak Ridge the site for the first
facility to re-package and store high level radioactive
waste. DOE proposed the development of this facility at the
same time it announced the shut-down of the Oak Ridge Gaseous
Diffusion Plant, effectively laying off over 2,000 workers. The
promise of jobs to help the local economy has always been the "big
carrot" in reducing local opposition.
          
            TRACK RECORD
          
          Tennesseans have grown increasingly skeptical that DOE can indeed
construct and operate such a facility safely in light of its own track
record on worker health and environmental damage. While DOE officials
claim that there are minimal worker risks at their facilities, there
is increasing evidence to the contrary. A paper. by Bob Alvarez of the
Environmental Policy Institute documents serious occupational health
problems at Oak Ridge facilities:
          * Leukemia mortality at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory--workers
in maintenance jobs who worked less than ten years show a 91 percent
increased risk of leukemia. Those who worked longer showed a risk 212
percent greater.
          * Cancer mortality at the Oak Ridge Y-12 weapons plant--research
found that the risk of brain tumorsfor workers employed five to ten
years was 489 percent greater than expected. Leukemia and aleukemia
risks were 900 percent greater than expected.
          An October 11, 1984 issue of the New Scientist
indicated additional problems:
          * Overall, workers at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory have a 49
percent excess leukemia mortality compared to the general public;
          * Janitors, laborers, maintenance men and construction workers at
the Laboratory have a significant excess risk of radiation-associated
cancers;
          * Between 1943 and 1947, workers at Oak Ridge's Y-12 uranium
processing plant had "significant excesses of deaths from lung cancer
when compared to US white male rates";
          * Workers at Oak Ridge's Y-12 plant had "excess death from cancer
of the lung, brain, and central nervous system, Hodgkin's disease and
other lymphatic tissue," and
          * Workers at Oak Ridge's Gaseous Diffusion Plant exhibit "excess
deaths due to lung and brain cancers and respiratory disease."
          In addition, a study of 19,000 women working between 1943 and 1947
at the Y-12 plant was never finished--officals claimed that it was
difficult to follow up on research subjects who did not have Social
Security numbers and changed their names upon getting married. In late
1985, DOE officials announced that nine years of health data of
workers had been destroyed or lost.
          During the mercury investigation, it was discovered that workers at
the Y-12 plant curing the 1950's breathed doses of mercury vapor as
high as thirty times the prevailing health standards.

          The track record for environmental damage is as scandalous. In
addition to the 2.4 million pounds of mercury illegally released into
the environment, we have the following:
          * Over twelve million cubic feet of low-level radioactive waste was
buried at the Oak Ridge Reservation since World War II--enough to fill
the 95,000-seat University of Tennessee football stadium;
          * TVA has identified more than 140 dangerous chemicals and
radioactive materials present in Oak Ridge creek bottoms, including
lead, cadmium, methylene chloride, thorium, and perchloryethlene;
          * Over the years DOE engaged in poor disposal practices, including
dumping wastes into poorly sited and constructed trenches and ponds
which have resulted in serious underground water contamination;
          * In 1985, DOE admitted to having dumped over fifty million pounds
of uranium chips into Dempster Dumpsters, then buried them in shallow
trenches;
          * In an eight-year period, DOE has had 740 NPDES (National
Pollution Discharge Elimination System) violations at its three Oak
Ridge facilities; and
          * Recent spills of strontium-90 resulted in shutting the water
intake system for the City of Kingston. City officials were notified
one day after DOE had notified workers at the Gaseous Diffusion Plant
not to use the water.
          Notwithstanding other unknown dangers, DOE has estimated that the
cost for clean-up of their facilities will run to over $800
million. As recently enacted laws, such as the Resource Conservation
and Recovery Act, and Superfund Law (CERCLA), and recently promulgated
standards, such as National Emission Standard for Hazardous Air
Pollutants, are applied by the federal and state EPA's, more
information will become known about DOE past disposal and operating
practices.
          The Tennessee Valley Energy Coalition (TVEC) is one Tennessee
citizen organization leading the fight to keep the proposed temporary
nuclear waste facility out of Tennessee and to make DOE correct past
sins before proceeding with any new projects. TVEC has recently
organized Americans for a Clean Environment, a local group which is
monitoring past and future DOE activities at Oak Ridge. The
organizations recently delivered petitions to the state capitol
representing the opposition of over 100,000 Tennesseans to the MRS
facility. The Sierra Club Radioactive Waste Campaign is working with
TVEC, the Highlander Center, Tennessee Chapter of the Sierra Club, and
other Tennessee groups to halt the spread of groundwater contamination
from Oak Ridge facilities.
          
            Joanne Thompson, Ph.D., is executive director of the
Tennessee Valley Energy Coalition and an adjunct faculty member with
the University of Tennessee School of Social Work. TVEC's address is
1407 East 5thAuenz e, Knoxville, TN 37917. Call 615-637-6055. This
article, and the one following [Debra Castaldo.  "Oak Ridge
Wastes Varied, Extensive"] are reprinted from The Sierra
Club Waste Paper, published quarterly by the Sierra Club
Radioactive Waste Campaign, 625 Broadway, New York, NY
10012.
          
        
        
          Millions of Pounds of Uranium--Oak Ridge Wastes Varied,
Extensive
          By Castaldo, DebraDebra Castaldo
          Vol. 8, No. 2, 1986, pp. 16-17
          
          The Oak Ridge Reservation (ORR) located in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, is
owned and operated by the US Department of Energy (DOE). The ORR
includes three plants: Y-12 Plant, Oak Ridge Gaseous Diffusion Plant
(ORGDP) and Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL).
          The Y-12 and ORGDP plants produce nuclear materials for research
and development and national defense. ORNL is involved in research and
development. The Y-12 plant has four major responsibilities: (1)
production of nuclear weapons components, (2) processing of source and
special nuclear materials, such as highly enriched uranium, (3)
support for weapons-design laboratories, and (4) support to other
government agencies. Activities include the production of lithium
compounds, the recovery of enriched uranium from nonirradiated scrap
materials, and the fabrication of uranium and other materials into
finished parts and 

assemblies for use in the plutonium production
reactors at the Savannah River Plant.
          The ORGDP is a complex of production, research, development and
support facilities located at the western edge of the City of Oak
Ridge. The primary function of ORGDP is the enrichment of uranium
hexaflouride (UFO) in the uranium-235 isotope. Extensive efforts are
also expended on research and development associated with laser
isotopic separation and the gaseous diffusion and gas centrifuge
processes. DOE is closing down the production of UFO at ORGDP.
          ORNL is a large multi-purpose research laboratory. Facilities
consist of nuclear reactors, chemical pilot plants, research
laboratories, and support facilities.
          Hazardous wastes, such as lead, cadmium, methylene chloride,
thorium, uranium, perchloryethlene, mercury, and various
radionucleides contaminate local groundwater. Fifty-one million pounds
of uranium are buried at the ORR. One of the main pathways of
pollution to humans is through drinking water supplies. Water that
drains the ORR enters the Clinch River and is subsequently conveyed to
the Tennessee River at Kingston, Tennessee. The Clinch River is the
source of most water used in the Oak Ridge area. Water supplies for
Clinton, Oak Ridge, Kingston and DOE facilities are drawn from the
Clinch River. In addition, waste waters from ORR are discharged
directly and indirectly by a system of tributaries in the Clinch
River.
          Water analysis of the Clinch River shows the water quality to be
highly turbid. Cadmium, copper, iron, lead, mercury, nickel, silver,
and zinc concentrations all exceed EPA criteria for protection of
acquatic life. Iron and manganese exceed drinking water
standards. ORNL was issued a notice of non-compliance by the State of
Tennessee (October 26, 1983) for water pollution violations. In
December 1985, strontium-90 levels in the Clinch River exceeded even
DOE's lax standards, and water intakes for the City of Kingston were
shut down.
          DOE is considering centralizing the ORR waste disposal
facilities. Currently each facility has its own disposal
area. Proposals for a central waste disposal facility for all ORR
plants favoring a trench system were published in a Draft
Environmental Impact Statement September 1984. Since soil permeability
is quite low, the landfill alternative is favored over an above-ground
system. But the hydrogeology of the site is quite complex, and
migration is difficult to predict.
          
            Debra Castaldo is a freelance writer with ten years
experience in private industry and state/federal government
environmental management programs.
          
        
        
          Reaping the Whirlwind: The Civil Rights Movement in
Tuskegee by Robert J. Norrell. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1985. $19.95
          Reviewed by Lamar, Howard R.Howard R. Lamar
          Vol. 8, No. 2, 1986, pp. 21-24
          
          In the preface to Reaping the Whirlwind: The Civil Rights
Movement in Tuskegee, Robert J. Norrell writes that: "It is
about power: whites trying to keep control of their society and blacks
seeking more autonomy. In a larger sense, it is the story of two
communities, one white and one black, in the painful process of
merging into a single if different community." On first impression
that sounds like a political scientist or a sociologist speaking of
revolutionary social and political change in abstract terms. Nothing
could be further from the truth, for Reaping the
Whirlwind may well be the most articulate, moving, personal
and compassionate scholarly case study of the impact of the Civil
Rights movement in the South to appear to date. It is both a tour de force of effective writing and a model of
fairminded reporting. The interplay between the parade of vivid
personalities in this book-judges, sheriffs, mayors, voter registrars,
academics from the Tuskegee Institute and administrators from the
local Veterans Hospital, is brillantly handled.
          Reaping the Whirlwind focuses mainly on the
thirty-

one years between 1941 and 1972 when blacks and whites fought
an intense battle as to who would control political offices in the
City of Tuskegee, Ala., and the surrounding County of Macon. It was in
1941 that the softspoken Tuskegee Institute sociologist, Dean Charles
Gomillion, organized the Tuskegee Civic Association, a group of black
men and women, to achieve "civic democracy" by pressuring the Macon
County Board of Registrars to enroll blacks as voters. That crusade
came to an end, as it were, in 1972 when newly registered blacks, now
the majority of voters in the County, elected blacks to nearly all the
city and county offices as well as representatives to the state
legislature. Best known among the winners were Lucius Amerson, a black
sheriff who had held that off ce since 1966, and Johnny L. Ford, a
former worker for Senator Robert Kennedy and Vice President Hubert
Humphrey in the presidential campaign of 1968, who became Tuskegee's
first black mayor.
          What distinguishes this study from many others, however, is that
Norrell is as determined to understand the white conservative
rationale for resisting black political power as he is in detailing
the story of the triumph of the black voter. Norrell feels that the
thoughts and actions of white conservatives were shaped by the
community's experiences during Reconstruction when recent ex-slaves
were elected to political office under a Reconstruction state
government. Believing that they had not only lost the Civil War but
would lose control of their community, they organized to intimidate
and drive out black political leaders between 1870 and 1874, when the
election of governor George Houston symbolized the end of
Reconstruction in Alabama. Norrell offers convincing evidence that
memories of Reconstruction provided whites with the example of what
would happen again if blacks ever gained political power.
          After the violence of Reconstruction came a detente of sorts when
whites, fearing that blacks might leave the county in such large
numbers that the labor force would be depleted, sought to achieve
"Perfect Quiet, Peace and Harmony"--a white conservative's phrase--in
race relations, in part by providing training schools. As has long
been known, Tuskegee town fathers cooperated with Booker T. Washington
in 1881 to found the Tuskegee Institute as a trade school, operating
on the model of Hampton Institute in Virginia. Norrell, having seen
Washington in the context of the actual situation in Tuskegee, comes
away with a renewed respect for Washington's realistic approach and
his generally beneficial efforts for his race. At the same time he
concludes that despite the presence of both Washington and George
Washington Carver, the Institute actually did little for agriculture
and the black farmer in Macon County.
          Beginning with Washington and continuing through the term of his
successor, Robert R. Moton, both Institute officials and Tuskegee
whites worked to create a harmonious "model community" based on the
separation of the races. Nevertheless Norrell contends that a black
civil rights movement of sorts never ceased between 1870 and
1972. During his lifetime Washington was continually protesting
anti-black state legislation, the poll tax, and in particular the
disfranchisement of voters, both black and white, in the conservative
State Constitution of 1901.
          The hidden conflict surfaced anew in 1923 when a Veterans
Administration Hospital for black soldiers was located in Tuskegee,
and whites sought to control the key administrative positions. When
they failed to do so, the long-term state senator from Tuskegee,
Richard Holmes Powell, lamented that "The Negroes are gradually taking
things away from us by contesting every inch of ground, refusing all
compromise, and fighting to a finish." Eventually the Veterans
Hospital employed 1500 blacks with high-paying jobs. "In that base of
economic independence," writes Norrell, "lay the potential for
challenging conservative control of Macon County." Ironically,
educated blacks with economic independence, two main themes of Booker
T. Washington's teaching, proved to be the key to success of the civil
rights movement in Tuskegee.
          The actual drive for voter registration started on an almost
innocent note when Charles Gomillion, vouched for by two whites,
registered to vote in 1939. He did so in part to secure paved roads
and better water and sewage facilities for the black residential areas
around the Institute. Norrell finds that Gomillion was a gradualist
who felt that by cooperation between black and whites some kind of
"civic democracy" could be achieved. The remainder of Reaping
the Whirlwind is, at one level, the progressive
disillusionment and political education of Gomillion, who, by the
1960s, had been replaced by a more militant black leadership which
sought full power and not shared power. But until the 1960s it was
Gomillion and the Tuskegee Civic Association who led the fight for
registration, who instituted a successful boycott of local merchants,
and who insisted on a gradual approach.
          In 1941 with the coming of World War II, a third major force of
potentially discontented blacks appeared in Macon County when Tuskegee
Institute President Frederick Patterson persuaded the federal
government to locate an Army Airforce Training Field in Tuskegee, a
move the NAACP denounced as continuing segregation in the armed
forces. Segregation between white officers and black trainees-many of
the latter from the North and the Midwest-and conflict between black
military police and white county police threatened major
disruptions. A sense of escalating crisis developed as blacks from the
Institute, the Hospital and the air base challenged the Board of
Registrars in federal court in the case of Mitchell
v. Wright. When the Board of Registrars resigned or registered
white voters clandestinely, Governor James Folsom managed to find a
religious farmer, W. H. Bentley, who believed all men equal in the
sight of God, to serve as Registrar. Bentley registered 449 blacks in
1949, but was soon removed, and voter 

registration slowed again.
          Norrell finds that paradoxically as white candidates came to depend
more and more on black votes to be elected, the two sides had actually
stopped talking to one another. Thus what Gomillion and the Tuskegee
Civic Association and the new spokesman for the white conservatives,
state Representative Samuel M. Engelhardt, Jr., had to say has to be
told like two separated narratives. There followed in the 1950's, in
dramatic sequence, moves and counter moves. When Engelhardt and Mayor
Richard Lightfoot got the state legislature to pass a law redefining
the city's boundaries so that most black voters would be excluded, the
Civic Association responded by imposing a successful boycott on white
merchants. Then in 1958 the newly formed United States Commission on
Civil Rights heard evidence on voter discrimination in Tuskegee and
ordered fuller registration. Meanwhile in Gomillion
v. Lightfoot, the Supreme Court struck down the law
gerrymandering the city's boundaries.
          At this point, cautious liberals in Tuskegee began to question the
wisdom of Representative Engelhardt's total denial of political rights
for blacks; an accomodationist Mayor and City Council were elected in
1960, and a deeply religious local banker, J. Allen Parker, began to
try to bridge the gap between the races through talk and action. Then
suddenly the issue of school integration came to Tuskegee when the
local school board was ordered to accept thirteen qualified black
students into the all-white high school. School integration rather
than voter registration, writes Norrell, "proved to be the first major
transformation in race relations in Macon County," for it split the
white community in scores of ways, setting friend against friend,
husband against wife, ministers against their congregations.
          Norrell traces these schisms as well as the public conflicts
between Governor George Wallace and the federal courts as represented
by Judge Frank M. Johnson of Montgomery. He also explains the rise and
success of the private school movement. In this recital he tries to be
fair to all parties, but he is understandably less patient with the
various Alabama governors who played politics with Tuskegee's dilemma
during the civil rights and school desegregation movements. In the
end, school segregation was maintained and with the exception of the
Church of Christ, the local churches did not integrate.
          Paralleling the agonizing dissensions on the white side, there was
a split between Gomillion and the more militant Non-Partisan League
led by Paul Puryear, a young faculty member at the Institute, and by
Detroit 

Lee of the Veterans Hospital, who sought to elect blacks to
all offices. Soon thereafter a new movement by Institute students
began, reflecting national black unrest during the 1960s and using the
popular techniques of marches, demands, and sit-ins to secure jobs for
blacks in white-run Tuskegee stores, to have the Confederate statue
removed from the town square, and to register voters. Their acts led
to conflict between the students and the Institute Board of Trustees
and to a tragic individual confrontation when a black student, Samuel
Young, was shot by a white gas station owner. Yet it was the students
who managed to enroll 1600 rural blacks as voters and thus tipped
future elections in favor of black candidates.
          Understandably Norrell cannot suppress his excitement that somehow
out of this painful saga, majority rule democracy had come to Tuskegee
and had affected all sectors of life except for the integration of
schools and churches. Yet while acknowledging that a major social and
political revolution had occurred in this small Alabama community, he
believes that there is continuity between Washington and Gomillion and
between the Confederate veterans of 1870 and their successors, Probate
Judge William Varner, the Board of Registrars, the mayors,
Representative Engelhardt and the White Citizens Councils.
          However, I think there is a third unstated continuity in
Reaping the Whirlwind which helps explain both the long
and tortured progress towards civil rights for blacks in Tuskegee and
the American South, and the behavior of nearly all the protagonists in
this troubled story. It is that tradition of deference found in all
class and settled societies, exacerbated in the South by racial
feelings. It is deference not merely of black for white, but black for
black, white for white, sons and daughters for parents,  men for women
and women for men in the American South. That deference helped
preserve segregation by stifling a dialogue between races; it
suppressed debate within the white community; on occasion it may have
forced violence to come before an honest exchange of views. Perhaps
the greatest revolution in Tuskegee since the 1960s has been that so
many contending groups have found their voice. The views of liberals
and conservatives, of blacks and whites can be found in the local
paper, and there--in hundreds more letters--can be found so many
ideas, suggestions and protests that they suggest a latter-day revival
of the reformers of the Jacksonian Period. Norrell is right in
concluding that democracy with all its virtues and faults has now come
to Tuskegee.
          Even so there is also a new tone of mutual deference discernible in
the Exchange Bank, in the Big Bear Supermarket, at the Veterans
Hospital and among the mixed faculty at the Tuskegee Institute. It is
this continuity, in a new context, that had led Norrell to speak with
deep respect for the career and ideals of Charles Gomillion who, as he
writes, "had been an emblem of interracial cooperation, a value which
appears to be in ascendance in the county again by the late
1970's."
          Based on many personal interviews, a careful attention to federal
state, local records, newspapers, and the works of other scholars,
Reaping the Whirlwind displays a thoroughness and a sensitivity to all
points of view that it is exemplary. It avoids stereotypical heroes
and villains, accepts no easy answers, and eschews moralizing. Reaping
the Whirlwind has set high standards for future case studies--which are
needed, for as Norrell himself has noted, "only when many of these
stories are told will the South's great social upheaval be well
understood."
          
            Howard R. Lamar is William R. Coe Professor of American
History, Yale University, and a native of Tuskegee.
          
        
        
          Gradualism, South Africa, and Civil Rights
          By Lawson, Steven F.Steven F. Lawson
          Vol. 8, No. 1, 1986, pp. 1-3
          
          In February 1986, a white student from the University of Cape Town
in South Africa paid a visit to my campus at the University of South
Florida in Tampa. Twenty-six years after black students in the
southern United States initiated their wave of sit-ins against
segregation American style, this young South African offered his
thoughts on eradicating his country's version of apartheid. Rather
than supporting divestment of funds from companies doing business in
South Africa, he counselled against any economic sanction that would
interfere with the Botha regime's commitment to bring about change "in
a peaceful and orderly fashion." To do otherwise, he argued, would
only succeed in plunging his nation into financial chaos, injuring
both black and white South Africans alike and pushing the government
further to the political right.
          On the surface this native South African sounded reasonable. He was
advocating the dismantling of the "dehumanizing system" of apartheid,
and he cited the progress that had been made toward this end. Within
the past two years, the Botha administation had repealed the Mixed
Marriages and Immorality Act and announced modification of the Group
Areas Act to permit blacks to own property in their designated
townships. These measures, he asserted, have strengthened the hands of
those like himself who are dedicated to working for change from within
to "bring about peace and justice for all in a country with tremendous
wealth and potential for all her inhabitants." Accordingly, the
correct position for Americans to take 

was to back the "constructive
engagement" policy of President Ronald Reagan.
          Reading these remarks as they appeared in my school newspaper, I
was immediately struck by their similarity to those put forth by
moderate segregationists during the Civil Rights Era. Though
significant differences exist between the situations in the U.S. and
South Africa, in both countries the response of ruling whites was much
the same. In neither case did they want to alter fundamentally the
system of racial control or share political power in any equitable
arrangement. Like the Pretoria regime today, "enlightened" southern
whites a generation ago advocated gradualism as the best approach to
resolving racial conflicts. Willing to accept desegregation in
principle, they attempted to delay its implementation for as long as
possible. In the aftermath of the Supreme Court's pronouncement in
Brown, moderates opposed school closings and other extreme measures of
white massive resistance but devised pupil placement laws and freedom
of choice plans to keep integration to a minimum. Furthermore, though
the courts and Congress had struck down practices denying the right to
vote on the basis of race, southern whites continued to employ
literacy tests to keep three-quarters of adult blacks
disfranchised.
          Throughout that period, southern moderates pleaded for
understanding and sufficient time to solve their own problems. They
criticized meddlesome northerners for not comprehending the unique
pattern of race relations that had developed in the South over three
hundred years and warned that attempts to overturn longstanding
folkways would plunge the region into violence and cause more harm to
blacks than to whites. Just as white South Africans admonish that
blacks will suffer most from economic consequences of divestment, so
too did moderates warn that blacks would be harmed if the federal
government cut off funds to segregated schools. They presented their
brand of gradualism as the antidote to the racist potions of the likes
of George Wallace, Orval Faubus, the White Citizens Councils, and the
Ku Klux Klan. Nevertheless, their prescriptions for change called for
more deliberation and less speed, civilities more than civil
rights.
          The record of Governor LeRoy Collins of Florida illustrates the
dilemma of the southern moderate. Elected to two terms beginning in
1955, on each occasion Collins defeated arch-segregationists in the
Democratic primary. As governor he advocated modernization of
Florida's economic and governmental structures through attracting
industry to the Sunshine State, expanding educational opportunities,
and reapportioning the legislature. In the aftermath of Brown and
Little Rock, Governor Collins pursued a middle course designed to keep
public schools open, maintain the dual system of segregation, and
avoid violent confrontations that would tarnish the image of the state
with northern investors. Consequently, he refused to endorse
legislative resolutions nullifying the Brown opinion, but at the same
time he also supported laws permitting local school boards to assign
students and teachers to segregated schools based on criteria other
than race, such as intelligence, character, and potential for
disruption. The governor insisted that the state did not have to defy
the US Supreme Court to assure "that there will be no integration in
our public schools so long as it is not wise in the light of the
social, economic and health facts of life as they exist in various
localities."
          In his final year in office, Collins began to reconsider his
position in a fashion that should be instructive for his South African
counterparts.
          In 1960, blacks throughout the state mounted sit-in demonstrations
to desegregate lunch counters in five and dime stores and other
facilities. The governor publicly urged white Floridians to reevaluate
the morality and fairness of a policy that prohibited blacks from
eating in an establishment where they were allowed to shop. In
addition, he created a biracial committee to facilitate the
desegregation of these businesses. After leaving office, Collins moved
even further toward embracing the goals of the civil rights movement
as well as recognizing the necessity of federal intervention to
achieve them. In 1965, he played a key role as President Johnson's
emissary in arranging an agreement that averted bloodshed on the
voting rights march from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama. In the span of
a single decade, LeRoy Collins had marched on his own personal odyssey
toward the attainment of first-class citizenship for blacks. 

Activism
rather than gradualism had triumphed.
          Had the United States moved at the pace desired by southern
gradualists, blacks would have continued to live under the yoke of
second-class citizenship well into the twenty-first century. As Martin
Luther King wryly observed during the Selma voting rights campaign in
1965, it would have taken 103 years at the rate they were going for
local registrars to enroll all the qualified blacks who
applied. Realizing that freedom is indivisible, black Americans and
their white allies refused to wait that long. They not only resisted
the new forms of segregation instituted to slow down racial equality,
but also challenged the federal government to abandon its constructive
engagement policy of allowing the South to manage its own affairs, as
long as it did so in a respectable fashion. In the end, coercion by
means of the 1964 Civil Rights Act and the 1965 Voting Rights Act, not
voluntarism, broke the back of Jim Crow. Frederick Douglass summed up
the lesson long ago: "Power concedes nothing without a demand. It
never did and it never will."
          The cosmetic reforms of the Botha regime are as intellectually
shallow and morally bankrupt today as were those offered by southern
gradualists during our age of civil rights. They did not succeed then,
and they are doomed to fail in South Africa.
          
            Steven F. Lawson is Professor of History at the
University of South Florida, Tampa, and author of In Pursuit of
Power: Southern Blacks and Electoral Politics, 1965-1982
(Columbia University Press).
          
        
        
          Maggie Lee Sayre--A Glimpse of Shantyboat Life
          By Rogers, TomTom Rogers
          Vol. 8, No. 1, 1986, pp. 12-14
          
          Maggie Lee Sayre, born deaf, never heard water slap boat
thwarts. Yet during her half century on the Tennessee River she
compiled an unrivaled record of life there.
          Her record is a rare stream of more than four-hundred photographs
shot while she lived on the river in a houseboat, or "shantyboat," as
many called the floating wood homes. Her photos were displayed-and she
was on hand to discuss them-during the Tennessee River Folklife
Center's dedication celebration April 19. The Center is at Nathan
Bedford Forrest State Historical Area at Eva, Tennessee.
          Organizers of the twentieth annual Festival of American Folklife,
to be held this summer in Washington, D.C., have invited Sayre as one
of about ninety Tennesseans who will make up the Festival's spotlight
on the Volunteer State this year. The festival is presented by the
Smithsonian Institution and National Park Service.
          And later this year, from September 8 to October 15, Mud Island at
Memphis will present the first showing of the traveling exhibit of
Sayre's photos, "Maggie Lee Sayre: Pictorial Narrative of a River
Life." The Tennessee Folk Society, with a grant from the Southern Arts
Federation, is preparing the exhibit, which is to tour for two
years.
          Excited by the recognition coming her way, Sayre still sees her
riverine life as precious, closeknit years with her parents, Archie
and Mary Sayre. Using simple box cameras, she froze those years in
snapshots she keeps now to "remember always."
          In one series of four photos, made in 1938, she recorded the
process of tarring hoop nets.
          "Archie Sayre and helper Charlie dyed black tar," she explained of
the sequence. "Papa stirred around the nets in the big barrel for two
or three minutes, then pulled 

them out of the barrel to hang the nets
in trees. When the nets were made they were white."
          Another photo, of a visitor boarding the Sayres' moored houseboat,
brought from her an explanation of how her family had tied a forked
stick to a tree on shore to hold the houseboat safely off the bank. A
picture from 1938 shows the "live can" Archie Sayre used to keep his
catch fresh to increase its market value.
          Another shot, of friends fishing from the houseboat deck, shows on
the wall behind them the rolls of line from which the Sayres uncoiled
lengths to mend snag nets.
          Sayre said her father preferred fishing the Tennessee River because
it yielded bigger fish than other waterways. She said he caught "any
kind of catfish, buffalo, carp, spoonbill."
          "Did you ever have a name for your houseboat?" she was asked.
          "Never know to call a name," she answered.
          "Home?"
          She nodded "Yes" and mouthed the word: "Home."
          Spry and good-humored at sixty-six-her birthday was April 4-Sayre
communicates by written note. Seldom does she move about without a pen
and notepad.
          She and her sister, Myrtle, were born a year apart. Myrtle, also
deaf, died at sixteen. Maggie Sayre's father, who survived her mother,
died in 1977. Maggie Sayre has lived in a nursing home since then.
          Between the ages of seven and nineteen she attended a school for
the deaf at Danville, Kentucky, and spent summers on the river. When
she finished school, in the late 1930s, she returned to live on the
river year-round.
          Here's her account:
          "Archie and Mary met her at the depot and they all returned home
and were very happy.
          "They moved to the Tennessee River. They sailed the houseboat and
motor boat to Tom Creek. They stayed there for three years. They
continued to sell fish to a market.
          "They then moved to Click Creek near Sugar Tree, Tennessee. After
that they moved to several places down the Tennessee River and stayed
a few weeks in one place.
          "They decided they like Click Creek best, so they moved
back. Maggie's mother got sick and was taken to Jackson Hospital. She
later died. She was buried in Paducah, Kentucky.
          "The houseboat was getting old, so they moved to a house on Brodie
Road. This was in 1971. Archie liked to hunt and they enjoyed eating
ducks, squirrel and rabbits.
          "Archie became sick and had to stop fishing in 1974. He died March,
1977."
          Their three-room floating home was sold and moved ashore to be used
as a home. Today it is unoccupied and crumbling. Some folklorists hope
to preserve it.
          The Sayres' boat was larger than most, and its motor gave them a
mobility most houseboaters lacked, according to Tom Rankin, who worked
with Sayre in 1982-83 when he was doing research for the Tennessee
River Folklife Center.
          The Sayres stayed on the river longer than most shantyboaters, said
Rankin, who now is Director of Programs with the Southern Arts
Federation.
          Shantyboat life "was mostly a drifting life," he said. It was
"pretty extensive up until the 1930s," but the New Deal signaled the
beginning of the end for the gypsy-like houseboaters, and "by the 50s
and 60s they were told to get off the river."
          Although the shantyboat life is part of the past, the river still
draws and shapes those who live near it, 

according to Nancy Michael,
folklorist at the Tennessee River Folklife Center at Nathan Bedford
Forrest park. Today more than two thousand persons in the seven
counties bordering the river hold commercial permits to take fish and
mussels, she said.
          So Sayre felt at home at the Center's celebration. Many persons
whose photographs or handiwork are displayed in the Center's exhibits
were also part of the day's events.
          "As you walk through here you will see a lot of people who are
coming," explained Michael. "That's what we're trying to do, get as
many people as possible who have been contributing."
          Like T. J. Whitfield of Holladay, whose twenty-five foot-long
musseling boat, Betsy, is the museum's centerpiece.
          The festival officially dedicated the $315,000 center, which opened
last year.
          River people, Michael said, are marked by "their independence...and
their aesthetic sense. When they talk about the river it's obvious
they have a sense of it, a love of it."
          She pointed out a display board with river woman Ada Roberson's
words:
          "I ain't got but one thing to say: Enjoy everything you do. Get all
the experience you can at anything you can. I wouldn't take nothin'
for the years I spent on the river."
          "It's a healthy way of livin'. You get plenty of fresh air and
sunshine. You work hard...in the way of a job. One thing-it's not
nerve rackin' like factory work. You ain't got somebody on your
shoulder yelling 'Make production, Make production'-If there comes a
day that you don't feel like going out there, you can stay at
home. It's a good way of life."
          
            Tom Rogers is a staff writer for the Nashville
Tennessean--where this article originally
appeared.
          
        
        
          Claude Ramsay, 1916-1986
          By Minor, BillBill Minor
          Vol. 8, No. 2, 1986, pp. 17-18
          
          In death, Claude Ramsay belatedly was paid homage the other day by
a lot of big politicians and some of his long-time foes around the
Legislature as the best friend working people in Mississippi ever
had.
          It was extraordinary, of course, for a labor leader in this state
to be accorded such recognition because organized labor has never been
regarded as a political force here comparable to most other
states. Nor was Ramsay a beloved figure in many political circles.
          No doubt, the Ramsay family and those who toiled with Ramsay in the
vineyard to keep the labor union movement alive in Mississippi were
pleased that Claude was appreciated.
          But it occurred to me that if people in government and those who
influence government want to pay a more lasting tribute to the memory
of Claude Ramsay, it would be to correct one of the chief wrongs in
our state that Claude spent the last years of his life trying to
correct.

          That is the unconscionable system of compensating injured workers
in Mississippi, a system in which benefits allowed by state law border
on cruel and inhumane punishment of those so unfortunate to be hurt on
the job.
          Mississippi was the last state in the nation to enact a Workers
Compensation Law in 1948, to assure compensation for workers who
suffer job-related injuries or illness without having to go to court
or prove who was at fault.
          For years Ramsay had been the point man in trying to get the
Mississippi Legislature to upgrade benefits for injured workers to a
level of decency comparable to most other states.
          The sad facts are that Mississippi's benefits for job-related
injuries have fallen behind all other states to the point that the
economic worth of a Mississippi laboring man or woman seems to be only
a fraction of other American workers.
          A Mississippi worker who loses an arm on the job can expect to be
compensated $25,200, while an Alabama worker with the same injury
would receive $48,840; a South Carolina worker $63,144 and a worker in
Iowa--a farm state which in many ways resembles Mississippi--would be
paid $133,250.
          The loss of an eye by a Mississippi worker carries only $12,600 in
benefits, but $24,800 in Louisiana, $27,280 in Alabama, $21,862 in
Arkansas and $92,400 in Pennsylvania.
          At the heart of the inadequate Mississippi workers' benefits is the
pitifully low maximum weekly benefits permitted an injured worker in
this state. Now at $133 a week, it is considerably below every other
state in the nation (Alabama $303, Louisiana $248).
          Ramsay had waged a losing battle against the powerful business
lobby which consistently in the past worked on the Legislature to hold
down the maximum weekly benefits to only small annual increases.
          While most states have adopted a system of maximum weekly benefits
based on two-thirds of the state's average weekly wages, the
Mississippi Legislature has held the line to a specific amount.
          Translated into a yearly amount, the $133 weekly payment allowed an
injured Mississippi worker adds up to $6,916, which is below the
poverty level. That means, for instance, a truck driver making $600 to
$700 a week who injures his back and is laid up for six months would
have only $133 a week in compensation to take care of his family.
          Although Mississippi Workers Compensation Law is now almost forty
years old, the maximum 450 weeks of compensation, regardless of
injury, has remained in the law.
          Some business organizations have even touted Mississippi's low
compensation as a selling point to attract industry to the state. In
1981 the state Supreme Court held under the existing state law, a
worker in Mississippi had no job protection if he filed a worker's
compensation claim. The court went so far as to suggest that the
Legislature should adopt the Texas law which guarantees a worker
cannot be fired for filing a compensation claim.
          Ramsay had valiantly tried to get the Legislature to outlaw
retaliatory firings of any workers who made compensation claims, but
again he met a wall of business resistance led by the Mississippi
Manufacturers Association.
          Hoping to break the long-standing stalemate in the Legislature over
upgrading the injured worker's benefits, Marshall Bennett, chairman of
the Mississippi Worker's Compensation Commission, two months ago
brought the opposing forces together with legislative chairmen who
handle compensation leglislation in hopes of reaching a compromise on
revising the law.
          Ramsay, as labor's spokesman, and a representative of the
Mississippi Trial Lawyers Association, which sides with labor in the
controversy, sat down with the manufacturers and other business
representatives, the legislative leaders, and Bennett. They hammered
out a compromise just a week before Ramsay died.
          Although the compromise measure emerged intact from the House
Insurance subcommittee, House members failed to pass the bill.
          Claude wasn't around for the demise of this year's workers'
benefits bill. But in lieu of eulogies and flowers, I'm sure he would
rather see injured Mississippi workers get a better deal.
          
            Longtime Mississippi political columnist Bill Minor lives
in Jackson.
          
        
        
          Claude Ramsay-A Life for Mississippi workers
          By Riley, SteveSteve Riley
          Vol. 8, No. 2, 1986, pp. 19, 21
          
          When Claude Ramsay retired late last year, the longtime Mississippi
labor chief started shopping for a shotgun. After twenty-six turbulent
years of fighting racism and anti-union sentiment in a state steeped
in conservative traditions, Ramsay said he was ready for the serenity
of the piney woods and the open water.
          "I'm getting ready to do some fishing and hunting," Ramsay told an
interviewer in September.
          Ramsay's hunting season was short-lived, however. He died in his
sleep at his home in west Jackson January 18, barely a month after
stepping down as director of Mississippi's AFL-CIO. While Ramsay, who
was sixty-nine, had talked a good game about relaxing in retirement,
few who knew him believe he would have strayed far from his primary
passion: assisting the less fortunate, particularly through
politics.
          "He was always pulling for the underdog," said Wayne Dowdy of
McComb, Mississippi's Fourth District congressman, whose shocking 1981
election was made possible by Ramsay's endorsement. "He was going to
stay right in the middle of politics. He gave me every assurance he
would be active. That was Claude's way. He wasn't one to sit on the
sidelines."
          Sitting on the sidelines would have been safer during the turbulent
1960s. While Mississippi boiled with racial turmoil, Ramsay took
perhaps the two most risky positions for a white Mississippian still
living in his home state: he tried to build a base of organized labor
and supported-no, campaigned for-equal rights for blacks.
          "He was really in double jeopardy," said Norman Hill, a former
civil-rights worker and now president of the A. Phillip Randolph
Institute. "He showed tremendous courage."
          Herb Mabry, head of the Georgia AFL-CIO, summed up Ramsay's
positions succinctly. "He had guts when it took guts to have guts,"
Mabry said. Ramsay also had something to back up his guts - a double
barreled shotgun he carried on the front seat of his car during his
travels across Mississippi. That gun was stolen after the civil-rights
battles died down, and Ramsay never had it replaced. But he never
regretted arming himself. "In November 1975, I went to a victory party
for (former Governor) Cliff Finch," Ramsay said in September. "A
little sawed-off bastard came up to me and said, 'Claude Ramsay,
you're about the ugliest SOB I've ever seen.' He said he was a former
member of the Ku Klux Klan and that he had an assignment to bump me
off one time. I said, 'I'm glad you never got around to it. It may
have been that you were scared you might get your ass blown off.'
          "I didn't come back from World War II to run from some SOB with a
sheet over his head."
          As Ramsay told that story, he chuckled with a degree of
self-satisfaction. His always raspy voice had grown gruffer, his
prominent nose looked larger and redder than in years past. A bout
with throat cancer had forever extinguished what had been an
ever-present cigar. But as he approached retirement, Ramsay appeared
content--not that he had accomplished everything he had wanted, but
that he had given it his best arm-twisting effort.
          It was never easy for labor and Claude Ramsay. In 1959, when he was
elected to his first term as president of the state organization,
Mississippi labor unions counted 35,000 members. Ramsay's work boosted
membership to 50,000 in 1960; it peaked in 1980 at slightly above
100,000. Membership since then slipped to about 80,000 which Ramsay, a
hard-line Democrat, attributed to anti-labor actions by the Republican
administration of Ronald Reagan.
          Even as the labor ranks swelled during the 1970s, Ramsay's
influence on state government was never overpowering. Though he
influenced a sizeable chunk of votes, his bouts in the Legislature
often ended in disappointment. Mississippi's workers' compensation
laws remain among the nation's weakest, and Ramsay's ultimate goal, a
state Department of Labor, remains a dream.
          But Ramsay is given credit for effective voter-registration drives
in the 60s, which syndicated columnist and veteran political observer
Bill Minor said "helped blacks more than they will ever know." And his
coalition of labor and blacks also was a positive factor in 

the landmark
education reform legislation in 1982.
          Ramsay backed his share of political losers, going it alone in 1972
for George McGovern, a most unpopular politician in the Deep South. He
also campaigned hard in 1964 for Lyndon Johnson, a national winner who
was swamped by Barry Goldwater in Mississippi.
          Ramsay often said his political "high-water mark" came with Dowdy's
election in 1981. In a special election to replace the resigning Jon
Hinson, Dowdy stunned Republican Liles Williams in the GOP-dominated
Fourth District. Dowdy had emerged from a crowded Democratic field
after he endorsed extension of the Voting Rights and Ramsay rallied
the labor troops.
          That victory was heady stuff for the Ocean Springs, Mississippi,
native, who got his first involvement in union organizing in 1939 when
he went to work for International Paper Company in Moss Point,
Mississippi. That job had come about after Ramsay's fiery personality
had helped ease him out of higher education. He briefly attended Gulf
Coast Junior College, where he had a job milking cows.
          "I got into a cuss fight with the guy who was in charge," Ramsay
recalled.
          He then left school and went to work at the paper company, where he
helped organize one of the state's first industrial unions. He served
in Europe in World War II and later returned to his Moss Point job as
a shop steward. In 1950, he was elected president of his union local
and in 1959 he was asked to direct the AFL-CIO.
          It was in the Army that Ramsay met a soldier who would strengthen
his already growing resistance to racial hatred. He said a black
French Moroccan joined his unit and "became a favorite of everybody in
the company. And all of them were Southern boys. I was never taught to
hate black people. But it set me to thinking."
          Those thoughts started to crystallize in the early 1960s, when
Ramsay faced some tough choices. Ramsay said he worked and spoke out
for civil rights because racial tensions were chasing away industry
and because he thought segregation was wrong.
          A speech in 1962 to the Metal Trades Council in his native Jackson
County thrust him into the civil-rights spotlight. In the speech,
Ramsay spoke out against racism, saying violence could prompt the
federal government to take contracts away from Ingalls Shipbuilding, a
major defense contractor. And he came to the defense of a Pascagoula
newspaper editor Ira B. Harkey, Jr., who had written that a group of
local citizens were "goons" after they traveled to Oxford to support
segregation at the University of Mississippi.
          Harkey won a Pulitzer Prize for his civil rights editorials and
later wrote a book, The Smell of Burning Crosses. He
credited Ramsay with turning the tide in Jackson County. "It was a
helluva gutsy thing to do," Harkey said. "Without him, God knows what
would have happened."
          At the time of his retirement, Ramsay took the title president
emeritus and turned over his authority to Thomas Knight, who had
served under Ramsay as secretary-treasurer since 1960, and Neal
Fowler, took Knight's old job. Fowler said Ramsay wanted to stay
involved.
          "Just the other day he and I were sitting and talking about plans,"
Fowler said. "I think it really struck him that day. He realized he
was going to retire. I can remember seeing tears in his eyes. It's a
shame that he didn't get to enjoy his retirement."
          Others said Ramsay just wasn't the type to sit around. "The kind of
life he lived made up for not getting a long retirement," said Robert
Walker of Vicksburg, a Warren County supervisor and former field
secretary of the NAACP in Mississippi. "He didn't work for that."
          
            Steve Riley is a staff writer for the Jackson (Miss.)
Clarion-Ledger.
          
        
      
    
  