
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 8, Number 4,
	       1986
        
          The Climate for Workers in the U.S.:  Summary of a Study by the
Southern Labor Institute. A Special Project of the Southern Regional
Council
          By Marshall, RayRay Marshall
          Vol. 8, No. 4, 1986, pp. 1-2
          
          The challenge facing the South is to create jobs with the income
and benefits needed to bring the region's workers above the poverty
level - not just new jobs, but jobs that will significantly improve
the standard of living for people who work full-time, year-round.
          "THE 'BUSINESS climate' and 'ideal places to live' are regularly
assessed, but there have rarely been indexes of good places to
work. Indeed, the criteria used by most business climate reports
assume that low wages, limited unemployment compensation and worker
protection, and weak unions, are good 

for business. This is a strange
assumption for people who also profess to believe that people are our
most important asset.  The Climate for Workers report
demonstrates the error in this traditional assumption.
          "To attract business by maintaining and encouraging low wages and
weak worker protection was always shortsighted, but in an
internationalized information world it is ludicrous.  American
companies cannot compete in the international arena on the basis of
low wages.  Workers in many developing countries earn less than
one-fifth as much as their American counterparts.  Competitiveness
therefore requires greater attention to productivity, technological
innovation, and world class management systems, and these factors are
not likely to be highly correlated with low wages and weak worker
protections.  However, international competitiveness and high and
rising standards of living are likely to be highly correlated with a
high quality workforce and strong worker development programs.
The Climate for Workers is therefore a good indicator
of those places that are likely to have long-run development
potential.  Fortunately, far-sighted leader in these states realize
the connection between economic and human resource development and
have made strong efforts to improve their education systems.  These
leaders recognize the futility of the all-too-frequent strategy of
attempting to compete by depressing wages.  Attention must be focused
on other aspects of human resource development, that also are
important in improving workers' welfare and therefore the quality of
life in any state.
          "This report puts job growth in the Southeast into proper
perspective and evaluates the overall benefits of work.  The climate
for workers in the sunny South is rather chilly.  Those who believe
that 'the Southern economy no longer exists' or that 'the South has
thrown off its history,' should consider the findings of The
Climate for Workers.
          "As with any new indexing undertaking, The Climate for
Workers has technical weaknesses.  However, its thrust is
sound and it should initiate discussion to improve technical quality
in future reports."
          
            Dr. Ray Marshall, former U. S. Secretary of Labor, holds
the Audre and Bernard Rapoport Chair in Economics and Public Affairs
at the LBJ School of Public Affairs, University of Texas at Austin; is
Board Chairman of the Southern Labor Institute; and Vice President of
the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          The Climate for Workers: Where Does the South Stand?
          By Johnson, KennyKenny Johnson and Scurlock, MarilynMarilyn Scurlock
          Vol. 8, No. 4, 1986, pp. 3-15
          
          
            We believe the true test of economic conditions is how working
people--the vast majority of citizens--fare in these times of economic
change. This report examines how the economic climates in the states
affect most workers.
            Although it experienced extraordinary job growth during the past
ten years, the Southeast remains the least favorable region of the
nation when considered from the perspective of working people and
their families. More than in any other region, workers in the twelve
states of the Southeast fail to enjoy the full fruits of their
labors.
            During a major restructuring away from traditional manufacturing
jobs (furniture, textiles, apparel) and toward service jobs
(especially business and health services), manufacturing growth where
it does occur is generally in machinery, electronic equipment, and
related fields. Yet in the Southeast, state governments and chambers
of commerce have clung to the refrain of cheap land and cheap labor
that produced the region's heavy dependence on-low wage, traditional
manufacturing jobs and the largest proportion of working poor in the
country. Even the new service jobs in the region have wages at the low
end of the pay scale. In the final analysis it must be realized that
recent and phenomenal job growth in the Southeast has occurred in
large part at the bottom end of the wage scale, and has not improved
significantly the conditions and prospects for the wage earners of the
region. As the Southeast's economy follows the national trend of fewer
manufacturing and more service sector jobs, the region's employed and
unemployed workers are unlikely to see much change in their personal
conditions.
            Southern states fill the bottom rungs of nearly all of the more
than two dozen indicators considered in this study of the nation's
labor climate. This situation is graphically depicted in the map on
the next page. The top five states, meanwhile, are Massachusetts,
Connecticut, Minnesota, California, and New York.1 The national ranking for each state is n
composite score based on a weighted total (called the worker climate
index) that is derived from thirty-three indicators. The fifty states
and the District of Columbia were examined across the spectrum of
working and living conditions: job and income growth and distribution,
hazardous and low wage jobs, poverty and the working poor, statutory
protection and state labor department policies, equal employment
opportunity and labor organization membership, among other
indicators. A rank of one is beat fifty-one is worst. The nine
regional divisions used in this report are based on those used by the
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis; see map,
p. 4.
            The Southeast's extraordinary growth in jobs during the past ten
years has been accompanied by the least change in personal income of
any U.S. region. While four Southeastern states rank among the top
nine in job growth for this ten year period, eight Southeastern states
fall among the bottom eleven in personal income growth during the same
years. Table VI shows the correlation in each geographic region
between job growth, income and wage growth.
            More and more people are working full-time year-round yet have
incomes below the poverty level. These are the working poor. Working
people are much more likely to be poor in the Southeast than in any
other U.S. region. Of the ten worst states, eight are in the
Southeast--ranging from Tennessee, with 8.2 percent of its workers
below poverty level, to Mississippi at 12.7 percent (the highest
proportion in the nation).
            Similarly, Southeastern states today have the lowest per capita
incomes in the U.S., and nine of the twelve Southeastern states are
among the bottom thirteen in manufacturing wages, averaging less than
$8 per hour. The range in these states extends from $7.97 in Alabama
to the national low of $6.95 per hour in Mississippi.
            The Southeast region can rank high in job growth, and yet rank low
in wages and income, because in eight of the Southeastern states, more
than 40 percent of the manufacturing jobs are in low-wage industries
(those with national average wages of less than $8 per hour). These
include lumber and wood products, furniture and fixtures, food and
related products, textiles and apparel, rubber and plastics, leather
and tanning, and miscellaneous manufacturing jobs.
            Not surprisingly, the eight states with the least worker protection
are in the Southeast. When it comes to state statutes and labor
department policies governing the workplace, protecting workers'
rights and safety, and providing compensation for disability and
unemployment, the South falls considerably below all other
U.S. regions. At the bottom of the benefit scale, five of the six
states that pay the least for permanent total disability--under $200
per week--are in the Southeast. In the nation's twelve worst states,
the weekly unemployment benefit is $140 or less. Eight of these twelve
are in the Southeast. At the bottom in the South and in the country is
Mississippi ($105).
            Until recently, blacks and women have been 

excluded from
traditionally white male occupations: officials/administrators,
professionals, technicians, and craft workers. Southeastern states
rank on the bottom in the percent of working blacks and women employed
in these jobs.
            Findings related to the quality of life in the states also echo
some historically familiar refrains.
            * The Northeastern states report the lowest rates of poverty,
ranging from 8 percent in Connecticut to 13 percent in New York.
            * The Southeast remains the nation's poorest region and Mississippi
(with 24 percent of its population impoverished) ranks at the bottom
of the South.
            * Blacks are most likely to be poor in the Southeast. The nine
states with the highest proportions of black poor are in the
Southeast. Rates of poverty for blacks in the South range from
Virginia's 25 percent to Mississippi's 44 percent (highest in the
nation).
            * A baby is less likely to survive its first year of life in the
Southeast. The two states with the worst infant mortality rates--over
fifteen deaths for every one thousand successful births--are
Mississippi and South Carolina. The eleven worst states, all with
death rates of thirteen or higher, include six more states from the
Southeast.
            These and other study results are detailed in this report.
          
          
            FINDINGS:
            
              Jobs and Income
              The relationship between job growth and personal income is perhaps
the best of all signs of the economic health of a state, addressing
work opportunity as it increases or decreases over time, and the
degree to which those jobs provide workers with an adequate standard
of living. This section of the report examines employment change--the
increase or decrease in the actual number of employees--in the top
five states, the bottom five states, and the Southeast region, and
then looks at income change in the Southeast and in the nation.2 To compare changes in both employment and personal
income we looked at the same three time periods: "long term" change
during the ten years from 1975 to 1984; "short term" change from 1980
to 1984, and the most recent one year period for which data is
available, from 1984 to 1985.
              
                
                  Employment Change
                
              
              
                Top Five States
              
              During the ten-year period from 1975 to 1984, three states gained
more than one million jobs: 2.7 million in California; 2 million in
Texas; and 1.5 million in Florida. Other top ten states gained over
450,000 employees: New York, New Jersey, Georgia, North Carolina,

Virginia, Massachusetts, and Arizona.
              Based on the index and ranking system, the five states with the
highest level of job growth over the long-term period (1975-1984) were
California, Texas, Florida, New York, and Georgia. During these ten
years, 17.4 million new jobs were created in the United States. Of
this number, 7.6 million or 43.5 percent were created in the top five
states (see Table I, next page).
              For the intermediate length period (1980-1984), the same five
states were again the top job growth performers, this time accounting
for 2.6 million or 65 percent of the 3.9 million new jobs in the
United States.
              Analysis of the short-term period (1984-1985) shows that
California, Florida, Texas and New York retained positions in the top
five states in producing new jobs. Michigan rebounded from the loss of
100,000 jobs and 48th ranking for the 1980-1984 period to edge out
Georgia for the number five position. Over the short term, 2.75
million new jobs were created and 40 percent were created in the top
five states.
              The economies of these top five states are similar. In the 1970s,
the national economy was dominated by manufacturing, as were the
economies of the top five job creation states. In the 1980s, the rate
of job growth in the manufacturing sector has been steadily declining
with a corresponding rise in the rate of job creation in the service
sector. During the recession years (1980-1983), the top five states
lost 430,243 manufacturing jobs and gained 346,923 new service
jobs. The intermediate period (1980-1984) saw only a one percent
increase in manufacturing jobs (56,800), but a 22 percent increase in
the service sector (1,331,900 new jobs) for the top five I performers
in job growth.
              The economy of the Deep South state of Georgia, like other Southern
states, continues to be dominated by the apparel and textiles
industries. The service sector, which still ranks third behind trade
and manufacturing, accounted for 29 percent of the job growth in the
three primary sectors and 30.6 percent of the total job growth for the
1980-84 period. Georgia, like California and Florida, did not lose
jobs in the manufacturing sector; however, the rate of job growth in
manufacturing declined (7.39 percent of total job growth) in the state
for the 1980-1984 period.
              A much clearer picture of the similarities in the economies of the
top five job producing states and the U.S. economy can be seen through
a comparison over the 1980-1984 period. The U.S. experienced a very
slight increase in jobs (4.14 percent) as it moved from an employment
base of 90.4 million in 1980 to 94.2 million in 1984. The increase in
the number of service sector jobs was almost three-fourths of the net
increase in jobs in the U.S. for these five years.
              In 1980, the three leading industry sectors for job growth in the
U.S. economy were manufacturing, services and retail
trade. Manufacturing accounted for 22.4 percent of the total jobs,
services for 19.8 percent, and retail trade for 16.6 percent. These
three sectors accounted for almost 60 percent of the jobs created in
the nation. By 1984, the service sector had moved to number one and
accounted for 22 percent of total U.S. jobs. Manufacturing was second
at 21 percent and retail was third at 17.3 percent. Over the five-year
period, this represented a 3.4 percent decrease in manufacturing jobs,
an 8.1 percent increase in retail jobs, and a 15.5 percent increase in
jobs in the service sector.
              In comparing job growth in the top five states to the U.S. job
growth performance for the 19801984 period in the manufacturing,
trade, and service sectors, the decline in manufacturing is seen in
all of the top five states. Indeed, there has been a loss of jobs in
this sector in New York and Texas and only modest increases in
California (2 percent) and Georgia (6 percent).
              In all of the top five states, the service sector is producing jobs
at an increasing rate (37 percent and 33 percent in Florida and
Georgia, and 25 percent and 18 percent in Texas and California). The
relatively low growth rate for service jobs in New York is somewhat
misleading since that has long been the dominant sector in its
economy.
              The net effect over the five-year period in the top five states was
a 1.9 percent decrease in manufacturing jobs and a 43.5 percent
increase in service sector jobs (see Table I).
              
                Bottom Five States
              
              In ranking states according to job growth, the top five states
performed consistently. The bottom five states, however, had no
discernible job growth patterns over the long, intermediate, and
short-term time periods.
              From 1975-1984, the bottom five states in job growth were North
Dakota, Montana, South Dakota, District of Columbia, and West
Virginia. During the 1975-1984 period, these five states added only
183,000 new jobs, representing 1.05 percent of total job growth in the
U.S. for the period.
              The states in the bottom five for the 1980-1984 period; by rank,
were West Virginia, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Ohio and Illinois. Job
growth was negative for these states, with a loss of 599,000 jobs, a
decline-of 15.3 percent.
              For the short-term period (1984-1985), the bottom five job growth
states were Oklahoma, West Virginia, North Dakota, Montana and
Louisiana. The job loss total for this period was 8,700, a decline of
0.3 percent.
              For the intermediate period (1980-1984), the manufacturing sector
lost 673,600 jobs in these five states while services added
375,400. In every state, however, the increase in services was
insufficient to keep the net job growth from being negative.
              In Table II, the percentage of jobs in manufacturing, wholesale and
retail trade, and services are shown in 1980 and 1984 for the bottom
five states. In 1980 manufacturing is clearly the dominant job sector
in all except West Virginia. In 1984, manufacturing is still dominant
in Michigan and Ohio, though less so. In every bottom five state, the
percentage of services jobs i had increased.
              Each of the bottom five states experienced job loss): levels
significantly worse than the U.S. as a whole dur-

ing this
period. Indeed, as a group they account for 36 percent of the
U.S. total loss of 1,864,207 jobs. On an individual state basis, this
represented a loss of 257,200 jobs or -5.3 percent for Illinois;
Michigan declined by 93,400 jobs (-2.91 percent); Ohio lost 126,300
jobs (-2.89 percent); Pennsylvania lost 128,000 jobs (-2.67 percent);
and West Virginia lost 62,700 jobs (-9.71 percent).
              
                The Southeast
              
              Despite its overall bottom national rank in The Climate for
U.S. Workers, employment change is one category where the
Southeastern United States did exceedingly well. In fact, for each of
the three time periods surveyed, the Southeast ranked number one as a
region in job growth, both in absolute numbers and percentage
change.
              Between 1975 and 1984, the Southeast gained 5.2 million jobs, a 32
percent increase over the ten years. Florida had the largest gain,
58.9 percent, while the smallest gain was made by West Virginia at
1.48 percent. After Kentucky's modest gain of almost 15 percent, the
rest of the Southeastern states gained at least 20 percent. Four
states in the region had employment increases greater than 500,000,
and seven states gained between 100,000 and 300,000 jobs. West
Virginia was the only state gaining less than 30,000 jobs for the ten
years.
              When examined by sectors of the Southeast's economy, job growth
shows greater variation,withl3.5 million jobs, or 63 percent of the
total employment in 1984, in manufacturing, retail and services. The
1984 employment was distributed relatively evenly among the three
sectors in absolute and percentage terms. Manufacturing was second in
relation to the three leading sectors, encompassing 33 percent of the
employment in the three sectors, and 21 percent of the total for all
sectors.
              
                
                  Income Change
                
              
              
                The Southeast
              
              The substantial and sustained performance of the Southeast in job
growth is undercut by its personal income statistics. Here, the region
is at the bottom of the scale (see Table III).
              In 1985, personal income per capita for the region was $11,169,
last among all regions of the nation. When measured in absolute change
for 1984-1985, the region does only slightly better, moving from the
bottom rank of eighth to seventh, an absolute change of $537.
              During the 1975-1984 period, personal income per capita for the
Southeast more than doubled, gaining $6,114, a 121 percent
increase. Over the ten-year period, however, the region does not climb
from its bottom rank. In fact, the picture is even bleaker. Among the
twelve states of the Southeast, eight are ranked at fortieth or below
in personal income per capita. Only Virginia, (number 11) and Florida
(ranked 14) are above the bottom grouping. The deviation of these two
states from the regional pattern is perhaps because, unlike most
Southern states, Virginia and Florida have the largest share of their
jobs in trade, government and services, not manufacturing.
              The performance of the Southeast during 1980-1984 was a slight
improvement. For this period, the region had an absolute gain in
personal income of $3,020 and a regional rank of five (out of
nine). This represented a 37 percent gain, exceeded only by New
England at 44 percent and the Mideast at 38 percent. As mentioned
earlier, however, this rate of growth was insufficient to move the
region's personal income off the bottom of the scale at $11,168.
              Analysts and state development officials have long argued that
industry is attracted to the South by its low wages and low
income. Certainly this correlation appears 

to hold for the ten years
between 1975-1984 (see Table III), when the region ranked number one
in job growth, eighth in personal income and seventh in hourly wages
for production workers in manufacturing.
              As Table III reveals, however, this relationship does not hold true
for all regions of the country. For example, the Far West region is
ranked number two in job growth and number three in personal
income. With a rank of four in wages, there is a correlation between
wages and income. Another example at the other end of the employment
change scale is the Rocky Mountain region, which is eighth in job
growth and seventh in personal income, yet comes in second among the
regions in wage growth.
              These variations are perhaps attributable to the job mix in each
region's economy and, to a much larger degree, the incidence of
low-wage manufacturing as a percent of the job total. For example, in
the Far West, low-wage manufacturing represents 26 percent of the
employment total, and in the Rocky Mountain region, 29 percent. In the
Southeast, however, almost half (42 percent) of all jobs are
classified as low-wage manufacturing for the ten-year period.
              In the final analysis, the significant job growth in the Southeast
region, due in large measure to its reliance upon an industries with
jobs at the lower end of the wage scale, has not led to an adequate
standard of living for a sizeable portion of its population. More
specifically, personal income change has not kept pace with the
changes in employment. The situation is one in which more and more
people work full-time year-round and still have incomes below the
poverty level. Indeed, the Southeast ranked worst of all regions when
measured in terms of the incidence of working poor as well as income
distribution, i.e., the proportion of families earning less than an
adequate income.
              
                The Nation: Low-Wage Jobs, the Working Poor, Unemployment,
and Incidence of Low-Wage Manufacturing
              
              One way to understand differences between states in wages and
income is to look at the number of low-wage jobs in the state
economy. Low-wage industries--those with national average wages of
less than $8 per hour--include lumber and wood products, furniture and
fixtures, food and related products, textiles and apparel, rubber and
plastics, leather and tanning, and miscellaneous manufacturing
jobs. We looked at these low-wage jobs as a percent of all the
manufacturing jobs in each state in 1982, and the results show why the
Southeast can rank high in job growth and yet low in wages and
income.
              Only four of the twelve Southeastern states have less than 40
percent low-wage jobs (Kentucky, West Virginia, Louisiana and
Florida). The other eight range from 40 percent in Virginia to 62
percent low-wage jobs in North Carolina. Also at the bottom in this
category are Oregon in the Far West, Maine in New England, and Idaho
in the Rocky Mountain region. Only the two Pacific states have a
greater dependence on low-wage jobs: Hawaii with 66 percent; and
Alaska with 77 percent of its manufacturing jobs in low-wage
industries.
              Jobs in these low-wage industry groups are too few to be counted by
our source, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in the Plains states of
North Dakota and South Dakota and the Rocky Mountain state of
Wyoming. The remaining seven states in the top ten--those having less
than 18 percent low-wage manufacturing jobs--range from 6 percent in
the District of Columbia in the Mideast to 18 percent in the
Southeastern state of West Virginia. Included in this top group are
Nevada in the Far West, Arizona in the Southwest, Michigan in the
Great Lakes, Kansas in the Plains, and Utah in the rocky Mountain
Region.
              
                
                  Incidence of Working Poor
                
              
              Due in large part to the shift from manufacturing to services jobs
and to the inadequacy of the minimum wage, more and more people work
full-time year-round and still have income below the poverty
level. These are the working poor, and they are measured here as a
percent of all householders who worked in 1979. Only three regions are
represented in the ten states with the lowest proportion of working
poor: New England with three states, the Mideast with four states, and
the Great Lakes with three states.
              States with less than 4 percent working poor are Connecticut,
Massachusetts, New York, and New Jersey. States with 4 to 4.5 percent
working poor are Maryland, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin,
Illinois, and New Hampshire.
              A person is much more likely to be poor despite working if they
live in the Southeast: of the ten worst states, eight are in the
Southeast. These range from Tennessee, with 8.2 percent of its workers
below poverty level, to Mississippi, with 12.7 percent, the highest
proportion of working poor in the nation. The only states to join the
Southeast at the bottom in this category are New Mexico and South
Dakota. The only Southeastern states with lower percentages of working
poor are North Carolina (7.7 percent), West Virginia (7.2 percent),
Florida (7.1 percent), and Virginia (5.8 percent).
              
                
                  Unemployment Rates
                
              
              There is considerably more controversy about the accuracy of
measures of joblessness and the connection between unemployment and
economic hardship. It is generally conceded that the rate of long-term
unemployed, if considered separately, would be lower; and 

that the
rate for short-term unemployment would be considerably higher if there
were more adequate measurement of economic distress in rural areas and
of blacks and many other urban residents.
              Unemployment compensation, for example, is often used to supplement
survey information in determining rates, yet many rural people
traditionally do not apply for unemployment, and many are not eligible
in the first place. Further, since labor on a family farm is counted
as employed whether paid or not, even farmers facing foreclosure would
not be reflected in the statistics. In urban areas the count misses
many in distress--black youth and black men, the homeless, migrant
workers and illegal immigrants--who distrust the system and evade
attempts to measure them.
              The unemployment rate ignores the underground economy, unemployment
compensation and multiple incomes within the same family. Yet it also
misses the many people who work full-time at low incomes--an issue we
discuss in connection with low-wage jobs and the working poor. The
rate would also be a great deal higher if it measured workers who have
become so discouraged about finding a job that they have stopped
looking for one, or workers forced into part-time jobs because
full-time jobs are not available. The discouraged worker is not
counted in the survey at all; the part-time worker is counted as
employed. We must recognize, then, that the unemployment rates we
discuss are but indications of the true depth of economic distress.
              We looked at the percent of the civilian labor force that was
unemployed for both 1984 and 1985, and the percent of the youth labor
force that was unemployed for 1984.
              Unemployment rates for 1984 for the civilian labor force varied
from a low of 4.3 percent in South Dakota to the national high of 15.0
percent in West Virginia. For youth the lowest rate was 9.1 percent,
also in South Dakota; the highest was in Mississippi at 32.7
percent.
              Looking at civilian unemployment alone for 1984, the rates were
lowest in the six states with 5 percent or less of their labor force
without a job: South Dakota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, Connecticut,
Massachusetts, Virginia, and Arizona. Six states had double-digit
rates: Alaska in the Pacific; Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and West
Virginia in the Southeast; and Michigan in the Great Lakes region.
              Youth unemployment, on the other hand, was at double-digit rates in
1984 in all but three states: South Dakota (9.1 percent unemployment);
New Hampshire (9.6 percent); and Massachusetts (9.6 percent). The five
worst states for young workers that year were all in the Southeast. In
Mississippi youth unemployment was higher than 30 percent; in four
other Southeastern states the rate exceeded 25 percent: Tennessee
(25.8 percent); West Virginia (28.3 percent); and Alabama (29.5
percent.)
              For the civilian labor force in 1985 unemployment rates ranged from
a low of 3.9 percent in Massachusetts to a high of 13.0 percent in
West Virginia. Of the seven states with rates below 5.0 percent, five
are in New England: Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont, Connecticut
and Rhode Island. Maryland is in the Mideast; and the lone state
outside the northeastern U.S. in the top group is the Plains state of
Kansas.
              Unemployment was worst in the three states with rates exceeding 10
percent, all in the Southeast: 

Mississippi (10.3 percent); Lousiana
(11.5 percent); and West Virginia, which once again had the highest
unemployment rate in the country (13.0 percent). Rounding out the
bottom seven, the four other states with unemployment rates at 9.0
percent or higher were Illinois, Michigan, Alaska, and Kentucky,
another Southeastern state.
              Sharp regional differences emerge when we look at the change in the
unemployment rates from 1984 to 1985. Of the seventeen states from New
England to the Mideast and across to the Great Lakes region, only
Connecticut had an increase in unemployment (0.3%). On the opposite
coast, only one of the four states in the Far West and neither of the
two Pacific states showed an increase in unemployment. Yet in all four
states in the Southwest and four of five states in the Rocky Mountain
region unemployment grew worse. There were similar increases from 1984
to 1985 in four of seven Plains states and four of the twelve states
in the Southeast.
              
                
                  Measures of Income
                
              
              
                Change in Personal Income
              
              Personal income figures tell how well the people of a state have
actually benefited from its jobs--whether those jobs provide workers
with an adequate standard of living. We looked at each state's long-
and short-term change in personal income per capita--the actual dollar
amount gained--over the same periods we used to examine job growth:
1975 to 1984; 1980 to 1984; and 1984 to 1985.
              During the most recent period, income rose over $1,000 in four
states. The greatest increase—$1,127— was in Nebraska, followed
by Connecticut with $1,080, the District of Columbia with $1,039, and
Massachusetts with $1,035 gained. New Jersey, New Hampshire and
Maryland had gains for the year of over $900 in personal income per
capita. The remaining states in the top ten--New York, Virginia and
Minnesota--had increases over $800. The greatest gains, then, occurred
in the northeastern part of the nation: three of the top ten states
are in New England and four are in the Mideast, while two are Plains
states and one is in the Southeast.
              The bottom fourteen states showed gains of less than $500 in
personal income per capita over the 1984-85 period. Seven of the
twelve Southeastern states make up half of this group: North Carolina
($462), Arkansas ($446), West Virginia ($404), South Carolina ($403),
Kentucky ($353), Mississippi ($351), and Louisiana ($274). The
remaining seven include two Southwest states, New Mexico ($485) and
Oklahoma ($474); three in the Rocky Mountain region, Idaho ($459),
Utah ($451), and Montana ($121); South Dakota ($303) in the Plains;
and Alaska ($206) in the Pacific. Montana is the only state with a
gain for the year of less than $200; Alaska and Louisiana are next to
last.
              The dollar change in personal income per capita for the preceding
five years, from 1980 to 1984, was greatest in eight states showing
gains over $4,000. Connecticut topped the nation with an increase of
$4,988, followed by the District of Columbia and Massachusetts. Alaska
in the Pacific region is the only state in the top eight not in the
northeastern U.S.; the others are in New England or the Mideast
region, including New Jersey, New Hampshire, New York and Maryland.
              Dollar gains over the five-year period were less than $2,000 in
only two states, West Virginia and, lowest in the country, Wyoming
with an increase of only $1,229. Eight other states in the bottom ten
showed dollar gains less than $2,500: Nevada, Oregon, Louisiana,
Mississippi, New Mexico, Montana, Idaho and Utah.
              Over the ten-year period from 1975 to 1984, the largest long-term
dollar gains in personal income per capita were in the top eleven
states. In two of these states the gains were over $9,000:
Connecticut, with a ten-year income increase of $9,582, was followed
by the District of Columbia, with $9,118. In four states increases
were greater than $8,000: Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey,
and Alaska. The remaining five, where increases exceeded $7,500, are
Maryland, New York, California, Colorado, and Virginia.
              The smallest long-term increases in personal income occurred in the
four states where gains were under $5,000: Idaho and Utah in the
Rockies; and West Virginia and Mississippi--lowest in the nation--in
the Southeast. Another five Southeastern states are among the eleven
where dollar gains were lower than $5,500: South Carolina, Tennessee,
Kentucky, Alabama and Arkansas. Also in this group are New Mexico in
the Southwest and Montana in the Rocky Mountain region.
              
                Income Distribution
              
              We looked at median family income for 1979, the midpoint of our
period for long-term income change, and learned that families were
struggling hardest to make ends meet in the Southeast. In ten of the
twelve states in the region--excluding Virginia and Louisiana--over 70
percent of families with income earned less than $25,000. Also in this
bottom group are Montana, Idaho, Oklahoma, New Mexico, North Dakota,
South Dakota, Vermont and Maine; in this category the proportion of
families earning less than an adequate income ranges from 70.8 percent
in Montana to the worst in the nationߞ79.6 percent—in Arkansas.
              No Southwestern or Southeastern state, however, is among the top
ten, where less than 60 percent of working families earned under
$25,000. The state with the lowest proportion is Alaska, with 43.6
percent. The other Pacific state, Hawaii, is also in the top ten. In
the Far West are California and Washington; in New England,
Connecticut. Maryland and New Jersey from the Mideast, Illinois and
Michigan from the Great Lakes, and Wyoming from the Rocky Mountain
region are also among the top states with the lowest proportion of
families earning less than $25,000 in 1979.
              
                Average Annual Pay
              
              Average annual salaries of most workers in 1983, the midpoint of
our time frame for short-term income change, were examined to fill out
the national income picture. The eight states where annual pay was
less than $15,000 include four from the Southeast: North Carolina,
South Carolina, Arkansas, and Mississippi. Also at the 

bottom in this
category are Vermont and Maine from New England, and Nebraska and
South Dakota from the Plains states.
              The twelve states where workers made the most in 1983 include no
Southeastern state and only one-Texas--from the Southwest. Again
Alaska tops the nation, paying an average $23,844. The other ten
states in the top twelve averaged annual pay between $18,000 and
$20,000. Joining D.C. from the Mideast region are New York, New
Jersey, and Delaware. In this category from the Great Lakes region are
Michigan and Illinois, and from the Far West, California and
Washington. One state in each of three other regions averaged over
$18,000 in 1983: Connecticut in New England; Texas in the Southwest;
and Colorado in the Rocky Mountain region.
              
                Cost of Living
              
              Income does not always keep pace with the cost of living,
however. In the second quarter of 1985, the American Chamber of
Commerce Researchers Association (ACCRA) measured the cost of living
for the largest available city in 45 states. These measures and the
ranking we derived from them--while limited by the considerations
detailed in Appendix I--show that in some relatively high-income
states such as Alaska, New York and New Jersey, there is also a
relatively higher cost of living. The nine measured cities with a cost
of living higher than the national average (indexed by ACCRA at 100)
are topped by Anchorage, Alas., at 139.2, followed by New York City at
137.3, and the Newark, N.J., metro area at 122.7.
              Lower wages, on the other hand, are not always accompanied by a
lower cost of living. Of the twelve Southeastern cities measured, five
are higher than the national average and seven are lower. The fifteen
cities with a cost of living lower than the national average are led
by Fort Smith, Ark., with the lowest ACCRA index, 92.3. The most
expensive Southeastern city, Atlanta, Gal, is indexed at 106.1. Other
measured cities in the region with a cost of living higher than the
national average are Birmingham, Ala.; Columbia, S.C.; Jacksonville,
Fla.; and Hampton Roads, Va., which includes the metro area
encompassing Norfolk, Virginia Beach and Newport News.
              
                Wages of Manufacturing Workers
              
              To discover state and regional differences in manufacturing wages,
we looked at average hourly earnings of production workers in 1984,
the starting point of our one-year period for income change. Nine of
the twelve Southeastern states--excluding Louisiana, West Virginia and
Kentucky--are among the bottom thirteen states, where these workers
average less than $8 per hour. (This figure is also the measure of a
low-wage job.) The range in the states averaging the lowest hourly
wage is from $7.97 in Alabama to the national low of $6.95 per hour in
Mississippi. Joining the Southeast at the bottom in this category are
Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire and Rhode Island from New England; New
Mexico from the Southwest; and North Dakota and South Dakota from the

Plains region.
              The top eleven states--where production workers in manufacturing
averaged over $10 per hour in 1984--include no Southwestern state and
only Louisiana from the Southeast. The range here is from the highest
average hourly wage in the nation, $12.25 in the Pacific state of
Alaska, to $10.03 in Wisconsin in the Great Lakes region. Also in the
top eleven from the Great Lakes are Michigan, Ohio, Indiana and
Illinois; the Rocky Mountain state of Montana; Oregon from the Far
West, Iowa among the Plains states, and from the Mideast region, the
District of Columbia.
              
                Wage Growth 1980-1984
              
              There are also differences between states in changes in pay over
time. We looked at the gain in average hourly wages of production
workers in manufacturing from 1980 to 1984, the same time frame for
our examination of short-term income change. Only production workers
in South Dakota gained less than one dollar per hour, posting a
sixty-five cents gain over the entire five-year period. Other states
where workers gained less than $1.50 are North Dakota ($1.30), Nevada
($1.40), and Alabama ($1.48). Rounding out the bottom ten are
Mississippi, Arkansas, Iowa, Nebraska, Colorado, and Hawaii.
              Production workers in manufacturing gained more than $2.50 per hour
from 1980 to 1984 in only one state, Michigan, where wages increased
by $2.66. Other states where workers gained more than $2.25 are Ohio
($2.39), Louisiana ($2.32), and Oklahoma ($2.28). Additional states
where the gain in hourly wages exceeded $2 over these five years are
New Jersey, New Mexico, Kansas, Minnesota, Missouri, Connecticut,
Maine, California, Illinois, and Alaska.
            
            
              Poverty
              
                
                  Persons in Poverty
                
              
              Six of the ten states with the largest proportion of poor people in
1979 are in the Southeast. All but one Southeastern
state-Virginia--are in the bottom sixteen. These range from Florida
with 13.5 percent poor persons to Mississippi with 23.9
percent. Joining the Southeast in the bottom ten are South Dakota,
16.9 percent poor persons; New Mexico, 17.6 percent; and the District
of Columbia, 18.6 percent. Texas,14.7 percent, joins the bottom
sixteen.
              Wyoming has the lowest proportion of poor, 7.9 percent. Other
states in the top ten--with less than 10 percent poor in their
populations--are Connecticut, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Wisconsin,
Indiana, Nevada, Washington, New Jersey, Maryland, end Minnesota.
              
                
                  Black Persons in Poverty
                
              
              In 1979, a black person was most likely to be poor in the
Southeast: all of the nine states with the highest proportion of black
poor persons are in the Southeast; ten of the eleven worst states are
in the Southeast. The only state with a similarly high proportion of
black poor is Rhode Island. The range in the bottom eleven is from 30
percent in North Carolina to 44 percent of the black population living
in poverty in Mississippi. The only Southeastern states not ranked
near the bottom still have over a quarter black poor: Virginia (26
percent), and West Virginia (27 percent).
              The top ten states--where blacks are least likely to be poor--range
from 21.3 percent in Idaho to 10.9 percent black poor in Alaska. Other
states with the lowest proportion of the black population living below
the poverty level are North and South Dakota in the Plains; Maine,
Vermont and New Hampshire in New England; Hawaii in the Pacific; and
Nevada and Washington in the Far West.
            
            
              State Actions
              
                
                  Statutory Protection of
Workers
                
              
              We examined the states to see how many of fourteen common state
statutes protecting workers were in effect, and whether or not their
provisions made them meaningful. State statutes are not counted if
they do not meet certain criteria; for example, state
anti-discrimination acts covering employment practices of the state
but not private employers. State laws which are counted meet the
minimum standards.3
               The minimum standards are described in Appendix II,
along with the table showing which statutes were in force in each
state a8 of Summer 1985. These are not included here but are available
with the full text of the report. See Order Info, page
2.
              Briefly, these are laws prohibiting sexual harassment, electronic
surveillance, and discrimination on the basis of race, religion,
color, sex or physical handicap; laws providing whistleblower
protection, access to personnel files, maternity leave, and time off
to vote; laws establishing minimum wages, maximum hours, mandatory pay
for overtime, timely payment of wages, and equal pay by sex; and laws
guaranteeing employees' right to know about exposure to hazardous
materials on the job and to obtain information about their welfare
fund.
              The eight states with the least worker protection are all in the
Southeast. In Alabama and Mississippi, not one of the fourteen laws
had been enacted; in South Carolina only one; in Virginia and
Louisiana only two; in Tenn-

essee, Florida and North Carolina only
three. The other two states in the bottom ten are the Plains states of
Iowa and North Dakota.
              The state which comes within one law of having all fourteen is
California, which lacks only legislation prohibiting electronic
surveillance. The other states in the top ten--those providing the
most protection to workers through state statutes--are Connecticut,
Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Illinois, Ohio, Alaska, West Virginia,
Kentucky, and Maryland.
              
                
                  State Minimum Wages
                
              
              At the end of 1985--when the federal minimum wage, which has not
been adjusted for inflation since 1981, remained at $3.35--state
minimum wages in non-farm employment ranged from a high of $3.90 in
the District of Columbia to a low of $1.40 in Texas. That is among
states having minimum wage standards for at least some of their
workers; nine states have none at all, including six states in the
Southeast: Alabama, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina
and Tennessee. Two of the bottom nine are Plains states, Iowa and
Missouri; and one, Arizona, is in the Southwest.
              Of the forty-two states with minimum wage statutes, twenty-two set
a rate even lower than the federal minimum. There are many gaps and
inconsistencies in coverage even where minimum standards do exist. For
example, the state maximum of $3.10 in North Dakota affects only
professional, technical, clerical and mercantile workers. The minimum
for manufacturing workers is lower at $2.95, and for public
housekeeping workers lower still at $2.80. In Utah the maximum of
$2.75 applies only in the Salt Lake City area; elsewhere it is
$2.50.
              Three states besides the District of Columbia have a minimum wage
higher than the federal minimum: Alaska, Maine, and
Connecticut. Sixteen states equal the federal minimum of $3.35:
Hawaii, California, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania,
Michigan, Illinois, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Rhode Island,
Vemlont, Minnesota, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and North Carolina.
              
                
                  Maximum Benefits for
Disability
                
              
              While all states provide disability benefits for job-related
injury, there is considerable variation in the maximum weekly
benefit. The maximum weekly benefit for permanent total disability of
$1,114 in Alaska in the Pacific region was almost two times the next
highest payment, $580 in Iowa. The top nine states, which paid over
$350 per week as of January, 1985, also included Illinois, Michigan,
Ohio, Maine, New Hampshire, Connecticut, and the District of
Columbia.
              At the bottom of the benefit scale, five of the six states that pay
the least for permanent total disability--under $200 per week--are in
the Southeast region: Alabama, Arkansas, Tennessee, Georgia and
Mississippi. Indiana in the Great Lakes region is also in this
group. Joining them in the bottom ten--where states pay less than $220
per week for job-related injury--are the Plains state of Nebraska and
three Southwestern states: Oklahoma, Arizona and Texas.
              
                
                  Maximum Unemployment Benefits
                
              
              As of January 1984, weekly unemployment benefits varied from a high
in Massachusetts of $278 (where the range is from $185 to $278) to the
national lows of $105 in Mississippi and Missouri. In nine states the
top range of the weekly unemployment check exceeds $200:
Massachusetts, Connecticut, Ohio, Illinois, Alaska, West Virginia,
Louisiana, Pennsylvania, and the District of Columbia.
              In the twelve worst states, the weekly unemployment benefit is $140
or less. Eight of these twelve are in the Southeast: Kentucky,
Virginia, Arkansas, Georgia, Alabama, South Carolina, Tennessee, and
Mississippi. The Plains states at the bottom are Missouri, Nebraska,
and South Dakota; the lone Southwestern state is Arizona.
              
                
                  State Per Capita Expenditure
                
              
              One measure of a state's investment in its citizens is its per
capita expenditures--the money spent per person (based on 1980
population) by state government in all categories. The eight states
investing $1,500 or more per capita are led by Alaska ($2,548) and
Wyoming ($2,132). Other states with high per capita expenditures are
Hawaii, New Mexico, North Dakota, Minnesota, and Delaware.
              Eight states spend less than $1,000 per capita: Ohio, Indiana,
Arkansas, Florida, Tennessee, Texas, New Hampshire, and Missouri,
which spends the least, $807 per person.
              
                
                  State Aid to Schools
                
              
              As an indication of state investment in education, we looked at
state revenue contributions per elementary and secondary school pupil
for the 1980-81 school year. This figure was chosen to reflect state
effort because the more 

familiar measure, per pupil expenditures,
includes federal and local funds. It should be noted, however, that in
some states, by law, localities bear the heavier proportion of costs,
and this is not reflected here.
              State revenue contributions per pupil are lowest in New Hampshire
($143.04) and second lowest in Nebraska ($688.77) The other nine
states contributing less than $1,000 per pupil are Mississippi,
Arkansas, South Carolina, Tennessee, Rhode Island, Connecticut,
Vermont, Missouri, and South Dakota.
              The state contribution is highest in Alaska ($4,210.66), and second
highest in Washington ($2,366.89). Other states in the top ten, where
revenue contributions per pupil exceed $1,500, are Hawaii, Delaware,
New York, Georgia, Florida, Minnesota, California, and New Mexico.
            
            
              Hazardous Jobs
              
                
                  Job-Related Death Rates
                
              
              The two industry sectors with the highest job-related death rates
(excluding agriculture) are construction, with a death rate of 37 per
1,000 workers from 1945 to 1983, and mining/quarrying, with a death
rate for the same period of 50 per 1,000 workers. Employment in these
two hazardous job sectors is measured here as a percent of all
nonagricultural employment in the states for 1982. Since this was a
recession year, the figures are lower than would normally be the
case.
              The eight states with the lowest proportion of these jobs--3.5
percent or less--are the District of Columbia, New York, Wisconsin,
Michigan, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Oregon.
              The seven states with the greatest dependence on these jobs--in
excess of 10 percent of total employment--are Texas, New Mexico,
Oklahoma, Alaska, Louisiana, West Virginia, and Wyoming, which at 25.6
percent has a proportion of hazardous jobs almost twice as large as
the second worst state, 14.6 percent in West Virginia.
              
                
                  Rates of Occupational Disease
                
              
              The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration has
identified six industry groups (excluding agriculture) generally
considered to have unusually high rates of occupational disease. These
are jobs in mining, cotton weaving mills and other cotton products
industries, chemicals and allied products, rubber and miscellaneous
products, and leather and tanning. Here we are looking at employment
in these groups as a percent of all nonagricultural employment in the
states for 1982. Again, during this recession year, the figures are
lower than normal.
              The states with the lowest proportion of jobs having high rates of
occupational disease--less than one percent--are Oregon, Washington,
and Nebraska. States with 1.5 percent or less of these jobs are South
Dakota, Minnesota, Vermont, Maryland, and Florida.
              The states with the most jobs having high occupational disease
rates--in excess of 10 percent of all nonagricultural jobs--are
Delaware, West Virginia, and Wyoming. Other states with 7 percent or
higher are Kentucky, South Carolina, Louisiana, New Hampshire, and
Oklahoma.
            
            
              Commuting Time
              
                
                  Travel Time to Work
                
              
              Time spent commuting to and from work is more than a measure of
inconvenience, in this case, a one-way travel time of 45 minutes or
more. It also reflects the geographic distribution of jobs within a
state and the degree of job concentration in congested urban areas.
              In the top ten states, less than 6 percent of all workers have a
one-way commute of 45 minutes or more. This group is dominated by the
Plains region: Nebraska, South Dakota, North Dakota, Iowa--all in the
top five, with less than 5 percent of all workers--and Kansas. Also in
the top five is the Rocky Mountain state of Montana. The remaining
states in the top ten are Alaska, Wisconsin, Nevada, and Rhode
Island.
              Four of the worst five, where over 15 percent of all workers have a
one-way commute of 45 minutes or more, are in the Mideast: New York
with 25.3 percent of all workers, the District of Columbia (21
percent), Maryland (18 percent), and New Jersey (16 percent). Illinois
(17 percent) is also in this group. Other states in the bottom ten are
Louisiana, Virginia and West Virginia, Pennsylvania and California.
            
            
              Health Care
              
                
                  Number of Physicians
                
              
              As one indication of the availability of health care, we looked at
the number of physicians per 100,000 people, based on the 1980
population. The rate is highest in the District of Columbia, with 511
physicians per 100,000. 

The top eight states in this category have a
rate over 200 and except for California, all are in the Northeast:
Maryland, New York, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Vermont and Rhode
Island.
              Six of the thirteen states with the fewest physicians are in the
Southeast. Their rates range from 127 per 100,000 in West Virginia to
Mississippi, where the rate is the lowest in the nation at 102. Other
Southeastern states in the bottom thirteen are Kentucky, South
Carolina, Alabama and Arkansas, joined by Indiana, Oklahoma, Iowa,
South Dakota, Alaska, Wyoming, and Idaho.
              
                
                  Infant Mortality
                
              
              A telling indication of the quality of health care in a state is
its infant mortality rate, the number of infant deaths before age one,
per thousand live births. The two states with the worst infant
mortality rates--over 15 deaths for every thousand births--are
Mississippi and South Carolina. The eleven worst states, all with
death rates of 13 or higher, include West Virginia, Alabama, North
Carolina, Florida, Louisiana and Georgia, and, from outside the
Southeast, Michigan, Illinois, and Delaware.
              A baby has its best chance of surviving its first year in Vermont,
with 7.7 infant deaths per thousand, and in nine other states with
infant mortality rates of 10 or below: New Hampshire, Massachusetts,
Idaho, Utah, Colorado, Nebraska, Iowa, Hawaii and New Mexico.
            
            
              Equal Employment
              
                
                  Traditionally White Male Jobs
                
              
              Until recently, blacks and women have been excluded from
traditionally white male (TWM) occupations, which are defined here as
officials/administrators, professionals, technicians, and craft
workers. What is being measured here is the number of blacks and women
who were employed in these jobs as a percent of all blacks and women
who were employed in private industry in 1981. Black men, black women,
and white women are ranked separately.
              The six states with the highest proportion of working black women
holding TWM jobs--over 20 percent--are Montana, Idaho, Washington,
California, New Hampshire and Vermont. Vermont at 32 percent
outdistances second place Idaho at 24 percent.
              Ten of the fourteen states where black women are more likely to be
excluded from these occupations--less than 13 percent of working black
women in TWM jobs--are in the Southeast. Only Virginia and West
Virginia in the region have slightly higher rates. The bottom fourteen
range from 12.9 percent in Alabama to 9.3 percent in South
Carolina. Only Wisconsin at 9.0 percent has a lower proportion of
working black women in these occupations; and only Wyoming, South
Dakota and Nevada join the Southeast from other regions at the bottom
in this category.
              The thirteen states with the highest proportion of working black
men in TWM jobs--over 30 percent--are Idaho, Montana, Utah, New
Mexico, Vermont, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and
California.
              The thirteen states where black men are still likely to be excluded
from these occupations--less than 25 percent of working black men in
TWM jobs--include eight of the Southeastern states: South Carolina,
Kentucky, Arkansas, North Carolina, Georgia, Tennessee, Florida, and
Alabama. The three states with the lowest proportions, however, are
North and South Dakota and Wisconsin. North Dakota at 7 percent is
significantly more exclusionary than next worst Wisconsin, where 19
percent of working black men hold jobs traditionally denied to
them.
              In fourteen states more than 26 percent of the working white women
are employed in TWM jobs. The proportion is far higher in the District
of Columbia (43 percent) than in second place New Mexico (29.3
percent). New York, Maryland, Delaware, North Dakota, Washington,
California, Colorado, Montana, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Alaska,
Virginia and Texas also have a high proportion of working white women
in TWM jobs.
              In the bottom ten states, the proportion of working white women
holding TWM jobs is 21.4 percent or less. Eight of the ten are in the
Southeast, from Alabama at 21.4 percent to the national low of 17.0
percent in Arkansas. The remaining bottom ten states are Mississippi,
Kentucky, Tennessee, North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia from
the Southeast, and Utah and Indiana.
            
            
              Labor Membership
              
                
                  Participation in Unions
                
              
              As an indication of freedom to organize bargaining units in the
workplace, we looked at labor organization membership as a percent of
non-agricultural employment in 1980. States with the greatest
proportion of workers affililiated with labor or membership
organizations--over 30 percent--are New York, Pennsylvania,
Michigan, Ohio, Illinois, Indiaian, Washington, West Virginia, and
Alaska.
              Sixteen states have the lowest labor organization membership in
their workforces, less than 18 percent, and eight of the sixteen are
in the Southeast: Lousiana, Mississipppi, Arkansas, Georgia, Virginia,
Florida and North and South Carolina, which at 9.6 and 7.8 percents,
respectively, have the lowest proportion in the country. Three of the
remaining states are in the Plains region: North and South Dakota and
Kansas. The others are Arizona, Oklahoma, Texas, New Hampshire and
Utah.
            
          
          
            CONCLUSIONS:
            While this report began with a number of conclusions to be drawn
from some thirty-three indicators of the quality of working life, the
heart of the issue--the overall climate for workers in the U.S.--lies
within the realm of jobs and income. From this perspective, several
key points are clear:
            * The U.S. economy is undergoing a major restructuring away from
traditional manufacturing jobs and toward a technology-driven economy
dominated by 

service jobs.
            * Contraction in manufacturing and expansion in services and
high-tech industries is uneven. The Southeast in particular lags
behind the national trend, and rural areas across the nation are
suffering the most, with the slowest job growth and the lowest incomes
for workers.
            * This unevenness in job and income growth has been exacerbated in
the farm states and the energy states--notably Alaska--where
conditions have deteriorated during the past two years. This time
period is not covered here in the same depth as the preceding ten
years, and this report may have captured a high point in their
economic well-being to which they may not return for some time to
come.
            * The transition to the new national job mix and away from
traditional manufacturing jobs is causing serious dislocations of
workers which, in the absence of a human resource development policy,
threaten to become longterm. The new poverty figures released August
1986, too late for consideration in this study, show a new and growing
class of working poor.
            * The thousands of new jobs that are being created are seldom
filled by these dislocated workers, whose education and skills do not
match the qualifications for high-tech manufacturing and service
jobs.
            * Even those dislocated workers who can make the leap from
traditional manufacturing to the new kinds of jobs are earning
substantially less money now. Fast food chains are not paying
steelworker wages.
            * These changes in the U.S. economy and the consequences for
workers caught in shrinking job areas have profound implications for
the Southeast. Despite numerical gains in job growth that lead the
nation and recent improvements in state financing of education, the
region has failed to meet the standards set by the rest of the nation
in almost every other way: the smallest gains in wages and per capita
personal income, the largest proportion of working poor, the highest
incidences of poverty, and so on.
            * The challenge and the task that face the Southeast today and in
the future is to create jobs with the income and benefits needed to
bring the region's workers above the poverty level--not just new jobs
as in the past, but jobs that will significantly improve the standard
of living for people who work full-time, year-round.
            * The reality is that in order to attract these better jobs, the
Southeast must improve the quality of education. Recent steps in a
number of states in the region to set higher standards and increase
the state share of financing elementary and secondary schools are keys
to a long-term strategy. Until it begins to take effect, another
generation will leave the schools and enter the job market with skills
and abilities well below those of workers in other regions, and in too
many instances functionally illiterate.
            * States that have been successful in attracting better jobs, as in
Massachusetts, have invested in education. States that have been able
to counter the shock of the structual changes in the economy, as is
beginning to happen in the Great Lakes states, have successfully
diversified their job mix. Not coincidentally, these are also the
states and regions that provide the greatest degree of worker
protection and the most consideration for workers who become disabled
or unemployed. They have higher wages and lower rates of poverty, and
a better chance of rebounding from periods of unemployment.
            * One of the most striking and consistent regional performances is
the grouping of the Southeastern states at the very bottom of the
rankings for equal employment opportunity. The glaring maldistribution
of the benefits of employment away from the large population of
minorities and women damages the entire region.
            * There are in effect two Souths: one where jobs and income are
available, and one where they are not. Moreover, the effects are even
more severe for blacks and women in the rural areas of the region.
            * Regardless of improvements that may be made in job creation,
human resource development, and education, unless these improvements
are available to black and white Southerners alike, the region will
remain the worst in the nation for wage-earners and their families.
            * The poor, the working poor, minorities and women--especially in
the rural South--have formed a permanent underclass in the region, one
that has been called "disadvantaged" and "structurally unemployed" for
more than twenty years. With recent changes in federal policies and
programs, their lot has deteriorated below even the poverty levels of
the early 1960s. Given the climate for workers in the region, there
are few chances indeed for these groups to help themselves. In the
absence of policies and programs that directly address their needs,
there is little hope for help from other sources.
          
          
            Kenny Johnson is the director of the Southern Labor
Institute, a project of the Southern Regional Council. A native of
Louisiana, he is a former regional director of the National Rural
Center. Johnson joined the Council after having served as field
director of the Voter Education Project. Marilyn Scurlock is a staff
member of the Southern Labor Institute and a former staffer of the
Southern Office of the National Rural Center.
          
        
        
          Labor Gives to Make Saturn Work
          By Garber, CarterCarter Garber and Fausey,  Verna Verna Fausey
          Vol. 8, No. 4, 1986, p. 19
          
          The Saturn Agreement has set a new pattern for UAW bargaining in
the automobile industry and is affecting many negotiations carried out
by other unions.  Despite an early GM promise to the UAW insistence
that Saturn not be a precedent, GM's Chairman Roger Smith talks of the
need to "Saturnize" industry and UAW Vice President Donald Ephlin now
declares "We need a lot more Saturns."
          From the beginning, the Saturn Project was a joint effort of GM and
the UAW.  The 1985 accord has its genesis with the establishment of a
joint study center in the spring of 1983 to map out "a new approach to
union-management relations and the more effective use of human
resources if assembly of small cars was to be feasible in the United
States."
          The unusual union contract has created controversy within UAW and a
debate within the nation's union movement.  Some charge that the UAW
has sold out under what Saturn calls its new "philosophy of total
cooperation."  UAW leaders are defensive; perhaps because "no party to
Saturn has risked more with this experiment than the UAW," according
to labor writer Anthony Border.  GM's William Hoglund stresses that
the UAW is a partner and "a stakeholder in Saturn and participates in
decisions.  A UAW advisor is on the Saturn management staff and is a
part of all enterprises."
          The contract reflects the concessions typical of the Reagan era as
well as autoworkers' desire for job security.  Saturn employees,
called members, will take a twenty percent pay cut in straight-time GM
wages in return for profit-sharing and additional income based on
meeting production, quality and productivity goals.  Production will
be carried out by small work units of five to twenty-five people
rather than by assembly line.  "Our work teams are going to do it
all-seek resources, keep records, communicate and work with supplier
partners and insure quality," according to GM's Hoglund.
          In order to get a commitment of relatively secure employment for
eighty percent of the workers, the union gave up normal grievance
procedures, seniority rights, fixed work rules and practices, and
traditional job descriptions.  The Agreement reads "Saturn will not
lay off Saturn members except in situations rising from unforeseen or
catastrophic events or severe economic conditions."  This sounds like
a weak guarantee in a country whose economy has be in an official
recession for half of the past one hundred and twenty years.  Yet the
Chr8ysler company to give workers a sixty-day layoff notice "when
practicable."  The UAW was willing to agree to this because of
numerous layoffs and the rapid loss of members in an industry which
has seen forty-seven facilities shut down since 1980.  However, the
deep concessions make it clear Saturn was designed to compete with
domestic as well as foreign autoworkers.
          Once the agreement was complete, GM picked a right-to-work state to
test it.  Saturn was to be kept away from GM's other plants where
there are strong anti-management sentiments and more traditional labor
contracts.  GM's labor relations chief, Alfred S. Warren Jr., said
that the UAW fought the Spring Hill location "up until the last
moment" as the ninty-nine member union/management team debated
sites.
          While Tennessee governor Alexander has made his peace with the UAW
in order to get the plant, Republican gubernatorial candidate Winfield
Dunn is not bound by this peace treaty.  Dunn, who was governor from
1971-1975, feels the Saturn agreement "violates the spirit of
Tennessee's right-to-work law."
        
        
          Today's Jobs at Yesterday's Wages: GM's Saturn Auto Plant
Arrives in Spring Hill, Tennessee
          By Garber, CarterCarter Garber and Fausey, VernaVerna Fausey
          Vol. 8, No. 4, 1986, pp. 16-24
          
          Spring Hill Mayor George Jones says he learned the same time you
did, if you were watching television on July 30, 1985, that General
Motors planned to build the world's most expensive manufacturing plant
in his middle Tennessee community, population 1,275. By that point
GM's Saturn plant had been the object of a seven-month industrial
recruiting contest involving a thousand sites in thirty-six states, a
parade of governors bearing gifts, and impassioned pleas from chambers
of commerce, local citizens and schoolchildren. But Saturn didn't go
to New York, which offered the billion-dollar bargain of one hundred
megawatts of free electricity for twenty years, or to Minnesota, which
pledged tax concessions and other prizes worth $1.3 billion, or even
to Kentucky, which legislated a $306 millon educational aid package
after word got out that GM considered the Bluegrass State's school
system inadequate.
          Instead, Saturn came to a sleepy town off I-65 thirty miles south
of Nashville. At the moment Mayor Jones watched GM's announcement on
his television set, Spring Hill had not even a single full-time police
officer, fireman, or physician. The announcement, said Jones, was like
something "falling from the sky."
          Spring Hill's experience raises many questions about corporate
power in the U.S., about industrial recruiting as practiced by most
state governments, about the role of organized labor in a rapidly
shifting economy, and about the ability of localities to control their
own destinies.
          
            Were They Just Lucky or What?
          
          In effect, Tennessee won a national lottery for a promised 6,000
industrial jobs and a huge addition to the tax base. After the
amazement wore off, one of the first questions asked in Spring Hill
was, why us? The answer may be that GM was less interested in what
Spring Hill had than in what it did not have: the area decidedly
lacked experience in negotiating with large companies, other prospects
for economic development, county-wide planning or zoning, organized
citizen groups which might have opposed GM's plans or at least have
complicated matters, and the history of labor-management antagonism
that characterizes many of the locales of other auto plants.
          Spring Hill residents are minor actors, if not pawns, in a grand
auto industry manuever. General Motors' plans for Saturn represent the
company's main effort to 

face down Japanese car competition. GM
created the Saturn Corporation as a subsidiary--with its own
executives, engineers, dealer network--and a "special" labor
contract. The Saturn plant will use computer and robot technology to
produce half a million subcompact Saturn cars a year with about
one-third of the workforce that would be needed at other GM
facilities. Board Chairman Roger Smith touts Saturn as the key to the
giant corporation's survival and competitiveness as a domestic
producer.
          Construction of the Spring Hill plant will require four thousand
construction workers for two-and-a-half years. Limited production is
expected to begin in late 1989. When the plant reaches full capacity
(some years later), GM claims that it will provide six thousand direct
jobs and twelve thousand to fourteen thousand indirect jobs among
suppliers, service firms, groceries, eating places and motels.
          In choosing Middle Tennessee, GM joined a Southbound migration for
automakers, including a Nissan plant at Smyrna, Tenn., just thirty
miles from Spring Hill, and Kentucky's planned Toyota
facility. Michigan has gone to extraordinary lengths to preserve its
hold on the industry, but the mid-South has become the location of
choice for both U.S. and Japanese carmakers.
          In addition to presumably docile labor, Spring Hill was chosen
because it lies within five-hundred miles of three-fourths of the
U.S. domestic market. The area had a railroad, interstates, and could
provide four million gallons of water daily. Geographically it is a
flat site about two square miles in size. In the rural setting, there
were a small number of landowners from whom to acquire land.
          "The final ingredients were simple but of the right combination,"
according to Jan White of Landauer Associates. This New York firm
which researched the sites for GM never revealed the nature of that
secret combination. For seven months, Landauer employees visited
potential locations, examined tax structures and school systems, went
to parks, and read back editions of local newspapers to determine how
each community solved their problems.
          With so many suitors, GM could take its time. The national media
provided millions of dollars of free advertising for the future car. A
GM-commissioned poll showed that Saturn had 49 percent name
recognition without building a plant or even designing a product. This
public relations triumph, achieved largely because of U.S. desperation
for jobs, is proudly heralded by Saturn's executives.
          By early February 1985, GM had information about every realistic
location "already on the computer," according to Stan Hall, a Saturn
spokesperson. Peter Laerman of the United Auto Workers (UAW) chastised
the corporation for encouraging a waste of public resources. "In cases
where GM knows perfectly well those sites will not be chosen, they
should make that clear before any more money is spent." But GM kept up
the "search" for another five months as desperate hamlets bid higher
for the prize.
          The site GM chose is in Maury County, just a few miles from its
border with Williamson County. The latter is Tennessee's richest and
fastest growing county with an unemployment rate of 3.1 percent in
July of 1986. Williamson County Executive Robert Ring says of Saturn,
"It's definitely not good for our county. I wish they had gone
somewhere else." Williamson County residents are concerned about the
rapid changes in their county which is evolving from an agricultural
to a bedroom community feeding metro Nashville's booming "office
parks." The result is a controversial growth management plan that is
unprecedented in laissez-faire Tennessee. 
          In Maury County, with 9.6 percent unemployment, the planning
infrastructure was non-existent. Judy Langston, a county native who
was hired when the planning office was finally set up three months
after the Saturn announcement, explains: "Maury County government did
not have any land use controls, policies or plan. We did not have any
zoning or subdivision controls at all and there was not a planning
commission as such." Langston and the commission have worked quickly
"to get the county ready to start dealing with the growth that's
coming." But while this unpreparedness worked to GM's advantage in
many ways, it led to the defeat of an attempt by Saturn to head off an
unsightly commercial strip next to its "campus-style plant." Even
though Saturn hired the Vanderbilt Law School Dean to work with the
county to develop a scenic parkway, the old neighbors quickly let
their new neighbor and politicians know that it would be a long time
before they would tolerate that much "governmental interference."
          
            What Did Tennessee Offer?
          
          Governor Lamar Alexander trumpeted his state's victory in full-page
newspaper ads published around the country. The considerable prize was
said to be the largest one-time investment in U.S. history, and Saturn
thus took on mythical dimensions and qualities far beyond the jobs and
related industries it will bring to Middle Tennessee. To Tennessee's
Republican administrators, Saturn testified to the state's
attractiveness to manufacturing investors and to their own competitive
ability in the politically prime arena of industrial recruitment.

          Alexander and former Senate Majority Leader Howard Baker had lauded
Tennessee's right-to-work law, its "pro-business climate and its
hardworking labor force" to GM Chairman Smith in early 1985. These
same factors were among the reasons the Southern Labor Institute
ranked Tennessee as the fourth-worst climate for workers in the
nation, but they made the state look good to GM and other
companies. The governor and senator may not have actually mentioned
it, but Smith's computers would have told him Tennessee was in the
bottom twenty percent of states in terms of maximum benefits for
disability and unemployment, and statutory protections for
workers. Nor would the wage demands be likely to be great from
citizens of a state ranked forty-second in the incidence of working
poor and near the bottom in manufacturing wages and income
distribution. Since Tennessee is projected to have higher than
national unemployment at least through the 1990s, this would be a
state which would appreciate GM, whatever its pay and benefits, for a
long time to come.
          Tennessee also was promoted as a state whose tax structure has been
tailored for big business: a one percent investment tax credit for
industrial machinery, no sales tax on industrial and pollution control
machinery, a tax exemption on finished goods, low worker's
compensation insurance rate, and no personal income tax. Over
forty-nine percent of the state's regressive tax revenue comes from
high sales taxes, including a tax on food.
          Tennessee's industrial recruiting ads say, "Grow with a
pro-business tax structure. Only four states have a lower state and
local tax burden than Tennessee. Tennessee does not offer large tax
concessions to attract business to the state--the tax structure is
already attractive for business!"
          With the nation watching and his 1988 Vice Presidential aspirations
perhaps in mind, Tennessee's governor eagerly courted the
industrialists. Alexander had won one such prize in 1982-the Nissan
plant- and wanted another. (Nissan made the largest U.S. industrial
investment by a Japanese company in a highly automated truck assembly
plant in Smyrna, thirty miles from Spring Hill.) The earlier success
may have helped guarantee the second win. If GM wanted to prove it
could compete with the Japanese, why not on the same turf? And the
UAW, GM's partner in Saturn, may have desired to locate nearby in
hopes that Saturn's union influence would rub off on non-union
Nissan.
          
            Greasing GM's Wheels
          
          In a less than candid statement, Alexander contended, "New York
offered $1.2 billion. We didn't offer a penny."
          But Tennessee's General Assembly rushed to provide housewarming
gifts to the new corporate arrival. In early 1986 Maury County
legislators introduced a bill to put a $500,000 cap on the realty
transfer tax and another cap on mortgage fees. Written to benefit very
large plants "such as Saturn," the bill was the result of a prior
agreement among legislators, Saturn officials and the governor. The
state lost a one time payment of $2.5 million to $3 million while
local governments lost $75,000. Alexander also pushed through the
Legislature a seat belt law wanted by GM to help forestall national
air bag legislation.
          In addition to the usual benevolence to large corporations, the
governor has promised Saturn $50 million worth of roads, including a
new I-65 exit and a new five-mile connecting "Saturn parkway" (much
like that built for Nissan). Saturn will get its cars to market faster
with a proposed $135 million expressway loop south of
Nashville. Spring Hill is getting a bypass, two stop lights,
state-paid planners and engineers. Tennessee pays for water quality
and regional impact studies. Saturn will receive and control $20
million worth of job training, with no requirement that Tennesseans
will be trained.
          Justifying all this is Revenue Commissioner Don Jackson, who
optimistically predicts that Tennessee may get ten dollars in tax
revenues for every dollar it spends on support facilities for
Saturn. The state's sales tax revenues will increase when Saturn
begins to meet its $200-million-a-year payroll four years from now,
but several more years will pass before the state realizes other tax
dollars. Business tax income was not coming in from the Nissan plant
by 1985, even though Nissan began production in 1983. Moreover, while
the state 

government may eventually experience a return on its
investment in Saturn, Saturn's neighbors fear that the bulk of the
costs will be borne by the taxpayers of the counties and
municipalities.
          Meanwhile, many Maury County citizens wonder just who will act in their best interest. Many feel that their local
officials failed to represent all of Maury County when negotiating the
in-lieu-of-tax agreement with GM. Many more, including many local
officials, wonder whose side the state is on when it comes to the
negotiating with Saturn and to the planning for the trauma of its
arrival.
          
            Will Tennesseans Get the Jobs?
          
          Much of the intense courting of Saturn was inspired by the lure of
thousands of new jobs.
          In November 1985, four months after Saturn's site selection, a copy
of the secret labor agreement between GM and the United Auto workers
was leaked to the Spring Hill Area Concerned Citizens Group. It
revealed that aa majority of the full initial complement of operating
and skilled technicians in Saturn will come from GM-UAW units
throughout the United States." The document concludes that "because of
the qualifications and experience of the current GM-UAW workforce,
they will be a primary source for the initial complement, up to full
capacity of operating and skilled trades technicians. The parties will
actively recruit GM-UAW employees."
          This news stunned Maury County officials, who had made large tax
concessions expecting the majority of jobs for area residents. The
Citizens Group leaders had been asking since early September for
eighty percent of the Saturn workforce to come from the county and the
state. GM says it made no promises.

          Not surprisingly, UAW Vice President Donald Ephlin has reported
that union members all over the country are interested in the Saturn
jobs. "We don't need applications. Every day I get letters inquiring
about employment," he said. Ephlin predicts that of the estimated six
thousand jobs about five thousand will be in the UAW bargaining
unit. These could be filled ten times over by the fifty-four thousand
UAW members now laid off, not to mention the forty-one thousand GM
says it may soon lay off or the current GM workers who may want to
move when Saturn begins hiring.
          Many local people resent outsiders' having a lock on the majority
of Saturn's jobs. GM has quietly let its Saturn partner, the union, be
played off against the local communities so that the UAW is faulted by
many as having taken the jobs Maury County residents thought were to
be their main benefit from Saturn.
          Spring Hill resident and fiberglass manufacturer Jim Miller said,
"the governor kept talking about at least three thousand jobs." But,
"once we read the agreement we knew we could not get any jobs out of
the project." He added, "the governor and GM 'foxed' people on jobs."
Miller asked the governor why no Tennesseans were guaranteed jobs and
"Dear old Alexander said that if not one Tennessean gets a job at
Saturn, it will still be good for Tennessee. Now that may be good for
Tennessee, but what about Maury County?"
          
            GM Unwilling to Pay Full Property Tax
          
          Tennessee helped Saturn choose a county with lower property rates
than surrounding areas. Saturn then hammered Maury County governmental
officials into an unprecedented forty year in-lieu-of-tax
agreement. According to county budget director, A. C. Howell, "the
forty-year term was the toughest part and the part that the county
disliked most about the deal. We really didn't want a forty-year
deal. It was a GM idea and they took pretty much a hard line on it."
GM's leverage was that its choice of this county was "tentative" until
it got the deal it sought. By withholding the labor agreement from the
public and county officials, GM had a further advantage in
negotiations.
          Maury County's industrial board agreed to hold title to the site so
Saturn is not burdened with real and personal property taxes, the
county's primary revenue source. The first year Saturn agreed to pay
$7.5 million; in 1987 and 1988, $3.5 million each year; from 1989 to
1995, $3 million each year; and from 1996 to 2025, the rate rises from
twenty-five percent to forty percent of the standard property tax
rate. The county was pleased at being able to negotiate the larger
amounts of funds up front since normally the property tax would not
show up in significant amounts until the plant was fully built. "The
plan of action is to use the front end money to handle the initial
impacts. Then we'll have to develop some mechanisms to make sure
future developers have to pay their own way," said Howell.
          Local residents and officials were skeptical of the deal since most
"high growth" counties find it impossible to make developers cover all
the costs of new services. If Saturn doesn't pay for expanded services
and if the developers who follow Saturn to Maury County don't pay, who
will? The residents of Maury County, who currently enjoy a low two
percent property tax rate, expect that they will have to pick up the
tab.
          Despite being spelled out in an official agreement there are still
different estimates of just how much the county has given away to
GM. Auto industry watcher Ralph Nader has estimated that the
in-lieu-of-tax deal will cost Maury County almost $57 million during
the first ten years. Budget director Howell figures that if the plant
as proposed is built "the full tax value would have been $14 million"
annually, a figure less than half the $32.9 million detailed in
published reports elsewhere. Even if Howell is accurate, this means
that after construction GM will pay $77 million less than the normal
county tax rate during the seven year period from 1989-1995.
          Nader staffer Jim Musselman said Maury County officials failed to
compare what GM said it was willing to pay in property tax with what
it was already paying at its facilities in Michigan and Ohio. GM
wasn't about to volunteer that it pays almost twice as much tax on
smaller plants. Howell said county officials talked to officials in
few other places during the six to eight weeks of negotiations, but he
wishes there had been more time for research. While GM clearly
benefited from the pressure of time it applied, Howell says the
greatest urgency came from state officials who wanted an agreement to
be reached but nevertheless offered very little assistance.
          On February 28, 1986, Saturn ceremoniously made its first payment
of $2 million. Its next checks were delivered in late May and
September to the Maury County Industrial Development Board. Posing in
front of the enlarged check, Howell wondered whether he should smile
or frown. It probably is not the best deal in the world but when you
go to buy a car you don't get the deal you want. I can't tell whether
it was a good deal or not. I think it was as good a deal as we could
have gotten... History will tell."
          Maury County found that, once the negotiations on an overall amount
from Saturn were concluded, the wrangling had just begun. Separate
agreements had to be made to divide its new revenues with the
incorporated towns of Spring Hill, Columbia, and Mount Pleasant. The
various county departments openly squabbled over the remainder. The
School Board has even threatened to sue to get its standard
forty-seven percent of county taxes.
          Even with its own discounted rate Saturn has become Maury County's
largest taxpayer; its nearest contender pays less than a third of GM's
amount. Saturn's employees will double the county's 1985 manufacturing
labor force, giving the new constituents tremendous political clout in
a county which was projected to have only 25,375 households in
1990.
          Further, GM's actions in other parts of the nation suggest that
Maury County will be asked in the future for more tax cuts. GM has
demanded real property tax reductions of up to eighty percent in
eighteen Michigan locations and has threatened to move its plants if
the cuts are not forthcoming. Four Michigan towns have 

already given
in. "For GM the Saturn plant represents another step in its ongoing
experiment to discover just how far it can lower its tax obligations,"
concludes labor writer Anthony Borden in The Nation
(June 21,1986).
          
            Will the Town Get its Fair Share?
          
          "More and more it looks like GM came to this rural area of
Tennessee looking for a colony to exploit instead of a community to
respect," said Ralph Nader. "The Volunteer State better start
volunteering more citizen and governmental oversight and get the
free-loading GM off welfare."
          "Let's be honest. The plant is going to affect us the most," Spring
Hill Mayor Jones exclaimed in late August 1985. "We're the ones who
are going to be dealing with the traffic and having our roads and our
land and our homes torn apart. Nobody seems to be interested in Spring
Hill."
          Martha Torrence, a school teacher who moved from Nashville to
retire in Spring Hill and is secretary of the Spring Hill Citizen's
Group, said of Saturn's first year, "We just can't understand why
we've been ignored, they forgot about us, just like we were dust to be
moved around."
          For several weeks, the state officials, Saturn and the UAW ignored
the mayor's letters and requests for a meeting with the townspeople to
explain what was going on and to answer citizen's questions. Only in
September 1985, when Mayor Jones warned that he might oppose zoning
changes needed for initial construction, did the three agree to the
town meeting.
          Spring Hill's annual property tax revenue was around $21,000 before
any GM payments. A recent property reappraisal had the effect of a
major tax hike and Mayor Jones did not want to raise taxes so soon to
pay for new facilities. When the mayor's efforts to get a financial
commitment from the county and GM failed, the city council began the
procedure to annex the Saturn site, just two miles outside the city
limits. This would have brought the town an estimated $8.5 million
annually, instead of the $11.5 million over a forty-year period to
which they eventually agreed.
          Upon learning about the annexation plan, Saturn's general counsel
threatened that GM would leave the Spring Hill area before the company
had turned one shovel of dirt. "I don't know if I'd call it
blackmail," Mayor Jones told the Flint (Mich.) Journal. "I have heard
accusations before that if we don't do this or that Saturn will pull
out." Jones reports that during this period he received a number of
death threats from developers who were panicked they would lose
anticipated substantial profits if GM did not come.
          Spring Hill's threat to annex Saturn's property, followed by
Saturn's threat to leave, is credited with giving the town enough
leverage with Maury County to get a large part of the in-lieu-of-tax
money. For $250,000 annually, Spring Hill committed itself in writing
not to annex the Saturn site. Mayor Jones is adamant that the
annexation proposal is merely tabled and will be activated if the
county fails to pay.
          
            Speculators Descend
          
          "We didn't have any real estate offices in Spring Hill before
Saturn hit. The next day we had five," says Joan W. Jackson, the
manager of the only branch bank in town. "Land speculators blew into
town with money in hand, bought land, and flipped it." Two months
after the announcement, land values had risen from $1,000 to $2,000
per acre to $5,000 to $10,000 per acre, with some acreage selling as
high as $35,000. Activity tripled at the county's Register of Deeds,
which collected more than a million dollars in recording fees and
transfer taxes.
          During the early "gold rush fever," the mayor distributed signs "My
home is not for sale. Compliments of George Jones, Mayor." He
explained, Y want my neighbors to know I want to keep them."
          By Spring 1986 real estate activity had slowed to a trickle. Many
local people only made money as the outsiders let their options
expire. Real estate agents and bankers predict a second boom as soon
as the town's bypass location is announced and when Saturn plant

construction begins.
          As the unemployed began to come to the boomtown, Mayor Jones and
the Board of Aldermen bought them one-way tickets to Columbia or
Nashville. The bus doesn't stop in Spring Hill, but a policeman takes
the indigent newcomers to Main Street and flags it down. Legal
Services personnel worry that the bus trip may await some local people
as well. After Nissan was built local people with low incomes became
homeless as the property values rose.
          "The rental situation here is already deplorable," says Bill Haley,
Legal Services director in Maury County. "The trailer parks, which
will be the primary places available for the transient construction
workers, have outrageous lease provisions, which allow landlords to
seize the personal possessions of the tenants if they don't pay
up. We're going to see local people evicted, as the landlords jack up
rents to lease to outsiders. Every county in the area has a long
waiting list for low-income housing now. With the tremendous real
estate pressures, homelessness is going to be an overwhelming problem
and the counties are doing little to address it."
          The arrival of the county's largest taxpayer frightens local
residents who wonder whether they can afford to stay. Rising land
values will increase taxes at the same time as the demand for new
services calls for increased county revenues. While the mayor is proud
of his negotiations with the county, he feels the negotiations between
the county and Saturn "were very poorly handled." Mayor Jones, a
contractor, draws an analogy with his trade. "A lot of people underbid
just to get the job. But when you've got to pay a dollar and a quarter
to get a one dollar job, you're talking one step backwards and it's
not good business. If it's going to cost us more to have them here
than we're going to get in return, then I think we're making a big
mistake."
          "It will be the people on fixed income who will suffer," says Mayor
Jones. Citizen's group leader Martha Torrence agrees: "We who are
trying to continue here might have to move out of the area because of
taxes."
          Homeowners are not the only victims. Randy Lockridge, who farms a
thousand acres, declares that Saturn, named for the Roman god of
agriculture, "will ruin farming in Spring Hill and have a negative
effect on farming in all of Maury County."
          Dairy equipment supplier John Campbell, president of the Citizens
Group, agrees that "farming's a thing of the past in Spring Hill." The
town's farm implement dealership is already closed, and the rapidly
rising land prices seem to affirm his conclusion.
          "Many people in the community who were in favor of the project have
now turned against it after seeing the way GM operates," said
Campbell.
          In the wake of recent elections, Jim Cathey, a landowner, said, "We
really should be voting on getting that plant here."
          Cathey's words echo the thoughts of thousands of Southerners who
suddenly are faced with the rapid changes and unintended results of
development decisions made secretively by a few state or local
officials in pressured negotiating sessions with outside giant
corporations. There are no mechanisms for public participation, much
less approval.
          
            State Needed to Manage Growth
          
          Governor Alexander has used the Nissan and Saturn catches to
catapult himself into the National Governor's Association Chairmanship
and to national political prominence great enough to cause talk about
an Alexander role in the White House. Alexander has 90 tied his image
to the Saturn project that he quips: "If it's shelved, they'll shelve
me right along with it." More than $460,000 of state funds have been
spent on Saturn-oriented public relations in which media professionals
have crafted Alexander's positive, concerned image. Yet near the plant
site, among officials and citizens alike, few are Alexander
boosters.
          "We don't understand the governor letting such a thing come into
our state. We think he should have said, "Okay, but give us so many
jobs," complains Martha Torrence. Mayor Jones's struggles to get the
governor's attention are well known. Alexander committed the state to
paying for the town's planning, abut every time a bill comes up they
want to give a run around getting it paid." Adds County official
Howell, "We really feel like they should have helped us more in
planning. The city of Columbia and the county are entitled to the same
thing Spring Hill was. I think they gave more to Spring Hill to hold
down the press situation. We weren't making that much noise so they
didn't have to do anything to quiet us down."
          The Saturn mishandling by the state led to a fundamental
questioning of the state's conduct of industrial recruitment by
representatives of other localities, including the Tennessee Municipal
Bond Fund vice president, Ed Young.
          "What role should the state play in helping local governments deal
with a mushrooming situation like this involving a major international
corporation, the Tennessee Valley Authority, some seven or eight
municipalities, several counties, a couple of development districts,
at least a dozen state departments and agencies, and numerous other
entities such as school and utility districts?" Young asks. Recruiting
success is just the first step in a process-not the final one."
          "There were a number of task forces the governor appointed in the
Spring Hill situation. They had one on transportation, one on water
and sewer, but there was not the overall coordination of these
functions. Only the governor can provide that," said Young. "State
officials must begin to develop an institutionalized memory and
expertise regarding growth management so that the right things are
done by the right people at the right time and the mistakes of the
past are avoided."
          
            Making Modern Mythology
          
          The Saturn myth is far more important than the Saturn reality to
all concerned. This is why, what in reality is one more branch plant
locating in the rural South, has captured the national imagination.
          To the company, the Saturn myth represents a 

resurgence in
thirty-eight states of the time-worn notion that "what's good for GM
is good for the country." GM has found that even corporate giants can
be given the aid and comfort Americans usually reserve for underdogs
in the nationalistic crusade to beat the foreign competition (some of
which is owned by GM).
          The legendary dimensions of Saturn have built political careers and
justified raids on public treasuries from the county's to the
nation's. Even in the latest tax "reform" bill, the deficit-ridden
Congress showed its support by writing in a special $60 million
tax-break specifically for Saturn.
          For the union and the industry the Saturn myth has come to
symbolize the "pattern for the Twenty-first Century industrial
operation." No matter that eighty percent of it is already in
practice. The union is willing to forego hard-fought contract elements
like seniority and grievance systems for a chance to be a partner in
this undertaking of mythic proportions.
          Saturn's shiny, state-of-the-art features mesh with the public's
desire to believe in reindustrialization--that the glories of Henry
Ford's revolution can come back in a high-tech form.
          For Tennessee and Maury County Saturn's myth is that the industrial
recruitment lottery can be won. There is now hope that young people
will not have to leave their rural homes to find jobs. There is the
illusion that our local and state officials are in charge even as they
carry out decisions made in distant corporate boardrooms.
          Despite the tremendous odds against them, communities across
America have gone into a period of self-flagellation and blame that GM
did not choose them. Most have learned nothing from the massive
expenditures of time and money. They have fallen back on the losers
dictim: "Try harder next time."
          The desperate desire to win justifies all public actions on the
basis of what they will do for industrial recruitment. In the wake of
the Saturn success, the governor's State of the State speech instilled
fear in the legislature that, if they don't pass his three billion
dollar roads program--"jobs corridors"--they would lose the Saturn
suppliers to one of the eleven other states within two hundred-fifty
miles of the new plant site. Similarly, better schools, higher sales
taxes, and a myriad of other unrelated governmental items are
justified to Americans by industrial recruitment.
          Why are Americans so vulnerable to such mythology? There simply are
not enough jobs to go around. Saturn has proven that states, and even
unions, are willing to do most anything for jobs. A relative few is
all Saturn will really provide. While the optimistic twenty thousand
eventual plant and related jobs sounds impressive, Governor Alexander
in more candid moments indicates that two hundred thousand jobs, or
ten percent of the state's workforce, are lost annually to plant
closings, bankruptcies and shutdowns. Saturn's total job impact-ten
percent of what is lost annually in one state-is thus miniscule.
          Few will bother to look beyond the comforting myths at the reality
when industrial recruitment succeeds. Maury County now is a living
example-and the real effects will not be known for years.
          What is known is that the three reasons for industrial
recruitment--jobs for locals, a better tax 

base, and community
improvement and an era of progress for those who reside there - have
not materialized. Many long-term residents have little hope that they
ever will.
          "Tomorrow's Jobs, Yesterday's Values" is the new Tennessee state
slogan. At eighty percent of the industry standard pay, Saturn will
surely bring yesterday's wages. A tax rate less than a third of normal
promises a reprise of yesteryear's company town scenario. Which of
yesterday's values are being preserved?
          Saturn is preserving yesterday's elements that corporations
value--a docile, concession-prone workforce located in a community
already nervous by every rumor that its corporate benefactor may leave
or is having financial woes.
          In self-appreciation festivals in each of Tennessee's ninety-five
counties, citizens are gathering to learn about and celebrate their
past as part of Homecoming 1986. Despite the attempted parallels
between the early pioneers and those charting the frontiers of Saturn,
there is a real awareness that something is being forgotten, something
irretrievably lost in Tennessee.
          What about the values of self reliance, of community-building. of
democratic local decision-making, of charting one's own economic
destiny? Tennesseans may remember that their foreparents came here to
escape their economic dependence on the Saturns of yesteryear.
          Amidst the booths demonstrating barnraisings, furnituremaking,
spinning, and even moonshining, Tennesseans may get in touch with the
real values needed to put all our unemployed citizens and resources
back to work. While this may at first seem naive, economists say the
majority of new jobs are being produced by small businesses, not by
large corporations. Tennessee's Economic and Community Development
Department, despite its almost exclusive emphasis on industrial
recruitment, documents that over a five-year period almost seventy
percent of the state's new manufacturing jobs were from Tennessee
firms expanding or starting up.
          As the 999 sites which didn't get Saturn ponder Maury County's
situation, maybe they should be grateful. If they can wean themselves
from the Saturn myth, they have a chance to proactively develop their
economy rather than reactively awaiting the next announcement from a
far-off corporate boardroom.
          The states, counties, and cities have shown they are willing to
subsidize every step of a company's business -build the roads, provide
all the social and physical services, do the planning and growth
management, subsidize the utilities, provide job training, waive the
taxes, own the factory and land, and sometimes pay the initial wages -
taking all the risks. It's time public entities use these resources to
support locally-generated forms of economic development which will
hire local people, complement the ways of life of current residents,
and build a stable local tax base and economy.
          
            Carter Garber is the founder of Southern Neighborhoods
Network, a regional organization providing training and assistance to
community economic development groups. Verna Fausey is editor of the
regional bimonthly Southern Neighborhoods, and the
founder of Public Interest Research. Garber and Fausey co-edit the
Community Economic Reporter, a bimonthly o' economic
issues in Tennessee. The authors wish to thank Paul Elwood, a member
of their editorial board, who assisted with interviewing, research,
and editing. Research funding was provided by National Rural Coalition
as well as SNN's Economic Development Policy Project.
          
        
      
    
  
