
          Behind the Numbers on Black Crime
          By Barak, GreggGregg Barak
          Vol. 8, No. 6, 1986, pp. 8-9
          
          According to FBI figures for 1985, the four largest cities in
Alabama--Birmingham, Mobile, Huntsville, and Montgomery--all
registered increases in their crime rates that exceeded the national
average of four percent. An overall increase in the crime rate of ten
percent in Montgomery was the largest increase, more than doubling the
national average.
          Montgomery's Mayor and the Chairman of the Alabama Republican
Party, Emory Folmar, equated the increase in crime with the persistent
problem of black-on-black crime. Referring to the annual FBI report or
crime index totals, Folmar said, "if you look behind the numbers,
you'll see the major problem is still black-on-black crime." The
implications of his statement, heard not only in the South but in the
North, East, and West as well, is that: if blacks would only stop
murdering and raping each other then the problem of crime, for the
most part, would go away.
          The problem with Folmar's analysis and that of so many other
politicians and media commentators alike, including the law-and-order
right, the neoconservative centrists, some of the more liberal
democratic left, and far too many members of the black middle class,
is that this analysis never actually looks either behind the official
numbers of crime or behind the incidences of black-on-black
crime. There are at least three related problems that arise out of
these oversights.
          First, everyone who takes these kinds of official explanations of
crime seriously, fails to comprehend other dangers in the South and
throughout the U.S. which pose far greater harm and threat to the vast
majority of Americans, black or white. Second, these types of "blame
the victim" analyses of crime tend to mystify black-on-black crime by
focusing almost exclusively on the "symptoms" rather than on the
"roots" of the problem. Third, by misdirecting our attention these
explanations support the call for the expansion of public policy
practices which have already increased the political and legal
repression aimed not only directly at the victims and perpetrators of
black-on-black crime, but also indirectly at the rest of the so-called
law-abiding society through a reduction in all of our individual,
constitutional, and civil rights. In a nutshell, these explanations of
crime are dangerous precisely because they feed ammunition to those
strategies of "crime control" which serve to exacerbate rather than to
ameliorate the problem, inside and outside of the black community.
          Crime, black-on-black or white-on-white, is not simply a question
of individual "free-will" nor is it a question of racial and cultural
"determinism." Making sense out of all forms of
"crime," including those defined as against the law as well as those
protected by the law, requires that we also examine the political and
economic arrangements of a given neighborhood, community, state,
region of the country, etc. All of these factors and others are
important in sorting out the "roots" of crime, and all must be
addressed if we are seriously interested in turning-the-tide against
crime, whether we are talking about "street" crime or "suite" crime,
whether we are talking about child neglect or wife abuse,
environmental pollution or drug abuse.
          Much of the distortion or mystification about crime has to do with
the way criminals and crimefighters are portrayed in the news and on
TV shows alike. AB the Washington Post has informed us, for example,
"TV crimes are almost twelve times as likely to be violent as crimes
committed in the real world." Even when the media and various
politicos are not focusing attention on black-on-black,
brown-on-brown, or poor-on-poor crime, they are still misrepresenting
the problem. The current preoccupation with drugs focuses almost
entirely upon illicit cocaine and marijuana rather than licit alcohol
and tobacco.
          Sometimes, however, even the middle class and the affluent are
depicted as engaging in ordinary, everyday criminal activity. But here
the media, especially TV, once again misleads us by erroneously
suggesting that these crimes take place in the streets rather than,
more accurately, in the American workplaces and in the executive
suites. This wrong impression sustains a false consensus that
represents the dangers of crime as stemming from the relatively
powerless rather than the relatively powerful.
          As a consequence of these projections, blacks and whites alike are
falling victim to the myth that black-on-black street crime represents
the single most dangerous threat to the survival and well-being of the
black community. In other words, to discuss black-on-black homicide
without discussing homicide or crime in general, is to provide a
partial picture of the crime story at best, and at worst, it is to be
guilty of what Rev. [Joseph] Lowery of the SCLC has called "another
form of racism." By placing the statistics of black-on-black homicide
in particular and of murder in general into a larger framework than
the one provided by the FBI or the major networks, we are able to
understand how the dangers of violent crime are distorted by
emphasizing the killings in the street, especially those among the
black underclass. After all, are there not other forms of external
victimization to blacks, involving homicides and other assaultive acts
short of death, that pose equal or more serious threats to the
survival and unity of the black community?
          We could discuss, for example, police homicides of civilians where
blacks constitute forty-five percent of the 

deaths even though they
represent about twelve percent , of the population. The Police
Foundation in Washington, D.C., informs us that more than one-third of
the killings of blacks and whites by the police have been unrelated to
any type of crime whatsoever. AB for the state of affairs here in the
South, Bernard D. Headley, formerly a Research Associate and Principal
Investigator at Atlanta University's Criminal Justice Institute, has
recently written that "specific incidents of police homicide involving
blacks as victims can be recalled ad
infinitum."
          We could also cite victimization at the workplace or economic
victimization in general to further dispel the myth of black-on-black
crime or of poor-on-poor crime as the most disturbing threats to
working class communities, black or white. AB Jeffrey Reiman's
well-documented book, The Rich Get Richer and the Poor Get
Prison (1984) reveals: workplace injuries cause some 14,200
deaths annually, and some 100,000 people die each year of diseases
that can be traced to coal tar, dust, asbestos, and other
substances. Almost all of these deaths are preventable by safety
devices and/or by the enforcement of existing and non-existing laws
designed to protect workers' hearth. In the South where unions are
weak or non-existent and where "right to work laws" prevail, it is a
safe bet that we receive our disproportionate share of workplace
victimization. The point, in any event, is that street crime may take
a life every twenty-three minutes, but a death resulting from a
preventable industrial cause occurs every four minutes.
          With respect to economic victimization, we could argue as Headley
has done "that the daily rip-offs that black and other low-income
groups experience at the hands of ghetto merchants represent an even
greater economic and material threat than do 'street' property
crimes." Whether we are referring to bait-advertising of goods that
are sold out, refusals to return deposits, misrepresentative sales
contracts or coercive pressures on buyers, these types of market
relations and others like them as David Caplowitz has argued in his
book The Poor Pay More, occur with the full connivance
of major banks and other lending institutions.
          These larger political and economic arrangements cannot be severed
from street and suite crime; market relations are responsible, in
part, for the alarming rates of black-on-black crime. Most people,
unfortunately, prefer the simplistic analyses of crime that, on the
one hand, ignore altogether the ever-present dangers of occupational
and corporate "crimes," and on the other hand, implicity or explicitly
argue for the class-based and racist explanations that attribute crime
to some inherent difference between poor people, especially poor black
people, and the rest of us. Rather than seeing the South's higher
crime rate as reflected in her higher rates of functional illiteracy,
teenage pregnancy, and impoverishment, or in her lower expenditures
per capita on education, health care, and other essential services, it
is still politically preferable, at least in Alabama, to point fingers
at the individual offenders rather than at the institutional
arrangements of the old and new South alike, I and at the same time,
to call for stricter forms of punishment where severity is already the
name of the game.
          Contrary to the wisdom of some of our leaders in the South and
elsewhere, the problem of crime cannot be reduced to the problem of
black-on-black crime nor will it be resolved by the get-tough
strategies of the law-and-order right. Such policies, in vogue for
more than a decade, have already proven themselves inept in the "war
on crime," only as of yet nobody has had the political courage to
officially declare them bankrupt. In the final analysis, as long as
people in the South and elsewhere refuse to view crime and punishment
in its totality, black-on-black crime in particular and poor-on-poor
crime in general will continue to serve as very convenient scapegoats
for the many problems that confront us here and across the country. So
long as we remain locked into a mind-set that sees our collective
well-being as threatened by isolated individuals and not by organized
political, economic, and social relations, then all forms of crime and
punishment as we have come to know them, will continue to eat away at
the very foundations of this great society of ours.
          
            Gregg Barak is Chairman of the Department of Criminal
Justice at Alabama State University, Montgomery, and is the author of
In Defense of Whom? A Critique of Criminal Justice
Reform (Cincinnatti: Anderson, 1980). This article is adapted
from a speech delivered before the Alabama New South Coalition, a
black political organization, in Birmingham in October
1986.
          
        