
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 8, Number 6,
	       1986
        
          Behind the Numbers on Black Crime
          By Barak, GreggGregg Barak
          Vol. 8, No. 6, 1986, pp. 8-9
          
          According to FBI figures for 1985, the four largest cities in
Alabama--Birmingham, Mobile, Huntsville, and Montgomery--all
registered increases in their crime rates that exceeded the national
average of four percent. An overall increase in the crime rate of ten
percent in Montgomery was the largest increase, more than doubling the
national average.
          Montgomery's Mayor and the Chairman of the Alabama Republican
Party, Emory Folmar, equated the increase in crime with the persistent
problem of black-on-black crime. Referring to the annual FBI report or
crime index totals, Folmar said, "if you look behind the numbers,
you'll see the major problem is still black-on-black crime." The
implications of his statement, heard not only in the South but in the
North, East, and West as well, is that: if blacks would only stop
murdering and raping each other then the problem of crime, for the
most part, would go away.
          The problem with Folmar's analysis and that of so many other
politicians and media commentators alike, including the law-and-order
right, the neoconservative centrists, some of the more liberal
democratic left, and far too many members of the black middle class,
is that this analysis never actually looks either behind the official
numbers of crime or behind the incidences of black-on-black
crime. There are at least three related problems that arise out of
these oversights.
          First, everyone who takes these kinds of official explanations of
crime seriously, fails to comprehend other dangers in the South and
throughout the U.S. which pose far greater harm and threat to the vast
majority of Americans, black or white. Second, these types of "blame
the victim" analyses of crime tend to mystify black-on-black crime by
focusing almost exclusively on the "symptoms" rather than on the
"roots" of the problem. Third, by misdirecting our attention these
explanations support the call for the expansion of public policy
practices which have already increased the political and legal
repression aimed not only directly at the victims and perpetrators of
black-on-black crime, but also indirectly at the rest of the so-called
law-abiding society through a reduction in all of our individual,
constitutional, and civil rights. In a nutshell, these explanations of
crime are dangerous precisely because they feed ammunition to those
strategies of "crime control" which serve to exacerbate rather than to
ameliorate the problem, inside and outside of the black community.
          Crime, black-on-black or white-on-white, is not simply a question
of individual "free-will" nor is it a question of racial and cultural
"determinism." Making sense out of all forms of
"crime," including those defined as against the law as well as those
protected by the law, requires that we also examine the political and
economic arrangements of a given neighborhood, community, state,
region of the country, etc. All of these factors and others are
important in sorting out the "roots" of crime, and all must be
addressed if we are seriously interested in turning-the-tide against
crime, whether we are talking about "street" crime or "suite" crime,
whether we are talking about child neglect or wife abuse,
environmental pollution or drug abuse.
          Much of the distortion or mystification about crime has to do with
the way criminals and crimefighters are portrayed in the news and on
TV shows alike. AB the Washington Post has informed us, for example,
"TV crimes are almost twelve times as likely to be violent as crimes
committed in the real world." Even when the media and various
politicos are not focusing attention on black-on-black,
brown-on-brown, or poor-on-poor crime, they are still misrepresenting
the problem. The current preoccupation with drugs focuses almost
entirely upon illicit cocaine and marijuana rather than licit alcohol
and tobacco.
          Sometimes, however, even the middle class and the affluent are
depicted as engaging in ordinary, everyday criminal activity. But here
the media, especially TV, once again misleads us by erroneously
suggesting that these crimes take place in the streets rather than,
more accurately, in the American workplaces and in the executive
suites. This wrong impression sustains a false consensus that
represents the dangers of crime as stemming from the relatively
powerless rather than the relatively powerful.
          As a consequence of these projections, blacks and whites alike are
falling victim to the myth that black-on-black street crime represents
the single most dangerous threat to the survival and well-being of the
black community. In other words, to discuss black-on-black homicide
without discussing homicide or crime in general, is to provide a
partial picture of the crime story at best, and at worst, it is to be
guilty of what Rev. [Joseph] Lowery of the SCLC has called "another
form of racism." By placing the statistics of black-on-black homicide
in particular and of murder in general into a larger framework than
the one provided by the FBI or the major networks, we are able to
understand how the dangers of violent crime are distorted by
emphasizing the killings in the street, especially those among the
black underclass. After all, are there not other forms of external
victimization to blacks, involving homicides and other assaultive acts
short of death, that pose equal or more serious threats to the
survival and unity of the black community?
          We could discuss, for example, police homicides of civilians where
blacks constitute forty-five percent of the 

deaths even though they
represent about twelve percent , of the population. The Police
Foundation in Washington, D.C., informs us that more than one-third of
the killings of blacks and whites by the police have been unrelated to
any type of crime whatsoever. AB for the state of affairs here in the
South, Bernard D. Headley, formerly a Research Associate and Principal
Investigator at Atlanta University's Criminal Justice Institute, has
recently written that "specific incidents of police homicide involving
blacks as victims can be recalled ad
infinitum."
          We could also cite victimization at the workplace or economic
victimization in general to further dispel the myth of black-on-black
crime or of poor-on-poor crime as the most disturbing threats to
working class communities, black or white. AB Jeffrey Reiman's
well-documented book, The Rich Get Richer and the Poor Get
Prison (1984) reveals: workplace injuries cause some 14,200
deaths annually, and some 100,000 people die each year of diseases
that can be traced to coal tar, dust, asbestos, and other
substances. Almost all of these deaths are preventable by safety
devices and/or by the enforcement of existing and non-existing laws
designed to protect workers' hearth. In the South where unions are
weak or non-existent and where "right to work laws" prevail, it is a
safe bet that we receive our disproportionate share of workplace
victimization. The point, in any event, is that street crime may take
a life every twenty-three minutes, but a death resulting from a
preventable industrial cause occurs every four minutes.
          With respect to economic victimization, we could argue as Headley
has done "that the daily rip-offs that black and other low-income
groups experience at the hands of ghetto merchants represent an even
greater economic and material threat than do 'street' property
crimes." Whether we are referring to bait-advertising of goods that
are sold out, refusals to return deposits, misrepresentative sales
contracts or coercive pressures on buyers, these types of market
relations and others like them as David Caplowitz has argued in his
book The Poor Pay More, occur with the full connivance
of major banks and other lending institutions.
          These larger political and economic arrangements cannot be severed
from street and suite crime; market relations are responsible, in
part, for the alarming rates of black-on-black crime. Most people,
unfortunately, prefer the simplistic analyses of crime that, on the
one hand, ignore altogether the ever-present dangers of occupational
and corporate "crimes," and on the other hand, implicity or explicitly
argue for the class-based and racist explanations that attribute crime
to some inherent difference between poor people, especially poor black
people, and the rest of us. Rather than seeing the South's higher
crime rate as reflected in her higher rates of functional illiteracy,
teenage pregnancy, and impoverishment, or in her lower expenditures
per capita on education, health care, and other essential services, it
is still politically preferable, at least in Alabama, to point fingers
at the individual offenders rather than at the institutional
arrangements of the old and new South alike, I and at the same time,
to call for stricter forms of punishment where severity is already the
name of the game.
          Contrary to the wisdom of some of our leaders in the South and
elsewhere, the problem of crime cannot be reduced to the problem of
black-on-black crime nor will it be resolved by the get-tough
strategies of the law-and-order right. Such policies, in vogue for
more than a decade, have already proven themselves inept in the "war
on crime," only as of yet nobody has had the political courage to
officially declare them bankrupt. In the final analysis, as long as
people in the South and elsewhere refuse to view crime and punishment
in its totality, black-on-black crime in particular and poor-on-poor
crime in general will continue to serve as very convenient scapegoats
for the many problems that confront us here and across the country. So
long as we remain locked into a mind-set that sees our collective
well-being as threatened by isolated individuals and not by organized
political, economic, and social relations, then all forms of crime and
punishment as we have come to know them, will continue to eat away at
the very foundations of this great society of ours.
          
            Gregg Barak is Chairman of the Department of Criminal
Justice at Alabama State University, Montgomery, and is the author of
In Defense of Whom? A Critique of Criminal Justice
Reform (Cincinnatti: Anderson, 1980). This article is adapted
from a speech delivered before the Alabama New South Coalition, a
black political organization, in Birmingham in October
1986.
          
        
        
          Row Upon Row: Sea Grass Baskets of the South Carolina
Lowcountry
          By Rosengarten, DaleDale Rosengarten
          Vol. 8, No. 6, 1986, pp. 17-24
          
          Coiled sea grass basketry flourishes today in the tidewater region
of South Carolina. In all seasons, or any given day, travellers to
Charleston can find dozens of basketmakers from the surburban
community of Mt. Pleasant, showing their wares on street corners in
the city and on crudely constructed stands along Highway 17. On Market
Street and the corners of Meeting and Broad, arrays of baskets in a
multitude of shapes and sizes grace the edge of the sidewalks, while
their makers sit behind them, talking and sewing new forms. North of
the historic city, across the Cooper River Bridge, as you drive past
the shopping malls and subdivisions that have sprouted in
Mt. Pleasant, you might not know which state you were in, if it
weren't for the palmetto trees and the basket stands.
          Contemporary Mt. Pleasant baskets descend from an ancient African
folk art that was introduced in Carolina late in the seventeenth
century. The African peoples who were brought to America to cultivate
rice and other crops carried with them skills they had used in
everyday life. Pottery and woodcarving, boatbuilding and netmaking, as
well as speech patterns, folk songs, and musical instruments, all
survived the Atlantic passage and resurfaced in new plantation
communities. In the lowcountry, where blacks outnumbered whites as
early as 1708, coiled basketry was one of several viable African
"carryovers."
          The early history of Afro-American basketry parallels the rise of
rice cultivation on the southeastern coast. Even before Carolina was
colonized, rice had been proposed as a staple for export. Around 1690,
after two decades of experimentation, settlers began producing a
"plausible yield," and by the mid-eighteenth century, rice was the
principal crop of what was to become the wealthiest group of planters
in America. From the start, lowcountry plantations proved to be
friendly environments for the production of Afro-American sea grass
baskets. Indeed, rice could not have been processed without a
particular coiled basket, called the "fanner." The fanner was a wide
winnowing tray used to "fan" rice-that is, to throw the threshed and
pounded grain into the air or drop it from a basket held at a height
into another basket, allowing the wind to blow 

away the chaff.
          Utilizing the natural materials of their new environment,
Afro-Americans made fanners and other large agricultural baskets out
of black rush, an abundant marsh grass, bound with thin splits of
white oak or strips from the stem of the saw palmetto. As rice culture
spread, so did the manufacture of these coiled work baskets. After the
Civil War, men and some women continued to sew rush baskets for use on
those plantations which weathered Reconstruction and on small, family
farms which were carved out of the old estates.
          The anonymous nature of early Afro-American basketry belies its
range and importance. At one time the craft must have been practiced
along the whole length of the coastal rice kingdom, from its
southernmost outposts on the St. Johns River, in Florida, to its
northern reaches in Lower Cape Fear, North Carolina. Nine-tenths of
the ante-bellum rice crop was grown in South Carolina and Georgia,
however, and it is here that sea grass baskets have left a historical
record. It is easy to see why coiled basketry persisted along
rice-growing tidal rivers, yet it also took firm hold on those Sea
Islands where commercial quantities of rice were not produced. There,
rice was cultivated as a provision crop, for local consumption; slaves
from rice-growing regions of Africa were said to '1anguish without
their favorite food." In some cases, the dietary preferences of
Afro-Americans apparently were as important as the profit motives of
their masters in determing whether coiled baskets would be made. Well
into the 1 900s, black farmers throughout the lowcountry planted small
crops of "upland" or "dry" rice and processed the grain in the African
way, using flails, mortars and pestles, and fanner baskets.
          Despite the coiled basket's steady use as an implement of American
rice culture and as a common household object, it is difficult to
assemble a precise history of the craft. Because grasses and wood
fibers are highly perishable and wear out in normal use, and because
they lack the intrinsic value of porcelain or silver, discarded
baskets in early times were assigned to the woodpile or left to rot in
the shed.
          A revolution in materials, forms, and functions occured at the turn
of the twentieth century in Mt. Pleasant, where a community of landed
black families began mass-producing and l selling "show baskets" made
of sweetgrass. Sweetgrass baskets had been sewn before, but never on a
scale to rival rush handwork. During the agricultural depressions
following the hurricanes of the 1890s and early 1900s and the arrival
of the boll weevil in 1918, show baskets provided a source of
cash. Mt. Pleasant basketmakers and Charleston retailers saw alike
possibilities in a new tourist market. Sweetgrass baskets, sewn with
strips of palmetto leaf and adorned with longleaf pine needles, became
a local specialty, and women came to dominate the craft.
          While Mt. Pleasant sewers turned their talents to sweetgrass, rush
"work baskets" continued to be made in isolated communities along the
coast of South Carolina and Georgia. At the Penn School, on St. Helena
Island, "Native Island Basketry" remained an important part of the
"industrial" curriculum for fifty years. But as agriculture declined
and resort development began to alter the face of the lowcountry, rush
baskets went out of use and almost disappeared. In recent years,
however, sweetgrass has become increasingly scarce around Charleston,
and Mt. Pleasant sewers are using rush again -not as the sole material
in their baskets, but as an element incorporated with sweetgrass to
add strength and color to large sculptural forms.
          Why has coiled basketry persisted in Mt. Pleasant? The answer has
to do with the strategic location of the community and the sewers'
responsiveness to a growing market. Mt. Pleasant began making show
baskets, made for sale to tourists and Charleston retailers, differed
from traditional agricultural or household work baskets in several
ways: in the use of palm leaf instead of palmetto butt; in the
proliferation of styles and decorative motifs; and in the
basketmakers' concerted appeal to buyers. Adapting traditional forms
and inventing new ones, sewers developed a large repertory of
functional shapes--bread trays, table mats, flower and fruit baskets,
shopping bags, hat box baskets, missionary bags, clothes hampers,
sewing, crochet, and knitting baskets, spittoon baskets, wall pockets,
picnic baskets, thermos bottles or wine coolers, ring trays, cord
baskets, cake baskets, wastepaper baskets, and platters in the shape
of small fanners.
          The sewers' first wholesale marketing venture was inaugurated in
1916 by prominent Charleston merchant and civic leader named Clarence
W. Legerton, whom basketmakers remember today as "Mr. Lester" or
"Mr. Leviston." Through Sam Coakley, acting as an agent for
basketmakers in his community, Legerton commissioned quantities of
baskets and sold them wholesale through his Sea Grass Basket Company
and retail in his bookstore on King Street.
          Legerton continued to buy baskets directly from Mt. Pleasant sewers
through the 1940s. His second son, Clifford, recalls that his father
"tried his level best to get them to organize to mass produce." No
doubt, Clarence Legerton's steady patronage was a tremendous impetus
to the basketmakers in and around Hamlin Beach, and may account for
the settlement's heavy concentration of sewers. "Manigault Corner," at
one end of Hamlin Beach, consists of a dozen households including
about sixty people. Basketmaking is an habitual activity in most homes
there, and as the girls mature many of them keep up the work. Mary
Jane Manigault, an elder of the community and a daughter of Sam
Coakley, Legerton's agent, is widely acclaimed as a master
basketmaker. In 1984 she won a National Heritage Fellowship, a
prestigious award given by the National Endowment for the Arts to draw
attention to a lifetime of excellence in "a local tradition that has
reached a really high level of artistry."
          Within fifteen years after Legerton began trading in Mt. Pleasant
baskets, sewers developed a strategy for selling directly to
tourists. The paving of Highway 17 and the construction of the Cooper
River Bridge made the coastal route which passes through Mt. Pleasant
a major north-south artery. Around 1930, basketsewers began displaying
their wares on the road. Mrs. Betsy 

Johnson is reputed to have had the
first "basket house" on the highway in front of her home. She and her
daughter, Edna Rouse, would hang a few baskets from wooden "arms"
nailed to a shed, to advertise that they had baskets for sale. To
increase their stock, they would buy baskets from other sewers in the
community. By the 1940s, Mrs. Johnson was commissioning work from
numbers of people to fill "big orders," and sending "great boxes" of
baskets away.
          Over the years, basketmakers have had many local patrons, but the
chief clientele at basket stands always has been tourists. In 1949,
the News cad Courier's Jack Leland described "gleaming...automobiles,
driven by persons from the large modern centers of this country's
industrial areas" who stop to look "at an importation of the artistry
of African workers."
          In the 1980s, tourist traffic flows past the basket stands twelve
months a year. Today's structures look a lot like the oldtime stands
and shed. Bare of baskets, they appear flimsy and make-shift, but in
use they hold lively exhibitions of original art. Basketmakers may sit
beside their stands, conversing with their neighbors, or sew in the
privacy of their vans or station wagons, some of which are equipped
with kerosene heaters, small televisions, and picnic coolers.
          Despite the modern conveniences, selling on the highway entails
risks and discomforts. High noise levels can make talking, even
thinking, difficult. The danger of automobile accidents is real, with
so many busy feeder roads emptying onto the highway and
ever-increasing commercial and residential traffic. Air pollution
irritates the people who stay with their stands all day and injures
the baskets as well. Exposure to sun, rain, and dirt makes many
baskets "go bad" before they can be sold. Besides these possible
misfortunes, sewers who don't own houses on the highway face the
insecurity of not knowing whether they will be allowed to keep their
stands where they are, or be forced to move them to make way for new
condominiums or supermarkets.
          An activity that under slavery gave men a measure of independence,
under freedom has provided economic opportunities and avenues of
expression for women. The negative side of its persistence is that it
reflects a reality of dismal alternatives. Until very recently, the
only jobs available to black women in the lowcountry were poorly paid
and menial, such as working in the fields or cleaning homes, hotels,
hospitals, and restaurants. The women call these jobs "hard work,"
"working out," and "working for nothing." Older basketmakers learned
to sew when they were girls as an extension of farm life, in a
tradition of independent producers and entrepreneurs. Some continue to
make baskets because they must; besides being the best way they know
to supplement their income, basketmaking has become so much a part of
their lives they couldn't give it up. Maggie Polite Manigault, for
example, explained to 

a granddaughter that she makes baskets "because
she has been doing it for so long that she would feel lost if she
didn't sew at least once a day." Many younger women have returned to
basketmaking after searching in vain for jobs that "pay something."
Some have taken up the craft part-time while they are at home caring
for small children or aging parents. Still others, drawn by the
desirable qualities of the work, have chosen basketmaking over
"outside" jobs. Basketmakers enjoy an autonomy which is rare in
today's working world; they can set their own hours for weaving and
selling, exercise their own judgment and intelligence, and work with
family members in a collective enterprise.
          Most sewers regard basketmaking first as a source of income, and
their moods rise and fall with daily or seasonal fluctuations in
sales. Some basketmakers--though generally not the youngest ones--find the work therapeutic. "Even though basketweaving is time
consuming," says Mae Bell Coakley, "I enjoy it because it's relaxing,
kind of therapy." Making things with your hands keeps your head
together," Mary Jane Manigault reflects. "When you sew baskets, you
just concentrate on that one thing. You have to have long
patience. You can't be a nervous somebody and make baskets. You have
to sit in one place and really get into what you are doing. You can't
have your mind running on all kind of different things. You have to
have a settled mind."
          Not the least of the satisfactions of making baskets is the chance
to be paid and appreciated for doing your work well. While sewers
unanimously complain that people don't want to pay what a basket is
worth, basketmakers as a group have begun to enjoy a new status. "I
think the biggest change," Jannie Gourdine told a Charleston
journalist in 1980, "is that people look at us as artists now instead
of just basket weavers."
          Coiled basketry has spread near and far as Mt. Pleasant women have
married men from other areas or moved away pursuing jobs. Some sewers
who have settled in nearby communities such as Awendaw,
McClellanville, Charleston, Johns Island, and Goose Creek, have
enlisted the help of their husbands and in-laws in gathering
materials, making baskets, and marketing. Other basketmakers have
moved to more distant South Carolina towns, such as Rock Hill, Sumter,
and Frogmore, and as far away as New York, Baltimore, Cartersville,
Gal, and Jacksonville, Fla. These emigrant sewers maintain close ties
with home. Most acquire their materials and sell their baskets through
relatives in Mt. Pleasant, and some spend summers there too.
          Basketmaking has expanded from settlement to settlement within
Mt. Pleasant, as Mt. Pleasant itself has grown. In 1949, thirty-one
stands were counted along a two-mile stretch of Highway 17, in the
vicinity of Christ Church. Today twice that many occupy sites on both
sides of the road all the way from "Four-Mile" to "Ten-Mile."
(Neighbothoods in Mt. Pleasent are named for distance from Charleston)
The number of highway shops peaked in the mid-'60s, when over seventy
were reported. At this point sellers seem to have gotten ahead of
their market. Sewers complained of too many stands, lower prices than
five years before, and intense competition for the tourist trade.
          Few people could depend on basketmaking for a living. Most used it
to supplement income earned doing housework or farm labor. "Some sell
baskets in the winter and then work on a farm picking tomatoes and
cucumbers in the summer," a basketmaker told a reporter for the State
in 1966. "Some days, don't make nothing," declared Victoria Milton, a
sewer for over thirty years. "Some weeks, don't make nothing or make
no more than four or five dollars." Apparently, basketmakers were
earning about the same in the 1960s as they did in 1952, when the
Charleston Evening Post estimated an average daily
income at two dollars. Medium-sized baskets were selling for two to
three dollars, larger wastepaper baskets and picnic hampers for six or
seven. Prices were slow to rise. In 1971, ten dollars was a top price
for carry-alls, serving trays, and handbags. "Just enough profit to
keep body and soul together," sighed one long-time sewer. "The
tourists won't pay any more than that because most of them figure
that's all it's worth."
          Depressed prices were just one of the chronic problems afflicting
the trade. By the 1970s, the number of basket stands had dropped to
about fifty, with some 300 women engaged in the craft. Fewer stands
did not mean a contracting market; instead, basketsewers were leaving
the highway to try promising new outlets--craft shows, shops,
galleries, commission work and, especially, the Charleston
market. Nevertheless, observers felt that lowcountry basketry was in
grave danger.

          "Rattlesnakes, a shortage of grass, and a lack of apprentices,"
reporter Tom Hamrick predicted, "will some day soon bring down the
curtain on the centuries-old business of hand-woven basket making in
Charleston County."
          Snakes always have been seen as a danger by the people who gather
materials. To go into the "swamps" to pull sweetgrass, Mary Jane
Bennett explained, "I used to put turpentine on my shoe. Snakes run
from turpentine, and I just had to hope they didn't run toward me
instead of away." New and more serious threats to the craft were the
scarcity of sweetgrass and the disinterest of the younger
generation. As Mt. Pleasant developed into a sprawling suburb, local
sources of sweetgrass were paved over or rendered off limits. Tropical
storms and hurricanes which have struck the Carolina coast over the
past few decades also have taken a toll on sweetgrass. Gatherers began
travelling to Johns Island and Kiawah, but soon sweetgrass habitats in
these places, too, were decimated by housing and resort
development.
          "I was fortunate enough to go on Seabrook Island before they
started building up," Mary Scott relates, "and they had the
beautifulest grass over there. Nobody knew about it till the people
start surveying to get the golf course straight...and then our people
saw the grass and we had a chance to get over there before the
building start. The prettiest kind of grass you want to see was over
there...and all these years those grass was there and nobody knew
about them."
          At this critical juncture, in the early 1970s, Mt. Pleasant
basketmakers again demonstrated their resourcefulness and
versatility. Running short of sweetgrass, they rediscovered rush, and
began using it to increase the strength and enhance the beauty of
their baskets. Although this "new" material has made up in part for
the dwindling supply of sweetgrass, it has not replaced it as the
basket's primary foundation material. Today, most sweetgrass comes
fiom coastal Georgia and northern Florida, gathered for the
basketmakers by men in their families or small-time entrepreneurs. The
costs of these trips are borne by the sewers, who pay as much as
twenty dollars for a bunch of grass you can just put your hands
around. Even if they are able to recoup this expense when they sell
their baskets, sewers have to plan for a major outlay of capital at
the end of each summer, when they must stockpile enough grass to last
until the gathering season begins in the spring.
          The difficulty of interesting young people in the work--the second
major threat to the craft's survival--has proved hared to overcome.
The problem is two-fold, the sedentary nature of the work makes it
unappealing to active youngsters, and its marginal economic rewards
cannot compete with the legal minimum wage. "This is a boring way to
spend all day," one basketsewer remarked, "and my children won't have
nothing to do with basketweaving." Predicting that the "business will
die off" when the current generation dies, another basketmaker 

bluntly
defined the trouble: "This is just too much monotony for the kids
today. They don't want to sit all day and half the night and weave
with their fingers and a little sawed-off spoon for a shuttle because
they can make more money doing almost anything else."
          Children under the age of ten appear eager to learn to sew and feel
privileged to participate in the work of their elders. As adolescents,
however, they become preoccupied with social life, school work,
television, and athletics, and they lose interest in the craft. "We
don't want to sit down and do this kind of stuff," eighteen year-old
Melony Manigault confides. "We want to get up and go." When pressed
some youngsters reveal a deep ambivalence about making baskets. On the
one hand, they feel coerced and impatient when they are expected to
sew. On the other hand they know the importance of the craft to their
parents and their people, and want k, see it outlast their
generation. Melony, for example, a serious girl and an heir to
generations of sewers, expects to keep making baskets, "but not as
steady as grandmama and mama." Sewing "one day out of the week," as
she does, is "not good enough if you want to sell. You got to make 'em
every day."
          Melony plans to attend college and doesn't think she will live in
the lowcountry after she graduates. By the age of thirty, women who
have stayed in Mt. Pleasant usually have settled down and started
raising families of their own. Many pick up basketmaking again as a
means of earning a few extra dollars. Those who pursue the craft
generally find compensations in the work other than money. "I just
love to do it," say Sue Middleton, who quit her job about six years
ago to sew fulltime. Considering the time it takes to make a basket
and the cost of materials, "you never get what you put in," she
says. "If you're just doing it for the money you'll never do it." You
have to like it.
          Coiled baskets appeal today to a broad and varied audience, from
souvenir hunters to collectors of folk art, from people who want a
bread basket to set on their dining table to museum curators who want
to document the craft and preserve examples in a dust-free,
climate-controlled cabinet. Prices have risen dramatically since 1971,
nearly doubling every five years. Small baskets now sell from ten to
fifteen dollars, though most sewers keep on hand a number of two and
five dollar items, such as bells, wreaths, Christmas stars, toy
baskets, and the work of children. Middle-sized baskets range from
twenty to eighty dollars, and very large baskets command prices in the
hundreds and even thousands of dollars.
          Considering the current market, sewers are more likely to spend the
time making big baskets. Rush, with its thick blades and great
rigidity, is structurally suited to large baskets, and encourages
sewers to work on a grand scale. "I really love the large one now even
more than I like the small one, " says Marie Manigault, 

"because the
large one show up prettier." Grouped together on a display table at
the edge of the highway, these big baskets catch the traveller's
eye. They sell slower than small pieces, sewers report, but eventually
they do sell.
          With their conical covers and bigbellied shapes, modern
Mt. Pleasant baskets appear more African than earlier forms. Indeed,
some sewers are influenced by exposure to African basketry, either
through books or through examples of tribal crafts brought home by
families travelling abroad. In size and color, large contemporary
baskets also bring to mind the traditional rush baskets that were used
on rice plantations and family farms during the nineteenth century.
          Mt. Pleasant basketmakers tend to be guarded about their
craft--protective of their livelihood and of a skill that sets them
apart. "As long as nobody takes our baskets away from Charleston, from
me and the black people here," Jannie Gourdine told a New York
Times reporter in 19S3 "then we'll never be
obsolete. These baskets are part of us." With the new public respect
shown for their work younger basketmakers have become less fearful
than their elders about teaching the craft to people outside their
community. Workshops in coiled basketry are offered regularly by
museums, schools, adult education programs, and community centers
throughout the lowcountry. In social profile, the people who attend
these classes resemble the white middle-class women who filled the
ranks of 

the Arts and Crafts movement at the turn of the century and
took up the art of Indian basketry as a pastime.
          Coiled basketry survived the loss of its old functions because
basketmakers found new ones and developed the aesthetic side of their
tradition. The hand production of baskets remained feasible because
sewers did not expect more than marginal income from it, and because
there were few competing opportunities. As economic prospects for
black people improve, basketmaking will become less appealing as a way
to earn an income. Yet, by enduring into the 1980s, sea grass basketry
has become subject to forces which make its immediate future
bright. Charleston's tourist traffic shows no sign of let-up, and the
flow of potential buyers soon will be expanded by the convention
trade.
          A small collectors' market underwrites the trend toward greater
recognition and higher prices. How many people the demand for baskets
as art can support is uncertain, but the impact of this new market is
likely to be greater than one would guess from the limited number of
sewers who cater to it. We can already see the tendency toward larger,
more showy baskets; the emphasis on regular stitching and elaborate
surface decoration; the rise of innovation and the eclipse of the
basket's historic provincialism and primitivism--the results, albeit
indirect, of pressures and tastes exerted by buyers looking for
expressive forms.
          As society becomes more technical and craft skills become the
province of specialists, the value of handmade objects will
increase. Mt. Pleasant basketmakers should see more income from their
craft, and those who want to may be able to spend more time
sewing. Many sewers will never be adequately paid for their time and
labor. The hidden costs in a basket are simply too great. But
regardless of market conditions, some people will continue to sew. As
tokens of loved ones and links between the generations, baskets are
meaningful to them in ways buyers cannot fathom.
          Louise White, a reflective and devoted basketsewer, explained that
while she was keeping house for a certain family she would examine a
set of sweetgrass placemats her mother had made many years before. If
she found a place that needed repair she would "carry a palm from home
in my pocketbook" and mend the break, "just to see how long Mama
basket will be there." She plans to give each of her children an
example of every type of basket she makes, hoping to provide them with
models from which to sew. "I always want them to have something to
remember in days to come," she muses. Perhaps they will be inspired to
take up where she leaves off. "It may be hard for them to see it, but
days will come whey will sew baskets....This basket here is strictly
just in the lowcountry, and if the generation don't take it up when we
gone, it's going to die away. But they will sew baskets. They will,
time will come, they will sew."
          Baskets are live eloquent forms, firmly rooted in a lineage and a
tradition. In a world of abrupt shifts and dislocations, the old
shapes and techniques have always been elements of stability. One can
sew a familiar form and transcend the insecurity of the moment. Making
a basket takes self-discipline; it gives self-possession. Even if the
basket serves someone else's purpose, the act of sewing connects the
basketmaker to a proud inheritance that cannot be diminished.
          
            Dale Rosengarten, of McClellanville, S.C., served as
guest curator for the exhibition, "Row Upon Row: Seagrass Baskets of
the South Carolina Lowcountry," presented by McKissick Museum at the
University of South Carolina, Columbia, during, the fall of
1986. Support for the exhibition and for the publication of the
catalog, from which the present essay has been formed, was provided by
the National Endowment for the Arts, Folk Arts Program and the South
Carolina Arts Commission.
          
        
        
          A Southerner in South Africa
          By Gaston, Paul M.Paul M. Gaston
          Vol. 8, No. 6, 1986, pp. 9-15
          
          Few visitors return from South Africa these days with good news or
give us much reason to be hopeful. Like those who have visited the
country, most Americans fear and expect the worst from it. We are all
a little like those northern Southwatchers of the early 1960s who
shook their heads in amazement each night, transfixed by the latest
visual evidence of some new outrageous violation of human dignity,
some new strain on conscience and credulity.
          Like them, we have good reason to believe that the worst is
happening in South Africa. A few constructive-engagement emissaries
indulge Reaganesque fantasies and dress P. W. Botha in imperial reform
raiment, but few of us are deceived. Despite government censorship,
reporting on south Africa overwhelms us with awareness of police-state
brutality, victimization of the nation's black masses, and the
obstinancy of Afrikaner nationalism.
          It is easy to submit to a sense of doom. The terrors of the
apartheid regime are so pervasive and its powers so vast and
impregnable that the Armageddon we see on the horizon seems sure to
end in a tragic victory of the forces of evil over the forces of
good. Blacks will not accept the fate the ruling whites have decreed
for them and their rejection of it, given the present odds, insures
the bloodbath against which we are daily warned.

          Many of us also believe that only pressure from the outside--from
the world that is South Africa's "North"--can change the white
intransigence and avert the calamitous bloodletting. Southerners in
particular ought to understand this kind of thinking. We know that it
took northern intervention to break the logjam of our history, once to
end slavery and later to dismantle segregation.
          Thoughts like these were among those running through my head as I
prepared to take my first trip to South Africa. I had wanted to go
there for many years, partly because friends there urged me to come to
teach my Southern history course. Perhaps, we reasoned, the study of
liberation struggles in another racist society might help South
African students understand better their own situation.
          Eventually I received an invitation to come to the University of
Cape Town to teach a course on the history of the Southern civil
rights movement. My wife, meanwhile, was invited to participate in the
work of a Cape Town group that helped communities in the black and
so-called colored townships who wished to set up educational day care
centers and helped to train teachers and administrators to staff
them.
          By the time the formal invitation arrived we had both begun to feel
that the idea was one whose time had passed. The country was in
turmoil. For months we had been seeing on television the awesome
Casspirs (military tanks) roaming the city streets and crushing black
protest in the townships.
          At the same time, letters from Cape Town friends told us much we
didn't see on television or read in the newspapers, and gave us a
vivid sense of the mounting repression and anxiety:
          * "The phone rings all the time and it is lawyers, friends with
more news. The latest is that the eighty-five who were taken yesterday
are to be placed under the emergency laws, which are immensely
wide. Cape Town was declared to be in a state of emergency
yesterday. Meetings are banned, of course."
          * "I have just returned from the fruit and vegetable market
where I have a friend whose husband was arrested at 4
a.m. yesterday. She is a lovely, energetic, sensitive and immensely
warm person. Her eyes fill with tears which she quickly brushes
away."
          * "Last week-end a friend telephoned us from her home in
Guguletu (a black township on the outskirts of Cape Town) to say that
the police were lined up outside her house, were taunting the people,
who were taunting them back... A tiny incident in a myriad of horror
and death."
          * "This has been a heavy week for me. The morning of the
emergency meant the arrest of one of our staff members, the Tuesday
morning the detention of another plus the husband of another, plus the
necessity of another to become unavailable. People have been picked up
left, right and centre. One has the sense of ruthless
determination."
          * "Our history is poised on the brink; you can almost smell
it. And what will it be?"
          What might it be, indeed! And who would make it? Those questions,
and the chance to be where history was "poised on the brink," urgently
called us to press on with our plans to visit, despite the rising tide
of repression and resistance. People whose judgment we trusted
reassured us about safety, even after a crushing new state of
emergency was declared on June 12.
          My wife and I arrived in South Africa in early July, I to stay ten
weeks, she seven. Most of our visit was in Cape Town, where we worked,
but we had a long weekend in Johannesburg and a week at a mountain
retreat in the Eastern Cape.
          Those weeks of immersion in South Africa's "history on the brink"
were moving and totally absorbing. Privileged to meet many of what in
the civil rights days we would have called "movement people," we came
back enriched by their friendship and their example. And we discovered
in them, in their struggle for a new South Africa, comradeship,
character, courage, and vision that inspired hope for the future. Far
from feeling America should be a good "North" and lead South Africa to
freedom, we came back wanting Americans to listen to the voices of the
new South Africa, struggling to be born.
          To return from South Africa optimistic, let alone with what one of
my friends cynically labels my newfound South African utopianism, is
to be out of the mainstream of reportage and judgment. But I cannot
make this response credible without some report on the 

state's
repressive power and apartheid's web of cruelties. Evils are there in
great abundance. We met them, were personally touched by them,
wrestled with them in one way or another every day we were there, even
though we were white and privileged.
          The newly arrived visitor is first of all struck by the amazing
reach of segregation. Even an unreconstructed southerner would blink
at the legislation that assigns living and working space exclusively
on the basis of racial classification and confines blacks in urban
townships, rural reserves, and single-sex workers' hostels--all
hidden away from the white world. The blacks who have built and whose
labor runs the modern, urban, industrial state are shuttled away at
the end of each day, hidden from the eyes of white people in
cement-block ghettos or hovels and shanties huddled on the
sandflats.
          On the outskirts of Jollannesburg we visited Alexandra, a
one-square mile township housing 100,000 people. I wrote in my diary
of watching a shanty being built of poles that support
corrugated tin sides and roof, about 15' x 10', will house 8 to 12
people, perhaps more. One has a sense of huge numbers of people
shoe-horned into squalid hovels. Crude outdoor privies. No houses have
plumbing, few electricity. And this is said to be "one of the better
townships."
          We were told about the political crisis in Alexandra--the struggle
of young community people to overthrow the rule of co-opted black
officials--and of a "great sense of community solidarity, much support
from comrades of clinic and community-service endeavors." But this was
not the community spirit the government approved: "army pitched tents
just outside townships," I wrote in my diary that night. A police car
took some notice of us, but drove off in another direction without
asking questions.
          One must go looking for Alexandra to see it something most whites
in Johannesburg have probably never done. It was the same everywhere
we went. Outside Cape Town, where a new township had recently been
established adjacent to a main highway, the state's bulldozers had
raised high sand dunes to block the view. No motorist need look on
those homes. One wouldn't have known there were black people on the
other side of those dunes of it hadn't been for high light poles which
we were told kept the community as bright at night as in the day
time--all for good security reasons!
          Along with segregated lives comes a peculiar immunity from
reality. Most ordinary whites we met, people uninvolved in any sort of
dissent or political activity, sooner or later brought up "the
troubles," indicating the crisis and conflict were on their minds. But
their daily lives, we felt, insulated them from the harsh world
apartheid sustained. One can live in total isolation
from all this, as most do, I wrote in my diary. Newspapers say little about the 'unrest,' as it is
called. In fact, they are muzzled so they can't. Television news is
unbelievably bland & uninformative. All 'unrest' areas are
surrounded by police or cordoned off by road blocks. Few whites see
them or have a picture of what is happening there. Life in
middle-class neighborhoods like ours goes on cheerfully: folks see
only 'cheerful' blacks who smile and say 'yes, master.'
          In Parliament one afternoon I watched a fierce debate between Helen
Suzman, of the opposition Progressive Federal Party, and the leaders
of the ruling Nationalist Party. Here I thought I might learn what the
country's leaders thought about the "unrest," get some hint of how far
the world of apartheid had shielded them from what seemed obvious
realities to us. I was lucky to see a debate at all. Parliament has
almost become an anachronism, abandoned by many serious antiapartheid
leaders. Frederik Van Syl Slabbert, one of the several inspiring
Afrikaner foes of apartheid I met, had resigned his position as leader
of the opposition party earlier in the year, despairing of
parliamentary politics as a means of bringing change
          The occasion for the debate I witnessed was the August massacre of
blacks in Soweto. There were conflicting reports over what had
happened with eyewitness accounts differing sharply from the
government version. Mrs. Suzman, a tenacious woman in her fourth
decade in Parliament as an eloquent critic of the government, had
introduced a resolution calling for the appointment of a judicial
inquiry to determine the facts. No one gave the resolution any chance
of passage but the debate promised to tell something about the myths
and assumptions the Nationalists lived by. Mrs. Suzman seemed tired
when I first met her a few days earlier. But there was fire in her
this day.

          Armed with published eyewitness accounts and her own
inspection-tour findings, she accused the government of covering up
its complicity in provoking the violence. It was not the first time,
she said, recalling earlier massacres followed by predictable
government distortions and denials of the truth. With rising emotion
she looked directly across the narrow aisle at Minister of Law and
Order Louis le Grange: "There has been a terrible spiral of death, and
I lay it at the feet, the very large feet, I must say, of the
minister."
          Government replies, and a level of abuse and heckling I found
astonishing even in this astonishing country, came from top-level
cabinet ministers. Led by the state president, some studiedly insulted
her by chatting while she spoke. Others shouted insults. The minister
of Constitutional Development said the trouble was caused by
communists and comrades, another thought Mrs. Suzman's remarks were
"scandalous," and the minister of information spoke for the rest when
he denounced her "1ack of patriotism."
          Mrs. Suzman's words were strong ones. "Shooting people in the
townships will not bring the new South Africa," she said, lamenting
what seemed to her the obvious truth that "the entire world has become
our enemy."
          No decent respect for the opinions of mankind, certainly not for
Helen Suzman, was evident in Parliament that afternoon and I returned
to the home where I was staying full of an innocent's outrage. Former
opposition party leader Slabbert was there, amused by my innocence. My
host marched me into the house, stood me in front of a floor-length
mirror and asked me what I saw. At a loss for the right answer, I was
given it: "You are looking at a man who has seen the South African
Parliament for the first time!"
          The segregated lives, the insulation from reality, and the siege
mentality of the Afrikaner ruling class were all vital parts of the
South African social order we were struggling to understand. So also
was detention, the South African term for political arrest. The new
state of emergency, declared on June 12, was nationwide and all
encompassing. The greenest new police recruit had authority to arrest
any person he suspected of being a threat to the state. Once detained,
the victim had no recourse to anyone on the outside and might be kept
hidden away in prison indefinitely. No one yet knows how many persons
have been locked up since June 12, but reliable estimates are in
excess of twenty thousand, a very large portion of them children.
          Political arrests were nothing new to South Africa in 1986. The
state had depended on them, along with the banning of dissident groups
and individuals, for its very existence almost since the moment the
Nationalists came to power in 1948. Systematically it had been cutting
off new opposition leadership at the knees every time it appeared. The
new emergency decree, wider than any previous one, was therefore only
an extension of the fundamental state policy of maintaining rule by
intimidating and terrorizing its opponents.
          Our introduction to the world of intimidation and arrest was
immediate. On our first day we learned from one woman of a family
member's idealism, brave resistance, imprisonment, and death from
cancer in jail. The second day a warm and gentle academic told me of
his arrest, of interrogation without being allowed to sleep for
twenty-four hours at a stretch, of solitary confinement, and, as I
wrote in my diary, "of his struggle to find ways to maintain his
dignity, to carve out areas in which he would not cooperate, areas of
some privacy, some way of distancing himself from the police."
          By the time we got to Cape Town our best friends had been jailed
briefly and arrests were constantly on our minds. We found the woman
who directed the program my wife was to work with in distress because
her daughter, a university student, was in Pollsmoor prison. She would
remain there for two months. Other friends were concerned about a high
school classmate of their daughter, also at Pollsmoor.
          At the University of Cape Town, where I was to teach my course on
the civil rights movement, I began making mental notes about the many
similarities between it and my own university. But the differences
were more striking. In the familiar looking student lounge a bulletin
board carried notices of students in detention and announced meetings
to protest the state of emergency. Every Wednesday a vigil for the
detained students was held. The student newspaper, vigorously
anti-apartheid, carried a communication in one issue from the
student-body president under the headline "President speaks out from
hiding," telling us that he had gone underground to avoid arrest.
          In the previous year, during the time I was debating whether to
come, UCT students had marched against apartheid. Police broke up
their demonstrations and came on campus more than once with tear
gas. By the time I arrived the new state of emergency was in effect

and there were no more demonstrations. Chafing perhaps more than
before under the police-state rule, the students knew that
demonstrations would send them directly to prison. A fresh report from
UCT's Institute of Criminology, which I found in my packet of faculty
orientation materials, was headed "83~o Claim Torture in Detention"
and went on, with soberingly persuasive statistics and graphic
examples, to justify that claim.
          There were thirty-three students in my class, twenty white and
thirteen black. (The government assigns three classifications to those
persons it does not call white: Black (African), Indian (Asian), and
Colored (mixed race). Politically sensitive Indians and Coloreds call
themselves black in protest against the government's racially-based
classification system and as an expression of their solidarity with
the African majority.*) UCT is an "open" university, refusing to
accept a quota system mandated by the government. Its student body of
11,845 is fifteen percent black.
          
             The 1985 figures, by major group, were: African,
2.9 percent; Colored, 9.7 percent; Indian, 2.4 percent; White, 85.0
percent. Nomenclature is full of political significance. Roger Omond
puts it succinctly: "The largest variety of terms has been applied to
those of African descent. Someone holding extreme white supremacist
views will often refer to Africans as 'kaffirs.' Official terminology
was originally 'native,' then 'Bantu' (literally 'people'), and is now
'black.' The word 'African' is officially taboo because it translates
into Afrikaans as 'Afrikaner'--just the word used for the white,
Afrikaans--speaking South Africans who have been largely responsible
for institutionalizing apartheid." Omond, Apartheid
Handbook, p. 23.
          
          The course was not a study in comparative history and social
movements, but the students were drawn irresistibly to
comparisons. Toward the end of the semester I asked them if they had
been more impressed by the similarities or the differences betwen the
two liberation struggles. Unanimously they replied the differences,
and quickly ticked them off. Their conversation then turned to the
similarities, for it was those that engaged them most: the mixture of
material and psychological forces undergirding white supremacy; the
common experience of suffering and exploitation; the heroic will to
overcome oppression; and the search for appropriate liberation
strategies, leaders, and ideologies.
          Most of all, my students were impressed by the resilience, hope,
and vision of the future they saw in the Southern movement.
          Echoing them, I said that I would take back with me the same
impression of their liberation struggle -a deep respect for the
resilience of the people, their hope, and the vision of a new South
Africa I had encountered so often.
          Explaining this sense of optimism in the face of the despair and
human destruction we saw can perhaps best begin with an account of my
visit to Crossroads.
          I was told it might be impossible to visit Crossroads. Army
Casspirs were everywhere and it was sealed off. The huge squatter
community had gone up in flames in a violent small war just a few
months earlier. That was before the television censorship had become
complete, and we had seen the shanties burning and the people
fleeing. Thousands of persons had been made homeless and much of the
talk when we were there was about how best to provide for the
dispossessed.
          Crossroads has a special place in the history of the South African
liberation struggle. I had first learned about it in 1979 when I saw a
film that explained its origins as an act of defiance and resistance
against influx control and pass laws--against the state's grand scheme
for what it called separate development. Under this plan black men
were allowed to come to the cities to work, but their wives must
remain back in the homelands to which the husbands might return for a
brief yearly visit. Protesting against this, the founders of
Crossroads, with women in the forefront in the early days, built their
own shanty town out of materials their ingenuity secured. Crossroads
grew and so did the government's determination to wipe it
out. International pressure mounted at one point to prevent it from
being bulldozed, the fate the government had in mind for it.
          By 1985-86 it still stood--vast and sprawling and now wracked with
internal dessension that had been fostered by the government. Playing
a crucial role in May of 1986, the government saw part of its aims
achieved when many of its worst enemies were burned out. Still,
Crossroads stood there and was apparently finding its way back to some
form of stability, despite the enormous strains that had been place on
it and despite the resident autocrat, well ensconced with government
support.
          At the end of August word came that the Casspirs previously
patrolling the section of the township we wanted to visit had moved
elsewhere, at least for the day, and that we might slip in for a brief
visit. My guide, a physician associated with a nutrition clinic we
were to visit, drove past charred remnants of the May war, including a
burnt out small bus, and led me on foot through the maze of shacks
down a sandy path that a street sign told me was a recognized
thoroughfare, even though it was largely under water left by a recent
rain. I had watched the Crossroads documentary, seen the township on
television, and read a long research paper on its history, but I was
not prepared for the feel of it, the vastness, the closeness of the
shanties to each other, the narrow sand roads, the sense that a
stranger could get lost here and never find the way out.
          The clinic was small and packed with women and children. On a table
resting on a scale--the first thing I saw as I entered--was a baby with
a distended stomach. I was quickly introduced to a woman, a Crossroads
resident, who would take us on a brief tour. We saw the rest of the
clinic, then went outside to admire the vegetable garden, a small
patch of green that was a powerful statement of faith in the future as
were the occasional fruit trees I saw planted in sandy front yards. We
sat briefly in one of the homes. The walls, lined with newspaper, made
me think, as I had several times since I had arrived, of James Agee
and of his Let Us Now Praise Famous Men with its
meticulous, 

evocative, and loving description of the homes of three
Alabama tenant families of the 1930s. I wished for his ability to see
and record.
          Outside again I exchanged greetings with small children, smiling,
playing games, eyes alert. I thought of Agee again, and almost recited
a passage from Famous Men: "In every child, of whatever
condition or circumstances, is born again the potentiality of the
human race." Crossroads, far from depressing me, was lifting my
spirits. The adults had a vibrancy, an ability to make contact, to put
a stranger at ease, that I am not likely to forget. Later the doctor
answered my questions about how it felt to work with the women and
children in such circumstances. I recorded the answer in my diary that
night: "Isn't discouraged or depressed by working with these people:
they give life more meaning because you see they are not beaten
down. They look to have a future."
          I also recorded some of my own responses that night drawing
political lessons from the day's visit: Thoughts on
Crossroads: Again impression of enormous resilience of SA people and
incredible friendliness. Warm & welcoming people determined to
make a life for themselves in this place, their own turf. Immense
blindness of PW & Co. to the reality of their own people. How to
get them to see it? Probably impossible. Probably too blinded by
ideology, privilege & circumstances of their lives to be
reached. Only way is for power to transfer, circumstances of lives to
change, and new views and senses of reality to emerge out of altered
circumstances.
          Of course I had no idea how power was to be transferred to change
the circumstances of their lives. No one seemed to believe that
incremental reform would phase out apartheid and introduce power
sharing within the existing social framework. Here was a fundamental
difference between the South African liberation struggle and the
American civil rights movement. As one friend put it to me: "In the
U. S. the civil rights movement was fighting for incorporation into
the American dream while we are struggling for a new society."
          It was this struggle for a new society that we came back
remembering most vividly, impressed by most deeply. We did not see
much of the young people in the townships, the controversial comrades
who are filling the vacuum created by the state's systematic
elimination of adult leaders. Brave in many ways, they engage in acts
of violence that trouble deeply those in the struggle we came to
know.
          Our closest contacts were with the intelligentsia--writers,
academics, filmmakers, clerics, lawyers, and doctors (black and white)--who had linked their professional lives to the struggle. They
contrasted sharply with their counterparts in the States, blurring
almost completely the distinction Americans make between activist and
detached observer. They had all the professional integrity we prize,
but they seemed to value it primarily for its power to facilitate
social change. Thus, they moved easily into what we would call
"activist" organizations without sacrificing their professionalism.
          Sharing such company was exhilarating. The intensity caused by the
constant threat of the security forces gave life a keen edge and
nurtured a sense of sharing and support. It also gave a richness to
ordinary social intercourse where we found none of the inanity that
poisons the social gatherings of American professionals. Instead,
virtually every group we joined turned its moral and intellectual
energies to the crisis and to discussion of the social order of the
new South Africa.
          As a scholar, I was struck by the flood of writings about the
country. At a conference on the history and problems of the Western
Cape, nearly every monograph had implications for the liberation
struggle. I said to one of the participants that South Africa seemed
to me the most studied society in process of change of any I knew. He
agreed. After this I began to ask authors why they wrote. What did
their books mean to them? The answers 

followed a pattern. Like
scholars everywhere, they wrote to understand, to explain to
themselves. They also wrote to make the truths they saw part of the
record, to undermine the myths of the state. But most of all, perhaps,
they wrote because they believed their ideas would have consequences
and this meant, as one influential political scientist told me, that
"we have faith there will be a future." Like the people of Crossroads
who plant their vegetable gardens and fruit trees, these allies in the
academy believe their ideas about the new South Africa will take root
and flourish.
          Shortly before I left I had a long luncheon with a friend whose
educational training ranged from eleven years as a political prisoner
on Robben Island, where he was a classmate of Nelson Mandela, to
graduate seminars in a European university. What, I asked him, should
I tell Americans about the South African struggle?
          "America," he began, "needs to be educated about the truly
revolutionary changes that are in South Africa's future." Describing
the tight web of American involvement in South African life--from
philanthropy to multinationals--he warned against thinking of a new
South Africa in American reformist, liberal-democratic, capitalist
terms. The nonracial democracy of the future, he told me, will not be
built on an American model. But neither will it follow a Soviet
model. Nor would it be a Cuban or Mozambican model. Non-capitalist,
because only with some form of socialism could there be any hope for a
decent distribution of wealth and opportunity, the model for the new
South Africa was constantly emerging from the ferment of specifically
South African conditions.
          It was this ferment that I found infectious and
encouraging. Discussions--in luncheons like this one, at clandestine
meetings, in public forums--ranged over every aspect of the ideal
society. "All kinds of fundamental rethinking, at odds with
traditional society, is going on," my luncheon companion
explained. "It's not enough to talk of the politics of a nonracial
democracy or the economics of a socialist state. We are examining, and
planning for, new educational institutions and philosophies
appropriate to a free society, rethinking the roles of the sexes, and
questioning all forms of elitism."
          It was from conversations like this one as well as the daily
encounters with compassionate people joined in a struggle they know
will not end soon-and from the resilient people of Crossroads-that I
drew the optimism I brought back. Optimism may be the wrong word. I
don't mean by it that I see clearly the best possible outcome. In
fact, the opposite may well happen. These gentle revolutionaries I
have come to admire may well be crushed by the fanatacism of
counterrevolution. It has happened before.
          But no one can predict the future, and if by optimism one means
that there are hopeful aspects of the situation to stress, then there
is abundant basis for optimism in South Africa. From the people who
give rise to this optimism one can draw courage. One can also identify
with them and look to them for guidance in the long struggles
ahead.
          
            Paul M. Gaston, Professor of History at the University of
Virginia, is president of the Southern Regional Council and a
contributing editor of Southern Changes.
          
        
        
          Palmer Weber, 1914-1986
          By Sullivan, PatriciaPatricia Sullivan
          Vol. 8, No. 6, 1986, pp. 5-7
          
          In 1948, Palmer Weber and Louis Burnham organized Henry Wallace's
third party campaign in the South. Building on earlier voter
registration and education efforts, the Southern campaign focused
primarily on the issue of civil rights. Wallace's Progressive Party
also challenged the segregation system and culminated with his tour of
the region in the fall of 1948. Despite a violent reception, Wallace
campaigned in seven Southern states and was the first presidential
candidate to address nonsegregated audiences in the South. On election
day, the Progressive Party suffered a disastrous defeat at the polls,
but "defeat" was not an operative word for Palmer Weber. A year after
the election, he wrote to Wallace praising his enormous courage during
his Southern tour, "which gave profound heart to all the oppressed
elements in the South." He chided those who would lose hope: "The mere
fact that the battle continues, that we get tired and discouraged is
no proper measure of accomplishment. We have no right to even stop so
long as one person's rights are not fully sustained. This is the most
simple and accurate moral principal which has sustained you and your
leadership."
          Continuing effort on behalf of political, economic and social
justice was the leitmotiv of Palmer Weber's life. It was a life that
incorporated a wide variety of experiences and associations, accented
with good cheer and enormous generosity of spirit. Palmer often
referred to himself as "an accumulation of accidents." But there was a
simplicity of purpose and steady determination that shaped his
sojourn. Palmer's creative participation in the major reform movements
of the twentieth century will be remembered by historians. The
significance of this life, however, speaks of a man who mastered the
art of living.
          Palmer Weber was born in 1914 in Smithfield, Va., a small rural
town on the James River. Diagnosed at the age of twelve as having
tuberculosis, he was sent to the Blue Ridge Sanitorium outside
Charlottesville. Palmer remembered this as "a fabulous piece of luck."
While selling newspapers on the wards of the sanitorium he met a
variety of adults who undertook to educate him. They included
socialists, Gandhiites, Baptist ministers--"a whole collection of
people in the midst of dying and getting well, all of whom were
concerned about the state of the human soul, the state of economics
and politics." Palmer was reaing Foreign Affairs and
Current History at the age of thirteen. He read the
first volumes of Plato's Dialogues, the Buddhist
Sutras, and Gandhi's Young India. It was, he recalled,
"a magic mountain type of experience where you had a continual
dialogue going on." At seventeen he enrolled in the University of
Virginia with a determination to study philosophy knowing that he
"wanted to be a wise man, a good man an ethical man."
          Palmer came to the University on scholarship and to maintain it
worked diligently to stay at the head of his 

class. He succeeded in
doing so not only in philosophy, but in economics, mathematics, Greek,
and biology as well. Virginius Dabney's history of the University of
Virginia describes Palmer as probably the most brilliant student at
Virginia during the 1930s. In addition to his studies, he immersed
himself in student politics. He was, he recalled, "a
Christian-Socialist, Buddhist, Ghandi type person...any kind of
variation where it was a questioning of authority or where an effort
was made to bring justice." Palmer organized the Marxist study group,
joined in establishing a branch of the National Student League at the
University, and successfully led a challenge to fraternity control of
student government. His political activities also addressed the
broader concerns of race and class stirred by the depression. He
helped to organized a union for hospital workers at the University
hospital, and worked as a labor organizer at a local textile
mill. From the beginning, civil rights was central to Palmer's
political concerns. He raised money for the Scottsboro defendants and
campaigned for the admission of Alice Jackson, a black woman, to the
University of Virginia. The Jackson case marked the beginning of the
NAACP's twenty-year legal battle for school desegration, culminating
in Brown v. Board of Education. In his column for
the student newspaper, Palmer called for federal legislation against
lynching, decrying the South's "decades long violation of the
Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth amendments to the Constitution."
By the time he was awarded his Ph.D., it was not surprising that this
most brilliant student was unable to obtain a teaching position in a
Southern university.
          Undeterred, Palmer Weber found his way to Washington where he
worked as an economic advisor to several Congressional committees, and
wrote speeches for a number of Senators. Palmer embraced the New Deal
as a reaffirmation of national citizenship rights and found
opportunities to try and implement his social ideas. He organized a
legislative campaign to abolish the poll tax, lobbied for the
continuation of the Fair Employment Practices Committee (which
prohibited racially discriminatory hiring practices in defense
industries), and led the fight for a Soldiers' Vote Bill. When it
became clear that conservatives in Congress could effectively block
all New Deal legislation, Palmer joined the newly established
CIO-Political Action Committee. In addition to working for the
election of New Deal candidates, this first national PAC concentrated
on strengthening the New Deal coalition through a nationwide voter
registration effort. Largely due to Palmer's initiative, the CIO-PAC
coordinated its effort with the NAACP, in what became the most
ambitious voter registration drive in the South up to that time. From
1944 to 1948 the number of registered black voters in the South
tripled. In 1946 Palmer became the first Southern white man to serve
on the National Board of the NAACP.
          In an article on "The Negro Vote in the South," written while still
a student at the University of Virginia, Palmer observed that reform
"lost its most valuable ally, when the Negro was denied active
citizenship. Equal access to the ballot, Palmer believed, was
essential to securing a more just society, and he dedicated himself to
that struggle. His commitment and unique abilities helped shape the
early civil rights movement. Virginia Durr, who first worked with
Palmer in the anti-poll tax fight, recalls: "Palmer could get hold of
something, organize it and set it into motion, action, and people
began to develop around it. Palmer was the moving spirit behind
eveyone else. He was full of vitality and able to attract people. The
essential thing was that he had such a burning desire to get this
thing done, to get the people in the South the right to vote, and to
end the segregation system."
          Henry Wallace's 1948 Progressive Party campaign in the South was a
continuation of the New Deal-inspired movement to open up the
political process to the region to whites and blacks. Palmer Weber
co-directed Wallace's southern effort along with Louis
Burnham. Looking back on that campaign thirty years later, 

Palmer
recalled, "if there was one thing the Progressive Party did positively
and effectively in the South it was to challenge the segregation
system everywhere--in public facilities, public speaking, blacks
running for public office. In every city we conducted registration
drives to register black voters. For example, in Greensboro, N.C., at
A&T College we managed to have about thirty-five black
students. They qualified three thousand black voters and the next year
they elected the first black city councilman since
Reconstruction. Randolph Blackwell ran that campaign."
          For Blackwell, his association with Palmer Weber in the 1948
Wallace campaign helped shape his life-long commitment to advancing
economic and political justice. Blackwell remembered, "Palmer had as
much influence on my professional development as anybody. We were
always delighted when Palmer would come to North Carolina A&T
during the '48 campaign. He had a great influence on those of us whose
lives he touched to dedicate ourselves to the task of ridding the
society of racial discrimination." (After completing a law degree at
Howard, and several years of teaching, Randolph Blackwell went on to
work with Martin Luther King, Jr. in the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference. In 1966 he founded Southern Rural Action, a non-profit
corporation dedicated to helping small, poor and mostly black
communities in the South become self-reliant economically and
politically).
          The Progressive Party campaign was also the culmination of the New
Deal-inspired movement for economic justice and political reform in
the South. During the 1950s, Palmer, like so many others, was subject
to Congressional investigation of his political beliefs. As
organizations and individuals collapsed in the face of McCarthyism,
Palmer Weber and his compatriots from the Southern Conference for
Human Welfare defended basic civil liberties. He and Clark Foreman
helped found the National Emergency Civil Liberties Committee. In
1954, Virginia Durr, Jim Dombrowski, Myles Horton, and Aubrey Williams
drew national attention when they defied Senator Eastland during his
hearings on "subversive activities" in the South. Palmer praised their
heroic behavior which he likened to a blood transfusion. "How
wonderful you have made it to be Southern again!" He then went on to
strategize on how they might "maintain and also spread out the pattern
of moral resistance which you five established in New Orleans."
          These early opponents to racial discrimination recognized the
obvious--that without securing the liberties guaranteed by the Bill of
Rights, the civil rights movement had no foundation. Palmer's old
friend, NAACP counsel and strategist Charles Houston, echoed this
sentiment in response to President Truman's loyalty program. "The only
way I can make sure of my own liberty of action and freedom to agitate
for what I believe to be right is to fight for the liberty of action
and freedom to agitate for every man." Wall Street, which prized
financial acumen over "loyalty" tests, enabled Palmer to make a living
for his family. He used that base during the 1960s to organize
Businessmen against the War in Vietnam. And helped raise over $2
million on behalf of Eugene McCarthy's 1968 presidential campaign.
          Returning to his home state of Virginia in the 1970s, Palmer turned
his attention again to voting rights. Equal participation in the
political process had yet to be realized in many black communities
throughout the South. Often, at-large systems of voting continue to
inhibit black political representation. Following the renewal and
strengthening of the Voting Rights Act in 1982, the Virginia ACLU
affiliate began a legal challenge to at-large districts throughout the
state. Palmer Weber and Leonard Dreyfus generously supported this
effort and Palmer helped raise additional financial backing. Thus far,
the Virginia ACLU has won every case it has filed. Early this past
summer, Palmer convened a meeting of state and national officials of
the ACLU to plan a long-term campaign which would implement the
Virginia strategy throughout the South. Chan Kendrick, director of the
Virginia ACLU, recalled that Palmer was one of the few people who had
a sense of how much work still needed to be done. The civil rights
movement of the 1960s had eliminated the most blatant forms of
legalized discrimination. Full political participation, however, has
yet to be realized and remains essential to securing full
citizenship. As an organizer during the 1930s and 1940s, Palmer
learned that the battle for political and economic justice required
continuous, systematic effort.
          Palmer commented shortly before his death that "Justice" was a key
word for him, much as it was in Plato's Republic. He asked, "What is
your responsibility as a citizen to see to it that the body politic
embodies justice?" Palmer spent a lifetime considering this problem
and acting on it. He greeted the efforts of others engaged in its
pursuit with great enthusiasm and generous support. All the while he
was a master teacher, conducting a "floating seminar." Nearly forty
years ago, Palmer commended Henry Wallace "for not faltering on the
simple principle of human rights which is not so simple after all,
considering it underlies the American revolution of 1776 and the whole
panorama of colonial movements throughout the world today." During a
half century of political activism, Palmer Weber never faltered.
          
            Patricia Sullivan is associate director of the Center for
the Study of Civil Rights and Lecturer in History, University of
Virginia.
          
        
        
          Congressman Espy from Mississippi
          By Minor, BillBill Minor
          Vol. 8, No. 6, 1986, pp. 1-3
          
          A studious, mild-mannered Yazoo City attorney, thirty-two years
old, wrote Mississippi political history on November 4, when he became
the first black sent to the U.S. Congress from this state since
1883.
          Mike Espy, a former assistant state attorney general, was a
political unknown when he entered the Mississippi Second District race
against Rep. Webb Franklin of Greenwood, a conservative white
Republican and staunch supporter of President Reagan.
          The last black Mississippian to sit in the U.S. House was John
R. Lynch, a Reconstruction-era Republican. Espy is one of the young
breed of black Democrats who have risen in the South in the post-Civil
Rights era.
          The Second District, covering the rich Mississippi River Delta, was
created by the federal courts as a black-majority district with
fifty-three percent black voting-age population. But the black voter
edge was based on 1980 census statistics, and current estimates place
the ratio of white to black eligible voters almost even. Twice-in 1982
and 1984-Robert Clark, a veteran black state legislator from Ebenezer,
challenged for the Second District seat, each time losing to Franklin
by one per cent of the vote. In both races, Clark got the white votes
thought necessary to win (about twelve percent of all white Democratic
ballots), but his black support fell short.
          Espy's victory--by a margin of 4,850 votes (2.3 percent of the
total)--was primarily credited to his highly organized campaign that
got out the black vote in impressive numbers, but there were several
other important contributing factors, not least among them the
disastrous farm economy in the Delta which many 

white farmers blamed
on Reagan farm policies.
          Several thousand white farmers who formerly supported Franklin are
believed to have "voted with their rumps" by staying home on election
day. However, many other white farmers deliberately went to the polls
and did something they never dreamed of doing before--they voted for a
black to represent them in Washington.
          Espy had won endorsements from influential white Democratic
politicians, among them the sheriffs of Warren (Vicksburg) and Grenada
counties. Generally, more white politicos in the district publicly
identified with Espy's campaign than they had with Clark's. Two highly
regarded young white Democratic state elected officials, State Auditor
Ray Mabus and Secretary of State Dick Molpus, campaigned in the
district with Espy.
          Espy's $50,000 campaign deficit--small by comparison with most
major Democratic bids for Congress in recent years--was quickly erased
three weeks after the election at a thousand-dollar-a-plate dinner
sponsored by Gov. Bill Allain and Mississippi Democratic Chairman
Steve Patterson. Some of Jackson's biggest bankers and businessmen
came out to meet with Espy.
          When Clark twice failed to whip Franklin, the political wisdom
indicated that blacks would have to wait until after the next census
and another court-ordered redistricting to win the Second.
          Consequently, no "name" black politician would take on Franklin in
1986. Without fanfare, and without seeking the blessing of the black
political elders, Espy quietly gave up his job in the state attorney
-general's office and began to organize his campaign in November
1985. At first, many veteran black politicians resisted Espy. They
felt he had not worked in the vineyard during harder times. Others
were wary because he comes from a somewhat privileged background in
the black community. (His family for years has owned a chain of
funeral homes and burial insurance companies across the Delta.)
          Eventually, most of the black political veterans warmed up to
Espy's sincere, hard-working style and helped pull him through the
Democratic primary last June over two well-financed white moderates
who aggressively sought black votes. Some, like Mayor Charles Evers of
Fayette, never came around. Evers supported Franklin, saying "I stick
with the ones in power, cause they can help me."
          From the start, many political observers underestimated Espy's
political ability because of his shy, reticient personality. Franklin
discounted the latest black threat after a July poll showed him twenty
points ahead of Espy. After that, Franklin took no more polls. For
that matter, neither did Espy, who conserved his money for his last
three-week media campaign, and to put gas in cars to get voters to the
polls.
          Espy deliberately ran a low-profile campaign through September and
early October, partly to keep down racial polarization and also to
keep his opponent guessing. Then in the stretch, he went head-to-head
with Franklin on farm policy, Social Security, drugs and any other
issue he could tie to Franklin's voting record. He held his own with
Franklin in a televised debate less than a week before the election
(by comparison, Clark, a less-polished speaker, might have been
outmatched).
          Hand-picked by no organization, Espy maintained independence in
running his campaign, in contrast with the 1984 Clark campaign which
was virtually taken over by the AFL-CIO. Nor did Espy allow the
Rev. Jesse Jackson to visit during the general election campaign, a
move that some observers believe could have resulted in last-minute
white backlash.
          In October, Espy had been taken to a National Democratic Party Gala
in Washington as a guest of white Clarksdale attorney Walter Thompson,
a member of the Democratic National Finance Council. Espy was seated
at a table with Joseph P. Kennedy III, the Congressional successor to
Tip O'Neill. Espy and Kennedy apparently became instant friends.
          The bright young Espy shies away from historic comparisons as the
first black Mississippi Congressman in a hundred and three years, or
as a new hero of his race. He has often said, "I just want to be known
as Mike Espy, 

Mississippian."
          Whether Espy can be Mississippian and Congressman after the 1988
elections is the unanswered question from his victory in 1986. In the
election aftermath, observers debated the size of Espy's white vote
district-wide. Exact figures are unavailable because racial breakdowns
at the precinct level are unreliable in Mississippi's electron
system. Espy's own campaign people and State Democratic Party
officials believe his white vote exceeded the twelve percent Clark is
believed to have had in the benchmark 1982 race. A spot-check of a
ninety percent white precinct in Warren County, for instance,
indicated Espy got twenty-four percent of the white vote.
          But white civil rights activist Rims Barber of Jackson
disagreed. Using selected precincts, Barber's analysis indicates that
Espy may have gotten a smaller percentage of white votes than
Clark.
          Because of the importance of understanding the racial voting
patterns, the Joint Center for Political Studies, a black-run research
institution in Washington, is reported to be planning a comprehensive
study of the vote in each of the district's three hundred and
eighty-two precincts.
          Such analysis is especially significant in the ongoing debate over
what percentage of black eligible voters a district must have to be a
"safe" black seat. Espy's electoral margin over Franklin was
whisker-thin, and appears to have been at least partly due to white
voters staying home.
          Whatever the percentage of white crossover votes, the turnout
numbers of 1984 strongly suggest that Espy may have to get twenty
thousand more votes, black and/or white, if he is to prevail in a
re-election bid during a presidential election year.
          
            Bill Minor, a veteran observer of Mississippi politics,
lives in Jackson.
          
        
        
          Locking Up Liberty in the Atlanta Pen
          By Dolman, JoeJoe Dolman
          Vol. 8, No. 6, 1986, pp. 3-5
          
          The granite fortress occupies the ridge on McDonough Boulevard with
imperial authority. Its gray steel and concrete outer wall stands as
tall as thirty-seven feet and as thick as four feet; it seals off
twenty-eight acres. In its eighty-five years, the bloody and decrepit
Atlanta Federal penitentiary has housed prisoners as different as Al
Capone and Eugene V. Debs. Yet nothing can quite match the task to
which it is now put.
          Today the pen holds some eighteen hundred Cuban inmates in absolute
disregard of constitutional principles, in conditions of crowded
squalor and in an atmosphere of persistent violence. It contains a
travesty that has few parallels in our history.
          Its inmates were among the 130,000 Cuban refugees who arrived in
the United States in the 1980 Mariel boatlift. Between three hundred
and four hundred of them have been imprisoned in Atlanta for more than
six years; the others trickled into the pen later, after an initial
period of freedom in this country. As "excludable aliens," they are
not entitled to constitutional protections. Yet as Cubans, Fidel
Castro has forbidden their return home. So year after year, the
federal government "detains" them. The question of who remains locked
up and who eventually goes free is determined by administrative
decree; terms of imprisonment are open-ended.
          It is a policy that has proven disastrous. Between May 1980 and
September 1986, there were ten inmate murders in the pen, seven
suicides, at least one hundred and fifty-eight serious suicide
attempts and more than four thousand episodes of self
mutilation. While Atlanta's Cuban inmates are just five percent of the
total federal prison population, they have accounted for ten percent
of the system's homicides, more than a third of its inmate-to-staff
assaults and half of its inmate-to-inmate assaults.
          Now maybe it is reasonable to wonder: aren't most of these inmates
violent criminals anyway? Murderers, rapists and the like? Well, that
is what the U.S. Justice Department has long argued. But the truth is,
the Cuban prisoners are a diverse lot.
          The first wave of inmates wound up in Atlanta after they answered
"yes" to the questions about previous imprisonments in Cuba. Never
mind that some had simply misunderstood the question or that others
had done time back home for such crimes as stealing food. All were
sent to the pen, where their institutional behavior, not their
purported crimes, determined whether they would be released. (Cuban
records are not available to federal officials.)
          Those who didn't go straight to the slammer--the overwhelming majority
of refugees--eventually entered American society as "parolees." Most
handled the adjustment well. Still, paroles could be revoked at athe
government's pleasure, and as the number of original inmates declined,
failed parolees took their place. The feds revoked parole if a refugee
had no visible means of support, no fixed address or no American
sponsor. Some refugees wound up in the pen for violating curfews or
travel restrictions or for failure to participate in certain
government programs.
          To be sure, others landed in the pen after they ran afoul of
American laws. Some were convicted of serious crimes here such as
murder, armed robbery, drug dealing and assault. But others were sent
to Atlanta for lesser infractions like driving while
intoxicated. Sometimes criminal charges alone (rather than
convictions) could send Marielitos to the pen. Sometimes regufees were
transferred to Atlanta after they had completed sentences in state and
city lockups.
          Some do leave federal custody eventually, after Immigration and
Naturalization Service decides they are eligible. Interestingly, of
the two hundred inmates INS has released to halfway houses since
September 1985, not a single person has gone back to prison. Until
recently, the feds clung to the flimsy hope that the other Marielitos
would remain behind bars until they could be returned to
Cuba. Although two hundred and one inmates were 

returned during a
brief thaw in relations several years ago, Castro scrapped the program
when the White House put Radio Marti on the air.
          Finally, in November, the administration softened its stance. It
announced a program to move hundreds of Cubans (nobody knows the
precise number yet) from Atlanta to a new minimum-security lockup in
Oakdale, Louisiana, in preparation for parole. It's an improvement,
but a limited one. INS standards for eligibility remain vague; the
agency simply says it will look for inmates with good prison records
whose offenses were not violent. Moreover, the feds plan to replace
them with Marielitos considered unreleasable who are now imprisoned in
other institutions. (In all, the government has two thousand, five
hundred "detainees" in custody.)
          So, despite the new parole policy, the dilemma will remain. It is
exacerbated by this fact: the pen has long been considered a
dangerously dilapidated place. A prolonged series of murders by
American inmates in the late 1970s made the feds decide to close it,
and by 1980 the U.S. Bureau of Prisons had begun to relocate the
inmate population. Then came the Cubans.
          At times since the arrival of the Marielitos, the overcrowding has
been almost unbelievable. When investigators from a House judiciary
subcomittee visited in early 1986, for example, they found as many as
eight men jammed into cells that measure two hundred and ten square
feet (an average of seven feet by four feet per inmate). A
stem-to-stern renovation is in the works now, but details have not
been released. In any case, the remodeling will be decades late. Today
the joint is a monument to outdated notions of penology.
          Its five massive cellhouses resemble--literally--warehouses inside,
where one sees nothing but steel bars, brick walls and concrete
floors. Each house contains five tiers of dark, fetid cells. Human
voices and clanking doors and food trays create a mad cacophony that
would have inspired Dante to new levels.
          Until recently, about half the pen's inmates were held in their
cells for all but an hour a day as punishment for a 1984 riot (that
consisted mainly of expensive vandalism). As of last March, only
twenty-seven of the staff's two hundred and seventy-nine guards spoke
Spanish. In late September, reports in the Atlanta media disclosed a
federal investigation of charges that payoffs were made to INS
officials in exchange for the early release of some
inmates. Apparently, the case is still open.
          In such conditions, it's no mystery why prisoners routinely get
violent or lose their sanity and mutilate themselves. The real
question is: Why hasn't the government done more, and acted sooner, to
relieve this situation? Ultimately, the government is a prisoner, too-
to a policy that costs $40 million a year and puts guards and
prisoners alike in constant danger. It's not as if suggestions for a
resolution to this mess were never heard. In fact, three years ago,
U.S. District Judge Marvin Shoob of Atlanta formulated a rather neat
solution.
          He ruled that the government does have the
authority 

to detain excludable aliens indefinitely. But, he said,
"after an initial period of time during which detention may reasonably
be imposed," further incarceration must be justified with evidence
that a detainee, if released, is likely to abscond, pose a risk to
national security or pose a threat to American persons or property.
          Shoob granted the inmates limited constitutional rights--including
a right to counsel, a "presumption of releasability," and a right to
prior written notice of factual allegations supporting continued
detention. In short, he told the Justice Department: Either prove your
cases against the inmates or set them free. Unfortunately, this order
and others like it have been shot down by an obstinate Eleventh
U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.
          The volleys between the two courts have grown remarkably
personal. In January 1985, Circuit Judge Robert S. Vance complained
that Shoob had exceeded his "very, very narrow" authority and poached
on the prerogatives of the executive branch. "The issue here is
whether the president of the United States or the attorney
general...has to go into Judge Shoob's courtroom and prove to him why
he did what he did," Vance grumbled in an opinion. Earlier Vance had
told an attorney for the inmates in court: "The government can keep
them in the Atlanta pen until they die."
          For now, Vance's word is law--but what a strange kind of law it
is. The Justice Department holds itself hostage to an administrative
nightmare. It inflicts on the Cubans misery equal to anything Castro
might have devised. At bottom, its policy expresses lack of confidence
in some bedrock, American, tried-and-true constitutional
principles. What is everyone so afraid of?
          
            Joe Dolman is an editorial writer for the Atlanta
Constitution.
          
        
      
    
  