
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 9, Number 1,
	       1987
        
          Popular Education in Nicaragua
          By Collier, MartyMarty
               Collier
          Vol. 9, No. 1, 1987, pp. 7-9
          
          "Watching the Nicaraguan popular educators reaffirmed my own
experience that to do popular education, you have to start from
people's own experiences. In SALT this is what we do," said Linda
Martin, a staffer of Southern Appalachian Leadership Training
(SALT). Martin is one of thirteen community workers and educators from
Tennessee who traveled to Nicaragua in January to deepen an
international relationship between adult, popular educators in North
and Latin America.
          What is popular education? Why have leaders from communities in the
United States traveled to Nicaragua to learn about it?
          In March 1980, less than a year after the Sandinista revolution
overthrew the Samoza dictatorship, the new government fulfilled one of
its promises: to help the majority learn to read and write--something
never attempted under Somoza. In the enthusiastic response, 60,000
young people and teachers volunteered to leave their hometowns and
participate as "popular teachers" for five months in the National
Literacy Campaign. This massive volunteer effort reduced the country's
illiteracy rate from 50.3 percent to 12.9 percent, and won two
prestigious awards from the United Nations.
          Southerners joined the tour hoping to benefit from the
award-winning approach being used in the continuing adult education
work in Nicaragua Participants came from the Highlander Center, the
Federation of Southern Cooperatives, Mountain Women's Exchange,
Southern Neighborhoods Network, Commission on Religion in Appalachia
and other groups. Their common focus is work among poor people in the
South. Their educational work--to enable participants to organize
themselves to solve common problems--has objectives similar to those
of Nicaragua's popular education program.
          The visitors were invited by the Nicaraguan Department of Education
(MED) as part of a relationship fostered over several years between
Nicaraguan popular educators and community-based organizations in the
South. Since 1983 there have been several delegations of Latin
American popular educators visiting the United States, and staff of
the Highlander Center and other alternative educational centers in the
United States visiting Nicaragua.
          In 1986 many Southerners had the chance to meet Eduardo Baez, from
MED in Nicaragua. His speaking trip 

to the United States was
coordinated by Highlander and led to participation in January's tour
by some of the same organizations and communities which had received
Eduardo, deepening both the professional and personal
relationships.
          POPULAR EDUCATION is used in the Nicaraguan Literacy Campaign to
teach math, science, and technical subjects to adults after they
become literate. The method emerged from the reality facing Nicaragua
after the Revolution: great shortages of formal schools and teachers,
few technical schools in rural areas and a largely adult population
with tremendous practical and political knowledge. These factors
demanded an education process preparing people to make decisions,
solve massive problems of production and agriculture, and at the same
time respect their experience. These adults could not simply be
lectured to or taught in traditional methods. Therefore a
participatory, problemsolving approach was developed, based on themes
from the people's own history and revolution, which aimed to prepare
the poor majority to participate fully in all aspects of society.
          In Nicaragua's educational method, study and problem solving are
based on the life experiences and needs of participants--not on
abstract concepts. Terry Keleher, a community organizer from eastern
Kentucky, went with several other tour members to a northern region of
the country. The group talked with peasants on a coffee cooperative
who are in popular education classes. One of the peasants went through
six levels of adult education and learned to be an accountant for the
cooperative.
          Keleher said of his trip to Ocotol, "I saw very sophisticated
levels of community organization and democracy in this area. The
stress of these educators was on knowing in order to change
society. Education here is integrated into all facets of life--not
compartmentalized like most of the formal education in the United
States. The idea is not just to teach people basic skills like
reading, writing and arithmetic but to also help them understand their
situation, and give them the power to change it for the
better."
          In contrast to the United States' "each one, teach one" approach to
literacy education, popular education in Nicaragua is a group
experience. Workers, students, peasants and housewives gather in small
groups for two hours a day to discuss community problems and
solutions. Reading and academic skills are taught through the
examination of these themes.
          The purpose of the lessons is to determine as a group how to solve
the problems at hand and master the skills needed, including learning
how to run the many organizations and businesses of which Nicaraguan
society is composed. Anne Hablis, a staff member of Mountain Women's
Exchange (an educational and economic development organization in East
Tennessee) attended a gathering of parents, children, and popular
educators in a region southwest of Managua. She said, "I was
impressed by the transformation taking place in people's
thinking. They [people in the adult education programs] had a
commitment to the philosophy of the revolution and what it's trying to
accomplish. They are not just trying to master technical, educational
skills. They had an awareness that through education they could solve
community problems by cooperating with one another--not relying on
somebody from the outside bringing them answers or
information."
          The Nicaraguan educational approach places priority on preparing
people to participate more fully in the processes that affect their
lives. "Literacy and popular education are political, because all
education is political," Father Cardinal, the Catholic priest who
heads--the country's educational system, told the group. "It
either maintains the status quo in the world, or helps build a new,
more just social order. The aim of education in Nicaragua is to
strengthen the orgnanization of people so they can really
exercise their power and so that this revolution will represent their
interests."
          Nicaraguans understand democracy as more than having elections for
public officials. They consider democracy the opportunity to
participate in solving their own problems and creating their own
future. Luis Aleman, head of popular education programs for MED,
explained that many cooperatives have been formed after the
revolution, but farmworkers lack the reading, math and analytical
skills needed to make financial and management decisions. MED has
joined other government departments to develop special pilot
educational projects addressing the learning needs which the
farmworkers have identified as most important in their work. In a
small country where owning land and producing one's food is so
important, these pilot projects are enabling farmworkers to live
better and have more control over their future.
          NICARAGUA HAS BEEN accused by the United States media and the
counter-revolutionaries ("contras") attacking Nicaragua, of using
popular education to indoctrinate citizens. In response, Nicaraguan
officials say indoctrination is not needed when the agenda is in the
best interests of the majority. Facts, statistics and international
awards bear witness to the reality that in Nicaragua the
Sandinista-led government, duly elected by its citizens in 1984, has
made tremendous strides in initiating a process in the interests of
the vast majority--the very poor. Infant mortality, illiteracy,
preventable diseases, and hunger have all been dramatically reduced in
the last eight years, in contrast to other Central American countries
neighboring Nicaragua.
          Participation, and not indoctrination, is evident in 

many of the
current popular education projects underway in Nicaragua. A
country-wide effort to combat remaining illiteracy is now
underway. Churches, youth groups, members of cooperatives, housewives
and workers make up the overwhelming majority of popular teachers who
work in their own communities and workplaces to teach others with less
experience. Nicaraguan literacy workers say a largely volunteer staff
of many thousands of people, working in the same communities in which
they live or work, would even be ineffective at an indoctrination
campaign. The popular educators maintain that teaching people to read
is itself a liberating act, that once people are literate, no
government, political party, or religion can control what they
read.
          Another example of democracy at work in the educational programs of
the Nicaraguan government is the production of educational
materials. Many localities produce their own educational materials,
orienting them to local needs. Linda Martin, also visiting Ocotol,
reported that she was very interested in how popular educators put
together their own educational materials (at the local level), as
opposed to only using what the national office in Managua
produced. She said, "I saw ways I could work with our program to
help leaders develop their own curriculum materials for leadership
development training."
          PROBLEMS IN THE NEW Nicaragua were not denied by people meeting
with the visiting Southerners. In fact, Nicaraguan education officials
had already raised many of the problems seen by tour
participants. Representatives of the Ministry of Education admitted
mistakes had been made and problems exist.
          A major problem in MED, which the staff pointed out themselves, is
that not all of the department heads and teachers are convinced of the
importance of the popular education method. Many still feel education
is a teacher imparting facts to ignorant people. The popular education
staff must struggle against this kind of thinking, and provide
positive proof that popular education works more effectively than the
traditional approach.
          Teresa Barajas, a Mexican who now has United States citizenship,
does volunteer work in a low-income, Catholic community of San
Antonio, Texas. She joined the Nicaragua tour to see how literacy
education is done "from the base" because her church is planning a
literacy program. "I found it extremely interesting that in
Nicaragua they teach people about their history, what causes
poverty," she said. "At the same time they teach literacy they
raise consciousness about the whole situation in their lives. They
teach people from their own level of understanding; for example,
peasants from the perspective of land, beans, and agriculture."
          Barajas visited the mountaneous region of Matagalpa, where much of
the country's coffee crop is harvested. She met with popular teachers
and community members involved in adult education classes. She was
impressed with the flexibility the popular educators used to make
education meet their student's needs.
          Barajas discussed several problems she observed. She spoke frankly
to many people on the streets, in restaurants and rural areas where
the group visited. Being an outgoing, friendly person and fluent in
both Spanish and English, she constantly gathered and shared
information with Nicaraguans she met. She said, "I talked to common
people on the street who felt their situation was still very bad. Some
people do not see a lot of changes in their lives. They seemed to not
have had the opportunity to learn why their situation is as it is. It
is true that the ideals of the revolution have not been completely
fulfilled. Undoubtedly the war and poverty they started with explain
much, but not all the problems that still exist. There are still
inefficiency and bureacracy."
          "The war is the main reason for many of the country's major
problems, like shortages of food, lack of personal income, and
difficult living situations. This makes it difficult for people with
problems to get to the top. There is still a big need to educate
people about why problems exist, and who to go to with what
problem."
          It was clear to tour participants that Nicaraguans have the
consciousness, commitment and political channels to direct their own
future, despite whatever difficulties and shortcomings exist. In
addition, participants felt that the revolution is a participatory one
in which the majority of the country's people are involved to a
remarkable degree in improving their country. Since the majority is
quite poor, it has opted for a leadership and national program with
priorities on redirecting political power and resources to the poorest
sectors of society.
          In previous periods in United States history those advocating
greater power and resources to the poor have been labeled "communist"
when they were promoting basically democratic political reformat Now
in Nicaragua the charge of communism has also been used by the United
States government and the "contras" to support a war in which over a
hundred popular teachers have been killed, along with thousands of
other Nicaraguans.
          Participants saw that community service and education programs in
the South and in Nicaragua are both being attacked by the same
philosophy and political forces.
          Many Nicaraguanas asked tour participants to take a message back:
Tell the people in our communities the truth about Nicaragua, and do
everything we can to stop the war against their country. They also
asked us to continue the exchange created by the trip. They need help
in obtaining valuable materials, such as pencils, raincoats and
lanterns for the teachers who travel to rural areas with no
electricity. They would love to come to the United States to learn
more about our educational work and talk to people about their
work. They encouraged participants to send others from our country to
visit. The groundwork has been laid for many of these things to
occur. Participants on the tour plan to meet to discuss what they hope
will be an on-going, international exchange. More information about
the trip and future plans can be obtained by writing the Highlander
Center, Route 3, Box 370, New Market, TN 37820.
          
            Marty Collier was a participant on the tour and is
currently living in Nicaragua studying and writing about popular
education. She has been a member of the editorial board of and has
worked in popular education through the Southern Neighborhoods
Network, P.O. Box 121133. Nashville, TN, 37212.
          
        
        
          Building the Union in an Anti-Union Age
          By Acuff, StewartStewart Acuff and Sarason, RobertRobert Sarason
          Vol. 9, No. 1, 1987, pp. 10-11
          
          How does a labor union organize and represent a group of employees
who neither have a collective bargaining contract nor any federal or
state collective bargaining legislation under the protections of the
National Labor Relations Act? In light of the Reagan Administration's
repeated efforts to gut the National Labor Relations Act, many
national leaders have struggled with that question.
          A group of state employees in Georgia is seeking an answer by
organizing with the Georgia State Employees Association (GSEA),
Service Employees International Union (SEIU) Local 1985/AFL-CIO. Since
public employees are not covered by federal law and since collective
bargaining for public employees is illegal in Georgia (and most
Southern states), GSEA Local 1985 is using other less traditional and
more militant ways to organize and represent its constituency.
          The short history of Local 1985 is full of creativity, democratic,
mass actions, rank-and-file involvement, and sophisticated political
maneuvering.
          GSEA was founded in 1974 as an independent association for state
employees. After years of frustration and limited effectiveness with
state government the leadership decided in 1985 to affiliate with the
Service Employees International Union. In September 1985 the local
hired Stewart Acuff as executive director, who came to the local with
a background in community organizing and labor organizing at Beverly
Enterprises Nursing Homes.
          Three hundred workers from every area of the state gathered for the
founding convention in October 1985 in Milledgeville, home of the huge
Central State Hospital. It was the largest labor gathering ever of
state employees in Georgia. A significant part of the day was the
adoption by all three hundred workers, after a two-hour discussion, of
a legislative agenda.
          Over the next two months, eighty workers in Rome met with their
state legislators and thirty workers in Augusta met with their
legislative delegation. On December 18 the new union brought one
hundred hospital workers to the State Capitol to jam a legislative
hearing and describe their working conditions and their proposed
legislation to improve those conditions.
          The Georgia Legislature began their annual forty-day session in
January. By then, GSEA Local 1985 had put together a network of
legislative activists from all over the state, recruited four
legislative interns from Morehouse College, and made a number of
friends in the Georgia Legislature--their first two bills had thirteen
cosponsors. But the peak of the session for these state workers was
Lobby Day on February 20. Some three hundred and fifty union members
converged on the Capitol that day to personally push for better pay, a
more equitable pay raise formula, less restrictive political activity
rules for state employees, better sick leave and grievance
legislation, and day care facilities for state employees.
          Hilda Stonebreaker, the current president and former executive
director who engineered the affiliation with SEIU, described the first
Lobby Day and the entire first session as huge successes: "We got
more money out of the governor than was recommended by the Merit
System and his budget people. We got even a little more from the
legislative appropriations committees, we passed a day care bill on
the last day of the session, and we got a study committee created to
look at two other bills. We got more than we expected. Even more
importantly, the whole process of grassroots lobbying and flexing our
muscles on Lobby Day was very empowering for our members. It gave them
the sense that they had more political strength than they had ever
considered."
          But Local 1985 wanted to be much more than just a good lobbying
organization. The members wanted to hold and exercise power at the
worksite--regardless of what the law said about collective bargaining
for public employees. And that would take nuts and bolt
organizing. The leadership decided to focus early organizing on
employees of Georgia's mental health and mental retardation hospitals
and facilities.
          The first target was Georgia Retardation Center in Metro
Atlanta. After a three-month organizing drive twenty employees marched
from the entrance to their admin-

istrator's office to demand meetings
between management and employees and to demand informal
recognition. Those employees took with them Herb Mabry, President of
the Georgia AFLCIO, Richard Ray, President of the Atlanta Labor
Council, and James Orange. organizing coordinator of the Industrial
Union Department and a leader in the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (SCLC).
          On that day in late January twenty workers met with their
administrator for three hours, set a regular schedule of monthly
meetings, and Local 1985 had a proven, workable organizing model.
          With a significant subsidy from the international SEIU, Local 1985
hired two veteran organizers, Lou Sartor and Jean Davis, in February
1985 to organize Central State Hospital in Milledgeville.
          By August, nearly half of the hospital's 2,500 eligible workers
were union members.
          The drive had three major milestones. In June, fifty union members
held a news conference in front of the facility outlining their
reasons for organizing, detailing their grievances, and appealing to
the community for support. The next month the union held a rally and
picnic at a Milledgeville park. James Orange and Thunderbolt
Patterson, an ex-professional wrestler, were guest speakers. About
1,900 workers came to eat barbequed chicken and show their
support. Finally, on July 28, one hundred Central State Hospital
workers gathered again at the facility's entrance. This time the
employees demanded meetings and informal recognition as their
counterparts at Georgia Retardation Center had already done.
          After a brief rally and a march of about fifty yards, they were met
by the Central State police force. The officer in charge announced
that all state employees who proceeded with the march would be
detained and subject to dismissal and all non-state employees would be
arrested for criminal trespassing. The marchers knelt in prayer, sang
two songs, and Acuff stepped across the line into the hands of the
police [at this writing, Georgia attorney general Mike Bowers was
prosecuting Acuff]. The march turned into a picket line which stayed
up the rest of the day.
          Just a few weeks later, seven workers from Central State
interrupted a Department of Human Resources board meeting to demand
monthly meetings in Milledgeville. James Ledbetter, DHR Commissioner,
granted the workers' request on the spot. One day later, Ledbetter
reversed the decision after Central State Superintendent Myers Kurtz
drove to Atlanta and made a direct personal appeal to Ledbetter.
          The union decided not to get bogged down in a lengthy fight in
Milledgeville but to continue organizing at additional facilities and
to use the pressure of more workers at more facilities organized to
push the department. The local also hired a veteran organizer to work
with employees at Gracewood Hospital in Augusta.
          On October 2, 1986, two hundred workers from Central State,
Gracewood, and the Georgia Retardation Center converged on Atlanta for
the most militant and exciting action the union had held. The day
started with workers crowding into the DHR Commissioner's office to
demand an immediate meeting and resolution of the
grievances. Commissioner Ledbetter was out of town, but the group
chanted and sang till they got a short meeting with Reuben Lasseter,
DHR Director of Personnel. After that meeting the workers marched the
three blocks to the Capitol for a rally which featured speakers from
every major union in the Atlanta area. During the rally, six rank and
file union leaders along with Rev. Fred Taylor of the SCLC met with
members of Governor Joe Frank Harris's staff.
          Two weeks later, three hundred union delegates and members from all
over the: state gathered in Augusta for their second convention. They
set their legislative agenda, raised their dues so the local could
hire a lawyer, attended workshops on grassroots lobbying and grievance
handling, and made their 1987 plans.
          Immediately after the convention, organizers Lou Sartor and Daisy
Hannah (who had replaced Jean Davis) began a second organizing drive
at Georgia Regional Hospital in Augusta and Mike Tatham began an
organizing drive at Northwest Regional Hospital in Rome.
          In January 1987, the legislative session began and the local is
fighting for more pay and a more equitable pay raise formula, overtime
pay, on-call pay, more political freedom, a state employee hazardous
chemical protection and right-to-know act, and progressive changes in
sick leave policy.
          Before the legislature convened one hundred and fifty workers met
in grassroots lobbying sessions in Rome, Gainesville, Milledgeville,
and Augusta. Additionally, the local leadership has laid out their
legislative agenda with the governor's staff. After the governor in
early January recommended a 2.5 percent raise for state employees,
union members placed two hundred phone calls to members of the House
and Senate appropriations committees to ask for more money. This was
to be followed up with a second mass Lobby Day at the Capitol.
          As the local grows in membership, as the number of organized
worksites increases, as the union's leadership becomes better versed
in Georgia's politics, and as the tactics are refined, the pressure
will build and change will come.
          
            Stewart Acuff is the executive director of GSEA/SEIU
Local 1985. Robert Sarason is a regional coordinator of
SEIU.
          
        
        
          Lillian Smith: A Southerner Confronting the
South. By Anne Loveland. (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State
University Press, 1986. $22.50).
          By Gladney, RoseRose Gladney
          Vol. 9, No. 1, 1987, pp. 13-14
          
          Before she died in 1966 Lillian Smith was contacted and sometimes
interviewed by several prospective biographers. Because she knew her
worth, Smith cooperated and compiled a rather extensive collection of
autobiographical notes, chronologies, and lists of significant friends
and references. After Smith's death Paula Snelling, as executrix of
her literary estate, continued the process by preparing and selecting
Smith's correspondence and other papers for deposit in the University
of Georgia Libraries. Students and friends of Smith have waited twenty
years for a serious, thoroughly researched biography. Anne Loveland is
to be congratulated for being the first to master the sheer volume of
material in the Lillian Smith papers and for placing Smith's life in
the mainstream of twentieth century American social and intellectual
history.
          Because she wee publicly praised and honored for her work with the
civil rights movement during her lifetime, Smith knew she would be
remembered for her early and continued call for a complete end to
racial segregation. However, what Smith most wanted was to be valued
as a creative writer and thinker. Accordingly, Loveland chose as the
informing theme of her biography what Smith had called the struggle to
relate the "Mary" and "Martha" aspects of her life, the conflicting
impulses between her writing career and her work for social
reform. While the use of this theme in her analysis provides important
insights into some of Smith's works, Loveland fails to establish her
own aesthetic criteria for evaluating Smith's writing. Instead, after
offering little more than reports of the critical views of Smith's
contemporaries and noting Smith's own acknowledged appreciation of
other philosophers and theologians such as Tillich and Teilard de
Chardin, Loveland concludes: "Regrettably, her philosophical
thinking was generally derivative and superficial and her literary
effort unexceptional. Her primary significance lies in the role she
played in the Southern civil rights movement of the 1940s, 1950s, and
1960s."
          Although Smith's contribution to the Southern civil rights movement
should not be underestimated, the value and significance of that
contribution cannot really be separated from the quality of her
writing and thinking. Behind Loveland's assessment of Smith's literary
and philosophical capabilities lies a seemingly unexamined acceptance
of the necessity of separating creative writing and social
activism. This failure to examine the implications of Smith's choice
of self-definition is one indication of the absence of an essential
ingredient in Loveland's analysis: a consciousness of the power of
gender in shaping a life and in influencing one's perception of life
in general.
          Without that awareness, Loveland fails to see the tension between
the "Mary" and "Martha" aspects of her character as a function of
gender and the frustration in Smith's life as a product of seeking
affirmation and validation from the very forces she rebelled
against--the patriarchal structure which perpetuates a racist and
sexist society.
          Additional evidence of Loveland's lack of feminist consciousness
pervades her discussion of Smith's analysis of the roles of Southern
women. Although Loveland notes Smith's "comprehensive challenge
against sexual convention," she seems to accept uncritically Smith's
rather limited definition of feminism. While observing that Smith
"thought of herself as specially qualified to help break the long
silence about women," and that her challenge to white supremacy and
racial segregation "inevitably threatened two major supports of sacred
womanhood," Loveland maintains that "[Smith] was clearly not a
feminist writer, for lesbianism was only a minor theme in her novels
and none of her works was written to promote women's rights or
liberation." I question the logic of so 

limited a definition of
feminist writing.
          Loveland's lack of feminist consciousness is further demonstrated
in her analysis of Smith's personal relationships. While acknowledging
that Smith's closest friends were women, and that the strongest
support and appreciation of her work came from women, Loveland
devalues the significance of that support by implying that those
female friends praised Smith's work because they "recognized how much
Lillian desired approval and praise." Downplaying the effects of
thirteen years of battling cancer, the 1955 fire which destroyed her
home and most of her unpublished manuscripts, and the reality of
patriarchal biases in treatment from male critics and friends,
Loveland concludes the chapter on relationships: "She seemed to
expect ill treatment from people, especially men, and purposely looked
for indications of it to confirm her suspicions. At least some of the
frustration and disappointment marking her life and career was of her
own making and the result of an inability to take satisfaction in
anything less than unconditional praise or loyalty."
          Although Smith's tendency to resist identification as a feminist
may be at least partially attributed to the absence of a
well-developed, supportive feminist movement during her lifetime, it
is not so easy to excuse Loveland's adherence to an anti-feminist
interpretation in light of the influence of feminist theory on recent
historical scholarship. Whether or not Smith can be called a feminist
writer, her biographer should recognize the power of patriarchal
values in shaping Smith's life. Smith knew that her sex made an
important difference in her experience, perception, and treatment as a
writer. She even associated the "Mary" or creative side of herself
with her knowledge of women. Yet she wanted to be valued as though sex
did not matter. The illusion that such approval can be "objective" is
in itself a product of patriarchal thinking. Ironically, we finally
learn from Smith's life what neither she-nor Loveland could fully
see--the power and the cost of self-creation and the necessity for
self-validation in a woman's life.
          Loveland's biography values in Smith what was acknowledged by the
ruling males of her day and ours: Smith's contribution to the civil
rights movement. Correspondingly, the biography undervalues the
importance of Smith's life and work with other women. If Smith's life
is to be re-created so that its richness and complexity may be fully
appreciated, her biographer must push the boundaries of patriarchal
thinking even further than Smith did.
          This carefully researched example of traditional scholarship has
reported the facts of Smith's life, but a full recreation and
appreciation of her character remains to be written.
          
            Rose Gladney is assistant professor of American Studies
at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa.
          
        
        
          Myth, Media, and the Southern Mind By Stephen
A. Smith (Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 1986.)
          By Egerton, JohnJohn Egerton
          Vol. 9, No. 1, 1987, pp. 15-16
          
          If anything is more prolific than kudzu in the South, it's
mythology. The collective imagination of Southerners--romantic,
gothic, adventurous, heroic, humorous, instructive--has thrived in
courtroom and classrooms, pulpits and porch swings, since the
plantation South emerged as a self-conscious entity in the wake of the
American Revolution.
          Social psychologists and psychiatrists and philosophers have never
come up with a satisfactory explanation of the phenomenon. We don't
know why Southerners thrive on stories, parables, imagination,
rhetoric, exaggeration, legend, mythology--but they do, and they
always have. Myth is embedded in the fiction and poetry, the newspaper
and magazine writing, the song lyrics, the preaching, the language of
lawyers and judges, the letters, the oral tradition, the ritual,
ceremonies, the radio and television programming, the advertising.
          It's even in the history. "I may not have the facts just exactly
right," a keeper of useful myths of Southern history once explained to
me at the end of a long and winding tale, "but what I've told you is
the honest truth." In a more negative vein, the South has also
suffered from some historians whose myths and facts bore little
resemblance to the truth.
          Think of the descriptive names the South has gone by--how sweeping,
how colorful, how misleading: Old South, New South, Deep South, Solid
South, Populist, Progressive, Agrarian, Bourbon, Jim Crow
South. Moonlight and magnolias, gentlemen of honor, ladies on
pedestals, happy darkies singing in the cotton fields, belles and
beaus glorifying the Confederacy, the Lost Cause, the pride of
Dixieland. The intertwining tendrils of fantasy embrace and encompass
reality in the South like wisteria on a backyard door.
          All of which makes a book like Stephen A. Smith's Myth,
Media, and the Southern Mind so useful and welcome. Smith is a
University of Arkansas professor of communications and rhetoric and a
former staff aide to some Arkansas politicans. He has been immersed in
rhetoric both as a scholar and as a specialist for skilled
practictioners of the art; he is an ideal person to analyze
and interpret the cultural myths that have dominated the historic and
contemporary South.
          To set the stage for his major points, Smith devotes the first
three chapters of his book to a synthesis of Southern history and to
his own careful and persuasive reinterpretation of it. At the risk of
oversimplifying his own simplification of a complex story, let me
compress his narrative into a few brief paragraphs:
          The South didn't emerge as a discrete, distinct region until after
the Revolution. By the early 1800s--fully two centuries after
Jamestown--the forces of slavery, agrarianism, economics, and
geography were slowly beginning to shape the Southern social
order. Institutions of politics, religion, education, and business
reinforced the identity. As the century wore on and the South lost
control of Congress, the White House, and public opinion, an
oppression psychosis set in; the white aristocrat's way of life was
under attack, and his response was aggressively defensive. The
planter-politician-businessman enforced a uniform white attitude based
on loyalty and honor and fear, and though there were whites who did
not agree, they were effectively intimidated into silent
acquiescence.
          Through the crucial middle decades of the nineteenth century,
through the Civil War and Reconstruction and the resurgence of white
supremacy, one petrifying and imprisoning myth after another kept the
white South solid. Turning defeat and humiliation into pride and
nostalgia for the "good old days," the ruling planters
turned-"colonels" learned to glorify defeat, to justify bigotry, and
to purify their hearts with religious and literary
mythology. "Separate but equal" was invented in this

pre-twentieth-century period.
          Henry Grady's "New South" movement of the 1880s was a variation on
this theme in that it tried to define the region's future, not its
past--but as Paul Gaston made abundantly clear in The New South Creed,
the Grady Bunch managed to cling to white supremacy and the Southern
status quo. The Populist movement of the same period did try to
redefine the Southern past, and for a brief time its leaders sought to
elevate democracy by uniting the powerless majority of whites and
blacks But Jim Crow leaders fumed the movement around, and egalitarian
yeomen became racist demogogues. Southern Progressives of the 1920s
fared no better, and the literary Agrarians of the 1930s were
unabashed reactionaries who yearned for antebellum white paternalism
and privilege.
          It was not until the 1940s that the white supremacy myth showed the
first signs of weakness. The democratizing influences of the New Deal
and World War II stirred Dixiecrat reaction, and when that failed,
increasingly alarmed racists dusted off some antique myths--massive
resistance, interposition, nullification--to hold the tide. But the
solid South of the White supremacists began to lose its powerful grip
as black resistance swelled, the courts compelled change, the nation
and the world condemned racism, and more Southern whites joined the
crusade against racism.
          The old guard said it was the end of the South, but wiser
Southerners observed that it was only the end of the myth--and out of
that notion came the impulse to create new myths and symbols and
rhetoric suitable for the modern South.
          The second half of Stephen Smith's provocative book identifies
three new mythic themes in the contemporary South: equality,
distinctiveness, and a sense of place and community. These ideas
aren't developed as thoroughly as they might have been, and that is
perhaps the weakness of the book. But Smith's modern themes, like his
synthesis of Southern history, may serve the purpose he intended: not
to present a definitive argument, but simply to introduce a new way of
looking at things.
          The theme of equality involves a revision of history, a
redefinition: the rediscovery of libertarian documents (the
Declaration of Independence, the Bill of Rights) advanced by Southern
Presidents (Jefferson, Madison); the impulse of Jacksonian Democracy;
the prophetic dissent of Justice John Marshall Harlan, in Plessy v. Ferguson, the "separate but equal" ruling
of 1896. Smith cites historians such as C. Vann Woodward and George
Tindall, journalists such as Ralph McGill and Harry Ashmore,
politicians such as Terry Sanford and LeRoy Collins, and activists led
by Martin Luther King Jr. and many others as the vanguard of a new
Southern tradition of equality.
          In support of his second new theme, distinctiveness, Smith argues
that the South is still different from the rest of the country, as it
always has been--but now often in positive ways, from its music, food,
language to its literature and oral traditions. This and the final
theme--the sense of place and community (by which he means such
characteristics as family ties, attachment to land and nature,
etc.)--are harder to sustain as examples of a new mythology. In fact,
Smith acknowledges that growth and other manifestations of
contemporary Southern life pose serious threats to the survival of a
progressive new mythology in the heart of Dixie.
          Understanding the cultural myths that thrive in a society is an
important step in the direction of understanding reality--the true
meaning of our past, present, and future. Thanks to Stephen Smith's
insightful book, we have more much-needed help in understanding the
once and future South.
        
        
          H.L. Mitchell A Lifetime of Organizing and Hell-Raising
          By Land, MikeMike Land
          Vol. 9, No. 1, 1987, pp. 3-7
          
          The way H.L. Mitchell figures it, the central mission of his life
has been to "raise hell."
          "I always believed that if you raised enough hell, something
would be done about a problem," he said, smiling.
          "And I always tried to do that."
          Armed with a socialist's convictions and a cutting dry wit,
Mitchell has raised that hell far and wide. In 1934 he helped found
the Southern Tenant Farmer's Union. In the forties he became president
of the National Farm Labor Union. The fifties found Mitchell leading
migrant workers in California; the sixties put him in the bayous of
Louisiana, organizing sugar-cane workers.
          And even though he retired to Montgomery Ala., in 1973, Mitchell is
still raising a little hell in 1986. He writes newspaper columns and
letters to editors about the need for a new homestead act to help the
small farmer; he has written his autobiography, Mean
Things Happening In This Land, and he tours the country each year
on college lecture circuits.
          "One thing I can say," the eighty-year-old observed,
"Since that first meeting in 1934 I've never been bored. I've been
mad and upset and all sorts of damn things but I've never been
bored."
          Harry Leland Mitchell was raised among sharecroppers in west
Tennessee. His father, Jim, did some sharecropping. He was also a
fundamentalist preacher who dropped out of his family's life for long
periods of time. Combine his father's disappearances with the
atmosphere in Tennessee during the "Scopes Monkey
Trial," and one has the beginnings of Mitchell's
dissatisfaction with organized religion.
          "These people like Pat Robertson, there have always been
religious pirates like him," Mitchell recalls. "In my time, we
had Billy Sunday preaching against evolution and breaking up
strikes. Now we have these people calling their opponents' 
humanists--which 

strikes me as a pretty good thing to be."
          So it was that as a teen-ager, Mitchell developed an
"independent kind of faith." One's religious impulses "had
to be pragmatic, as far as I was concerned."
          And what seemed pragmatic to him was socialism. He learned about it
by responding to a newspaper ad that declared, "To Oppose
Evolution, You Have To Know What It Is." He began to receive a
succession of Little Blue Books about different topics, including
socialism.
          As Mitchell is fond of saying, he heard his first socialist speech
in 1920 in "Moscow-Tennessee, that is." That was where he lived
when Dr. John Morris, a veterinarian, passed through and gave a speech
on socialism. Mitchell followed him around the rest of the day, asking
questions.
          The seed had been planted. Nine years later, after the Crash of '29
brought on the Great Depression, Mitchell was married to first wife
Lyndell, had a family and operated a cleaning business in Tyronza,
Ark. A fellow Tyronza businessman, gas station owner Clay East,
befriended Mitchell
          East, unlike Mitchell, had a college education-but, also unlike
Mitchell. had little awareness of alternate political philosophies.
          "One day," Mitchell recalled, "CIay came in my place and
said, "Hey, there isn't enough business here for three gas
stations. We should work out a deal so each of us takes off different
days. Then all of us would have some time to do some fishing.
"I said, 'Well Clay, you know that's a socialist idea, don't
you?' And he told me not to call him a socialist, that he wasn't
any such thing. I told him I was going to give him some books to read
on the subject. He said he didn't want to read any book if it had to
do with socialism."
          Not many months later, Mitchell had converted East into a socialist
so dedicated that East would slip socialist pamphlets and newspapers
into the automobiles of customers, and demand that traveling salesmen
read the publications if they wanted his business.
          Mitchell and East organized their local chapter of the Socialist
Party of America and met with its presidential candidate, Norman
Thomas. In 1934, Mitchell was part of the Arkansas delegation at the
SPA national convention. In that capacity, he watched a rift develop
between the New York founders and Midwest members that, in his
estimation, ultimately sealed the party's doom. The older members
advocated the cautious tact of working through the vote. Others,
Mitchell included, believed that unions-thought
"dead" at the time-offered a way to strike more
directly at the economic base of power.
          Later that year, eleven whites and seven blacks met to form the
STFU in a rural Arkansas schoolhouse. Mitchell's course had been
forever diverted onto the union route.
          The STFU had its ups and downs, the latter largely imposed from
outside by plantation owners and the fear they created. In 1935,
authorities in a rural town jailed a black preacher speaking at an
STFU meeting. East and Mitchell couldn't talk an ACLU lawyer into
leaving Memphis to free, in the lawyer's words, a "Nigra
preacher."
          East voiced the doubt that if the STFU couldn't find a lawyer to
get a preacher out of jail, the union may as well end. Mitchell was
more stubborn and the preacher was released, but the STFU was
definitely on the brink of collapse.
          Then, however, plantation owners lowered the rate paid per hundred
pounds of cotton to sharecroppers from $1 to 75 cents. The STFU
swelled to an estimated all time high of 31,000 by 1936. The STFU
would go on until the mid-forties. Mitchell, East and other leaders
dodged Iynch mobs and night riders, making strategic night runs
through hostile territory to reach sharecroppers.
          Mitchell still finds sad irony in one violent episode of '36. In
the aftermath of a mob's attack on a group of white and black
marchers, in which black marchers died, a white man and woman
investigating were beaten in the woods.
          Mitchell immediately arranged for the press to pho-

tograph the
beaten whites. As Mitchell wrote in his book, "The beating of a
white woman and a white minister became a nationwide human interest
story. No attention was paid to Eliza Nolden, a black woman soon to
die from the effects of a severe beating, nor to the serious condition
of white sharecropper Jim Reese, nor to the fact that Frank Weems, a
black sharecropper, had presumably been beaten to death. After all,
these three people were just sharecroppers."
          Mitchell managed to continue to get attention for
sharecroppers-attention from as lofty a couple as Franklin Delano and
Eleanor Roosevelt.
          In 1939, Mitchell was attending a meeting in New York City when he
opened the New York Times and saw pictures of "people I knew
sitting on the roadside" in Missouri. They had been dumped there
by a plantation owner after a conflict in negotiating a
contract. Mitchell immediately went to Washington to seek emergency
help for the 1,700 homeless sharecroppers.
          After several setbacks, Mitchell managed to win an audience with
Mrs. Roosevelt. "Aubrey Williams set it up and I drove up in a taxi
cab right through those iron gates, the same ones where Reagan always
stands and waves with all those damn dictators," he said, "I
waited for a long time to see her. When she walked in, she apologized
to me for being so long. She said, 'Mr. Mitchell, you know how long
it takes us ladies to get ready.'
          "I thought she was one of the most attractive women I'd ever
seen. I told her the situation, and was thinking that maybe the
president could order the National Guard to send down tents and field
kitchens. She told me she would put a note on the president's bedside
table and that it would be the last thing he saw before he went to
sleep and the first thing he did in the morning."
          FDR's order was circumvented by the Arkansas governor, who had all
the sharecroppers broken up in small groups out of sight, far back
from the road. But Mrs. Roosevelt, who wrote a national weekly column,
had asked Mitchell what the sharecroppers needed, and her two writings
about the problem yielded $5,000 in donations.
          "That's like $50,000 today," said Mitchell.
          Later, due to Mrs. Roosevelt's aid, 595 houses were built for
homeless farmers in Missouri.
          Despite such dramatic flourishes, Mitchell and others could see
harder things ahead for sharecroppers. Mechanization, they sensed,
would soon make them jobless altogether. In anticipation, an
inter-union program was worked out which sent twelve thousand
sharecroppers to new jobs in Northern cities.
          "We were," Mitchell says, "the only organization that
encouraged people to leave. Sharecropping was brutal. If they could
get jobs in the city, they were encouraged to do so."
          By the end of 1946, Mitchell had moved on himself He had divorced
Lyndell and later married the former Dorothy Dowe of Montgomery, whom
he had met when both worked in New Deal programs in Alabama. Dorothy
was also active in the farmers' labor movement.
          After World War II the STFU became the National Farm Labor Union,
with Mitchell as its first president. The NFLU joined the American
Federation of Labor. Soon Mitchell crossed the country to help
organize migrant workers in California.
          Then, in '55, Mitchell investigated the White Citizens Councils
that arose in the South after the Supreme Court's 1954 decision in
favor of desegregation. Never one to be falsely complimentary, he
called the councils the "KKK in business suits."
          In 1960, Mitchell moved to Louisiana, where he organized everyone
from sugarcane plantation workers to fishermen.
          He retired from full-time work in 1973, but he has carried the
concerns that dominated his career with him.
          Time has tempered his views somewhat. For instance, he does not
expect the revolution once envisioned by socialists.
          "Some of the things Roosevelt did along the lines of welfare
were socialist," he said. "But there has been no basic
socialist revolution in this country, because there have always been
plenty of jobs, plenty of free land and things of that sort. There has
been no major change in the economic structure."
          And, in some ways, he's even glad about it.
          "If we got the government too involved, it would mess up
everything," Mitchell said. "I used to think the government
should own everything, but now I've seen it make too many messes of
things."
          However, Mitchell would object strongly if anyone said he was
becoming conservative in his old age. Last summer he had a
non-malignant polyp removed from his colon. It was, he observed,
"the only thing I've had in common with Reagan in 40 years."
          He still believes in unions, despite the corruption that he says
exists in many of them. He figures the 

STFU was relatively clean in
that department. "George Meany once told someone that we were too
small to ever attract a good-size racketeer," Mitchell says,
laughing.
          But he also indicates that the problems of the small farmer today
are worse than the problems of the STFU sharecropper. The STFU, he
said, encouraged people to leave farming because the union could line
them up with industrial jobs, many of the openings coming as a result
of World War II.
          "Now there's no place for people to go," he said, mentioning
the problems of cities filled with unemployed individuals untrained
for an increasingly mechanized business world.
          Mitchell advocates a homestead act giving families modest acreages
with which to farm. He believes small farms are more efficient,
particularly if a group of small farmers form co-operatives. The
co-ops could be used to acquire equipment and other necessities.
          "Some people would tell us co-ops are a Russian idea," he
said. "But there were co-ops in this country long before the
Russian Revolution."
          Mitchell also deplores the role of the Farm Bureau, which, he says,
is run "just like the Communist Party -from the top down."
          "They've done nothing to help the small farmer," Mitchell
said. "They've encouraged the building of larger and larger farm
units."
          But he worries that farmers are too small in number to cause
changes in public policy anymore. "Fifty years ago, 30 percent of
our population farmed," Mitchell said.  

These days, it's down to 2 percent.
          "The Reagan Administration knows that. They're not worried about
what the farmers think."
          Which means Mitchell has something yet to achieve.
          "I keep thinking a homestead act is bound to happen," he
said. "But I've been talking about it for 50 years. I haven't made
much progress."
          But he's still "raising hell." And Mitchell
hopes he will continue to be an irritant to wrongdoers-even, according
to the conclusion of his autobiography, after his death:
          "When I shall have lived out my life I have asked that my body
be cremated, and that my ashes be scattered in the wind over eastern
Arkansas. Then, if any one of the plantation owners or their
descendants who know of me still survive, may they some day look up to
the sky, and if something gets in their eyes, they can then say:
"There is that damned Mitchell again.""
          
            Mike Land is a reporter for the
Alabama Journal in Montgomery.
          
        
        
          More Cuts for the Poor
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 9, No. 1, 1987, pp. 1-2
          
          Most attention to President Reagan's proposed 1987 budget has been
placed on the overall size of the budget and the record-breaking
deficits. But this budget is also important because it continues the
Reagan effort to cut programs that serve the poor.
          An analysis of the proposed budget by the Washington-based Center
on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP), says that one-third of the
$18.7 billion cuts would come from programs that aid poor people. The
proposed Reagan budget would cut Medicaid, student financial
assistance, low-income energy assistance, low-income housing, and
Indian health programs most severely. In addition, the proposed budget
proposes to eliminate another fourteen programs altogether including
Legal Services and the Community Services Block Grant. Legal Services
would be dropped immediately, Community Services funding would be
phased out over four years.
          "Winners" would be the departments of Defense,
State, Justice, and NASA. "Losers" would be
departments of Education, Housing and Urban Development, Interior,
Transportation, and Agriculture.
          According to the CBPP analysis, these shifts indicate a pattern in
which "agencies with military-related spending generally receive
sizable increases in their budget, while agencies that operate
domestic programs generally receive reductions."
          These cuts have come as the toll from sustained high unemployment
levels leaves large numbers of Americans, particularly among unskilled
or blue-collar workers, either without jobs or competing for a small
number of low-paying jobs.
          Typical are the experiences reported by an Auburn University
researcher who studied the small Black Belt community of Benton, Ala.,
following the closing of a textile plant there in 1985.
          The Dan River Mills cotton sheeting plant had begun operation in
1966, finding an instant work force among the poor in the area, many
of them displaced from newly mechanized farming; more than
three-

fourths of the Dan River workers were black. Then, in October
1985, with less than three months warning, the company laid off 246
employees, many of whom had worked at the plant for more than ten
years. The company blamed foreign competition for the shutdown.
          Researcher Mike Trend's surveys report that only 24 percent of the
laid-off workers found new jobs within two months. Only 46 percent had
found new jobs within nine months. Of those who were employed again,
40 percent described their new jobs as temporary, and the average
commuting distance was sixty miles a day.
          Though Trend's figures indicate that wages paid by Dan River at
Benton were generally much lower than wages paid for similar
industrial jobs in non-South states, the laid-off workers who got new
jobs typically took salary cuts of four to five dollars per hour.
          And the workers who took the greatest salary cuts and had the
hardest time finding new jobs were women and blacks. "Being white,
being male and being married were all associated with an increased
probability of becoming employed after the plant closing," said
Trend's report.
          Many of the former Dan River employees were unaware of or unable to
secure meaningful assistance from so-called safety net government
programs.
          Cutbacks during the Reagan years were initially justified as part
of a strategic effort to decrease the growth in federal spending and
eventually balance the budget. During the Reagan years, the deficit
has grown and the few reductions made have come disproportionately
from domestic aid programs that constitute a fraction of the total
budget.
          This particular combination of cuts grows out of a deeper Reagan
ideology about the role of government that has no real connection to
budget philosophy.
          That deeper ideology is revealed in another report from Washington
dealing with welfare and also reviewed by the CBPP. The report,
released by a special White House Task Force appointed by Reagan,
maintains that federal aid to the poor does not work, that federal
money now spent on the poor is inefficient (twice as much is spent as
is needed), that there should be a freeze on federal programs, and
that special pilot programs should be instituted at the state level to
explore alternative strategies for public assistance.
          The Welfare Task Force report, though prepared by persons with
access to the full range of government program data, amounts to a
restatement of long-standing Reagan views that federal government aid
programs ought to be terminated. Significantly, it does not address
the question in terms of federal deficits or show how such a cutback
would aid the movement to balance the budget.
          The CBPP analysis of the White House welfare report finds it
insufficient. The report fails to give proper weight to domestic aid
programs that do help the poor, and it "grossly overstated" the
inefficiency of the current dollars spent.
          The problem of helping the poor in America persists. Unemployment
is consistently high, the earning power of employed persons is
threatened, and there has been a "sharp increase over the past
decade in poverty among children."
          "What is needed," the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
says, "is leadership in developing bipartisan consensus on
effective actions that we can take now." 
        
      
    
  