
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 9, Number 5,
	       1987
        
          Waiting for the Gag Reflex
          By Teepen, TomTom Teepen
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, pp. 1-2
          
          The killing is picking up, not that anyone notices much any
more.
          We killed a man in Georgia the other night. The paper front-paged
his execution, but most of the TV stations ho-hummed it. Just another
electrocution, now commonplace enough that it was reported somewhere
around the fund-raising banquet for the musically incontinent, TV's
equivalent of a newspaper fate among the truss ads.
          There were three executions on a recent Friday, in Alabama, Utah
and Florida. Even the hat trick didn't attract great notice. The last
time three had been executed in one day was twenty-five years ago, but
the event this time was a big yawn.
          You can expect an increased rate of executions--and of general
indifference about them.
          A majority of the U.S. Supreme Court's justices kissed off a major
challenge to the death penalty in April--the last major challenge,
most experts feel-by saying they don't really care if the death
penalty is applied with apparent racial or other inequity. That put a
number of death sentences, held in abeyance, back on the killing
track.
          The persons who follow such matters do not expect exactly a blood
bath in the nation's death chambers, but on the other hand the
prospect is for a steadily rising frequency. The court of last resort
has made it plain that it is impatient with challenges and doesn't
want to be bothered on the point.
          The previous high for any year since the Supreme Court reinstated
the death penalty in 1976 was twenty-one executions, but there have
been about thirty this year, with a month to go. We are working our
way back to the time when executions occurred every other day, or 

more
often. There were 199 in 1935, the record. We may be only a few years
from the dubious achievement of rivaling, or even exceeding, our worst
year.
          There are 1,900 men and women on the nation's death rows. About 250
are being added annually.
          Is all this killing doing any good? No, if by "good" you mean
reducing either the general crime rate or specifically the murder
rate.
          There were 18,784 murders nationally in 1976, and 20,616 last
year. In between, the numbers rose to a high of 23,044 in 1980 and
dropped to a low of 18,692 in 1984. Georgia had 692 murders in 1976
and 653 last year, with a low of 460 in 1983 and a high of 877 in
1979.
          And if executions are supposed to deter murder, the lesson loses
even the possibility of working when it becomes so common it goes
virtually unreported.
          The simple truth is that the death penalty brutalizes our society
without providing any offsetting advantages. It does nothing more, or
finer, than throw bodies to a public bloodlust. And far from deterring
killers, the death penalty may incite them. It is a statement,
officially endorsed, that killing is sometimes a good way to solve
problems.
          We are not only failing to send the right message with
executions. There is a very high risk we are sending just the wrong
one.
          Most countries that presume to the description
"civilized" have quit this pointless
business. Britain's and Canada's parliaments recently have firmly
rejected proposals to resume the practice. The few putatively
civilized nations that retain capital punishment used it rarely.
          Execution is quite the popular thing with Americans just now. All
the polls show it. All the polls know it. It is not going to be
stopped, at least not anytime soon.
          But we are killing the retarded without serious qualm. We are near
the point of killing persons for crimes they committed as
children. And it is increasingly difficult not to notice and admit we
are mainly executing people of marginal intelligence, doubtful sanity,
debilitating poverty. The death penalty has become an act of class
warfare, fought top-down against the poor and incompetent.
          America may no longer have a heart in such matters, but perhaps, at
some point, we will prove still to have a gag reflex.
          
            Tom Teepen is editor of the editorial page of the Atlanta
Constitution
          
        
        
          As We Have Sown: The new struggle is the same old fight to make
enough to survive
          By Ritchie, MarkMark Ritchie
          Vol. 9, No. 5,  1987, pp. 5, 7-11
          
          History is a good place to begin. The important thing about
agriculture in the United States from the beginning of European
colonization is that from the moment this country was founded,
small-scale subsistence farming was everywhere. That is how we think
of our nation-as a nation founded by small farmers.
          We were about 99 percent small farmers and somehow it has declined
to about 2 percent now. We get the image of an inevitable natural
process. However, agriculture in the U.S. until about the mid-1890s
was pretty well split-the rural people who were small subsistence
farmers, farming for themselves primarily and maybe a little trade,
and the farming that today we call commercial agriculture. From the
very start of European colonization, the latter was formed into very
large-scale industrial units: chattel slavery and the plantation
system in the South, Spanish land grants with huge haciendas in the
West, bonanza farms. Not until the mid-1850s did families begin to
control land and to farm in a commercial way-where farm families
themselves could build their productivity to produce crops large
enough to be sold on a more commercial basis.
          From almost the first moment when families began being the dominant
unit of commercial production, family farmers and the family ranchers
of that time entered into the same kind of struggle that we face
today, a struggle between the high prices of things they needed to
live on the farm and the low prices they could get for their
products.
          At different times between the 1850s and the early 1900s that
squeeze was enough to cause what we call a depression but was then
called a panic, a much more useful term. We had five or six panics
when what farmers were getting for the crops was too little to pay
what they owed their creditors. In each panic rural people reached a
point of desperation. Then they began to get organized. Sometimes they
came together into cooperatives to defend themselves. Sometimes they
came together into political parties-the Greenbacks, the Populists.
          By the early 1900s it became clear that it was going to take more
than just farmers getting organized locally to defend
themselves. Farmers began seeing that they had to move nationally with
federal legislation if they were to 

begin leveling the playing field
between the monopolies that were providing them with everything they
needed to live and the monopolies they were forced to sell their
products to on the other end.
          In the 1920s, following the collapse of farm prices after World War
I, farmers entered probably the most serious depression they had faced
up to that time. They organized nationally and passed-three different
times-federal farm legislation called the McNerry-Halgan bill. Three
times that legislation was vetoed-once by Coolidge and twice by
Hoover-with a pretty blatant public comment that they needed to keep
food prices down so they could keep wages down. In each instance
farmers knew they had to come back and keep pushing. Farmers were
discouraged just as they are discouraged now. But they kept coming
back and pushing and pushing and finally in the early
1930s-unfortunately not until after their depression had rolled into
the cities and brought real misery to urban areas, too-they passed and
made the President sign federal farm legislation to begin giving some
security back to rural people, to farmers and ranchers.
          That first farm legislation, often called the parity farm
legislation or the Roosevelt farm legislation or the New Deal farm
legislation, was based on three principles. First, prices in the
marketplace had to be high enough so that farmers 

could pay their
bills and keep their families alive. The Roosevelt farm legislation
through the Commodity Credit Corporation put a floor under
prices. Second, that legislation tried to bring supply and demand into
balance. Things would occur-the weather, insects, all kinds of
issues-that farmers as individuals were unable to control but that
influenced supply and demand for them as a group. The legislation
effectively allowed farmers participation through national referenda
and voting on establishing supply management that would help them keep
supply and demand in balance. The third principle was protection for
consumers. In the thirties we also had some droughts and dust bowls
and all of a sudden we would find ourselves with the grain in the
hands of the grain companies and a big shortage on the farm. Prices
would suddenly skyrocket. Under the Roosevelt farm legislation, when
prices rose to a certain level national reserves were released into
the market to bring the prices back down so that they were kept within
a fairly narrow range to make it possible for farmers to keep their
families going but to keep prices from skyrocketing for consumers in
the cities as well.
          The farm programs that started in the thirties rested on these
three bases for a long time. These programs were not without their own
problems. The first programs were declared unconstitutional because
there was a tax on the processors. Some of the benefits were not
passed to the sharecroppers and tenant farmers. The same racism and
discrimination that prevailed in this country was felt through those
programs as well. But there was a struggle throughout the thirties to
make those programs right, to find the formula, as in all of society
we were looking for different ways to solve our economic crisis. By
the end of the 1930s people had really settled into a good solid
pattern of federal farm legislation that was to serve our nation well
through the early fifties.
          THESE PROGRAMS WERE a big success for a lot of people. They held
farm prices to a fair level and consumer prices were also very low. We
had a strong comeback for young farmers coming back onto the
land. Farmers who had been foreclosed on in the thirties were able to
come back onto their homesteads and continue farming. We had an
explosion in soil and water conservation programs. The founding of the
Soil Conservation Service and putting a few 

dollars back into farmers'
pockets made it possible to begin terracing land to recover land and
fix some of the things that we had done that had caused the great dust
bowl.
          The other place the programs were a success was for the
taxpayers. Because the programs were based on getting a price for
farmers out of the market the farm programs themselves actually
generated profit. The farm program from 1933 to 1953 on storable
commodities made about $12 million for the federal government. Now
that is not much money, but if you compare it to spending $32 billion
last year on the federal farm program you can see a pretty big
difference between the programs of those days and what we have
today.
          Some people didn't like those farm programs. We should be clear
about this. In the same way that in the 1800s and the early 1900s
farmers had to struggle with the people that were supplying them and
the people they were selling to, those were the same forces that were
opposed to the parity farm programs in the thirties and forties and
early fifties. On the one hand the chemical fertilizer-seed companies
felt that if farmers were imposing supply management, that if they
were not planting every acre fencerow to fencerow, then the companies
were selling less chemicals and less seed. Which was probably
true. Somehow the companies did not notice that farmers needed to make
a profit to be able to pay their bills. It turned out we had very very
strong opposition from the agri-chemical and machinery companies as
well.
          On the other side we had opposition from the companies that were
buying from the farmers. The cotton ginners, grain corporations, and
meet packers felt that if the farmers had government assistance to put
a floor under prices, that the commodity buyers were not going to be
able to get those commodities at lower and lower prices, which is the
way they thought they were going to build bigger markets. Also the
speculators felt that if the government intervened to keep prices
fairly stable, then this cut into their action quite a bit. 
IN FACT, IT CUT INTO the action of these corporations so greatly that
they organized to repeal the parity farm legislation, for the most
part, by the early 1950s. The corporations argued that cheaper food
was needed to build industry. These arguments took place in the
context of the McCarthy era when everything was defined in black and
white and when racism and red-baiting were rolled together into one
national hysteria. They were able to argue that the farm programs that
were helping the family farmers were somehow communism or bolshevism
or socialism. They were able to say that things that were keeping
black farmers on the land were somehow anti-American. They rolled that
sentiment together into a successful national lobbying effort to
repeal laws, especially those on grain crops and some of the crops
that were heavily developed in the midwest.
          (I point out to Yankee friends that because the South had strongly
organized itself in Congress, the crops that the South was very
dependent on at that time-tobacco, peanuts, sugar, dairy products, and
fruits and vegetables- were able to hang on. In fact, they have been
defended until today though they are certainly under assault
now. Tobacco companies are importing all kinds of tobaccos in order to
break the tobacco program. There is an assault on the peanut program
every time it comes up. But in the early 1950s when major parts of the
parity farm legislation were being repealed, Southerners in Congress
were able to keep some of those programs for some crops in the
South. The effect is seen in the more stable conditions that some
farmers in the South have had. A state like Kentucky that still has
115,000 farms is able to hold on to them because of the small tobacco
quotas. Some of the success in Georgia has been that people have been
able to hang on to those programs.)
          From the late 1950s and early 1960s there was chaos in agriculture
because these programs were being taken away. There were some
production increases because when farmers saw their prices being cut,
they intensified production to make up for what they were losing. Big
surpluses built up so bad the government would then shut down whole
counties and the soil bank was a really big program. Whole regions
were shut down.
          The 196Os were also a time with a lot of industrial development in
this country. We were kicking a lot of people off their farms. It was
an especially intense time for small black farmers being kicked off
their farms in the South. There was the pull of the urban area and
urban jobs, the 

auto industry and the steel industry. In some ways the
farm crisis of the late 1950s and early 1960s was masked by the
ability of people to move to industrial jobs.
          By the early 1970s the crisis, particularly for the Northern grain
farms, wheat and corn and soybeans, became pretty intense. In the
early 1970s, in Des Moines, Iowa, farmers were marching down the
street and on the one side were anti-war demonstrators because Richard
Nixon was in town, but on the other side farmers were throwing
pitchforks at Nixon. By the 1970s federal farm legislation had forced
down prices so much that many family farmers were in a
rebellion. Nixon and Congress chose a solution consistent with the
Great Society notion of that time, which was not to challenge
corporate power but to throw some money at the problem to keep people
quiet. Don't make corporations open up jobs, instead make them give a
little bit of money to a summer youth employment program. In 1972,
Congress developed a new approach to farm legislation in which we had
a floor under prices at a very low level and we provided farmers with
what was called a deficiency payment. How about that for language?
          For the first couple of years the low prices and the deficiency
payments were enough for farmers to survive. But when Congress started
this program-in the midst of the Vietnam war and our trade deficits
and everything else in the early 1970s-they asked how much farmers
need in a deficiency payment to come out okay. Soon they started
asking how much they could afford to give farmers this year. It did
not take too long between the Vietnam war and the rest of our
foolishness to not have enough money to give the farmers. Soon, the
low market price and the deficiency payment to farmers were not enough
combined to cover the cost of production. Then we began rolling into
the crisis that we face today.
          WE HAD ONE MORE trick up our sleeves to keep this whole crisis
covered up. The nation was on an inflation binge so farmland prices,
like everything else, were moving up rapidly. You could go into the
bank at the end of the year and say, "I lost money on my corn this
year," and the banker would say, "That's okay. You lost money
on your corn but your land went up another ten percent this year. By
golly, I can just loan you more money-by the time you retire  you'll
be a millionaire. Don't worry about losing money on your corn 'cause
you're going to be a millionaire pretty soon."
          Year after year people lost money on their crops but borrowed money
on their land. Farm debt went from around $20 billion in the early
1970s to a peak of $225 billion by 1983-a thousand percent increase in
farm debt in a little over a decade. Not because farmers were being
greedy and expanding, but because they were borrowing money to make up
for what they were losing. They were borrowing money to pay for
tractors that were doubling and tripling in price in the course of
three or four years. They were borrowing so much money that by 1983
about a million farmers held a debt that was twice the foreign debt of
Brazil. At the end of the decade, as land prices began to fall, the
first young farmers who had borrowed to the limit were not able to
borrow any more money, so their banks sold them out. Other farmers saw
their land values go down and banks would tell them they no longer had
enough collateral in their land and move them out.
          The crisis of the 1980s has been that downward spiral land values
have fallen 60 percent in my state. U.S. farmers have lost $300
billion.
          As in other times when we have had crises farmers have begun to
respond and get organized. Farmers in Tennessee in the early 1980s did
a sit-in at a FmHA office and farmers from around the country came
with them. Nationwide there has been a movement of farmers re-entering
the political process to find a solution. Enough people were concerned
about this in 1984 that although Ronald Reagan swept the country in
some states, Democrats who took a strong position on the farm crisis
were able to stand against that tide and get elected.
          By 1986 farmers had organized enough so that the farm crisis was a
motivating factor in moving millions of people to the polls. In
Georgia 10 percent of the people who voted in 1986 said the reason
they went to the polls and the reason they chose to vote was the farm
crisis. I think that is the tip of the iceberg that is beginning to
develop now.
          Farmers are not only getting out voters but they have been in
Congress writing legislation for new ways to approach the debt
problem. They are also trying to reestablish those successful farm
programs that put a floor under prices that was fair, and those supply
management programs like you still have on peanuts and tobacco that
kept supply and demand in balance and that were good for keeping rural
populations on the land so they are not being forced into the
cities.
          The concerns of farmers today have moved beyond their own
situations and their own financial problems. Farmers are looking at
the environmental effects of legislation. If you are being paid a
subsidy on each bushel you are forced to make the land grow more and
more. Farmers know that is tearing us up. We also know that these low
farm prices hurting our farmers here have ruined agriculture around
the world; when we put rice at $3.50 here, you can imagine what that
does to rice growing in west Africa and other parts of the
world. Farmers are also concerned about where this 

rolls into our
trade legislation. We talk about "free trade."
What that means is turning over the world's food system to that
half-dozen corporations who control it now. We are talking about free
trade with Canada. That means moving all our meat packing jobs to
Canada. President Reagan is talking about removing subsidies for
farmers worldwide. What they really are talking about is wiping out
farmers around the world so that the crisis we now face here now will
be worldwide.
          It is not only that we have had a farm crisis but it is also a
social crisis. The farm crisis has brought farm people back into the
mainstream of the social justice movement. Farmers are worried about
the same issues that urban people are. We need to bring that coalition
together concretely, realistically, politically-not just to solve this
farm crisis, but to solve the national and international crisis of
human spirit and of health and safety.
          We need to bring these people together to address those crises as a
political coalition because that is the only way we will solve
them-together. 
          
            Edward Pennick is director of the Emergency Land
Fund. Mark Ritchie, a native Georgian, is an agricultural policy
analyst with the Minnesota Department of Agriculture.
            The articles by Pennick and Ritchie are based on remarks they made
recently in Atlanta at the conference, "Urban Connections to the
Rural Crisis," sponsored by the Federation of Southern
Cooperatives and the National Council of Churches.
          
        
        
          As We Have Sown: At current rates, blacks will own no land by
the end of this century
          By Pennick, EdwardEdward Pennick
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, 5-7
          
          For black Americans the rural crisis is not limited to any region,
profession or economic class. It touches us all though probably
nowhere is the farm crisis more acute than in the rural South.
          The decline in black land ownership over the past twenty years is
alarming and unabated. The problem is so severe that a different
approach is now needed, one that appeals to survival instincts of both
white as well as black individuals.
          Like their counterparts in the Midwest and other parts of the
country white farmers are facing a serious economic problem. Many will
not survive. That will have adverse effects on entire rural Southern
communities and economies. Unlike their Midwestern counterparts most
Southern white farmers are reluctant and even refuse to organize
against those institutions and politicians responsible for putting
them in this crisis situation.
          White farmers for the most part are hesitant when it comes to
joining with other groups whom they consider outsiders or
anti-establishment although we at the Federation of Southern
Cooperatives have noticed a significant increase in the numbers of
white farmers seeking assistance from us. Still, white farmers' need
for assistance and our positive response does not translate in most
cases into those white farmers' willingness to join forces with us to
deal with the common problem-the unfair agricultural system in this
country. So the small white farmers for the most part continue to
suffer mostly alone while still believing that the present system will
rescue them. They refuse to believe that the key to their survival may
mean joining forces with black farmers and landowners. Unfortunately 

these beliefs are encouraged by many of our private, public and
religious institutions that are either too scared to rock the boat or
they recognize the almost unlimited potential of a black and white
Southern rural movement, a movement that would totally destroy the
age-old Southern strategy of divide-and-conquer.
          The Southern rural crisis is unique and complex. Yet for Southern
white farmers there is a glimmer of hope because whether they organize
or not they will benefit from a successful conclusion to the current
crisis. I believe that in the end the family farmer will prevail. This
does not, however, mean that the black family farmer will
prevail. Theirs is a different plight that requires constant
struggle. When there was no rural crisis black farmers were out of
sight and out of mind. Only recently has their situation been viewed
by some as worthy of inclusion in the future of American
agriculture.
          More than 90 percent of black-owned land is located in the
South. The problem is that blacks average nearly 30 percent of the
Southern farm population while they receive only a small fraction of
the state and federal government agricultural services.
          In fact, less than 25 percent of all black farmers have received
assistance from the Farmers Home Administration. Given the current
problems we are having with the FmHA some might consider that a
blessing. Still, the point is that blacks as a whole have been denied
equal opportunity to participate in programs mandated by Congress as a
resource to farmers. This is true even though statistics show that
blacks are more dependent on their farm operations for survival than
are their white counterparts. In Mississippi, for example, 43 percent
of all farmers are black yet they receive only 7.7 percent of FmHA
loans. The same pattern exists in other Southern states. Not only do
they not receive timely and adequate financial assistance, black
farmers also under-utilize other government-sponsored agricultural
programs. Their lack of knowledge of the number and range of available
rural development programs causes them to miss many needed and
beneficial services. When blacks do attempt to utilize these programs
their efforts are often hindered by under-staffed, poorly qualified,
even prejudiced personnel within the various county agricultural
offices. The bottom line is that even with the often heroic efforts of
FSC and other concerned organizations and individuals, blacks are
still losing land at a rate of a half million acres annually, over
twice as fast as white land owners and farmers.
          Depending on whose statistics you believe, blacks own between three
and one-half million and six million acres of land. No matter which
numbers you use, at the current rate of decline blacks will own no
land by the end of this century.
          LET YOUR IMAGINATION take you to the year 1998. It is an election
year and the major black political, social and religious leaders have
called a national press conference in Atlanta to bring to the public's
attention the fact that black Americans who once owned nearly fifteen
million acres of land are now a landless people. They are forming a
select committee to determine what led to this tragedy and to develop
strategies to force the candidates to make black land acquisition a
part of their overall platforms. Meanwhile, rural America has become a
hub of America's economy and farming is once again a family
affair. There are very few blacks in rural America except for the farm
laborers and the elderly who are physically and economically unable to
leave. The overwhelming majority of blacks are concentrated in a few
urban areas that are all but ignored by the government even though
they are controlled by black politicians. These areas are quickly
deteriorating and their occupants have all but lost hope for a better
way of life.
          Unless something dramatic is done today this imaginary scene will
come true. The responsibility for preventing it falls first on those
holding our imaginary press conference for it is they who should be
dealing with the struggle for blacks to maintain, even increase their
land holdings in this country. One can ask where they are today. Land
ownership affects all blacks. Some estimate that nearly half of the
blacks who hold ownership interest in rural land are living in urban
areas. It baffles me how some of our political leaders can speak of
economic development and independence and ignore the land issue.
          Too many black political and economic leaders still consider black
economic independence to be synonymous with more jobs. By jobs they
mean working for the typical 

industries located primarily in urban
areas. The fact is, these jobs are actually increasing black economic
dependence. This becomes apparent when one looks at the present
unemployment picture for blacks in these urban areas, many of whom had
left the rural South in search of the American dream. So to push for
jobs alone is not the answer. We must pressure the black leadership to
accord the land issue the same attention and respect it does the more
glamorous issues such as voting rights, integration, and stopping
Bork. This is not to say that Bork is not important, but you can have
nine Supreme Court justices, all of them black, and if you cannot feed
yourself it does no good. The leadership must recognize that.
          Land ownership-development is just as important and may well make
it easier for us to accomplish our objectives in these other areas
because we can then operate from a position of economic strength, not
just as consumers. In short, economic independence through the control
of natural resources-in this case, land-enhances political and social
independence. During the coming months when the black vote will be a
valuable commodity, we must make black land retention and development
an integral part of the test by which we will judge political
candidates and those individuals and organizations that support
them.
          Also key participants in our imaginary press conference are our
black religious leaders. The church has always been the source of
inspiration for blacks, especially during periods of intense struggle
and suppression. We must have the black church's support during this
crisis; it is their membership that will suffer most if the trend of
black land loss is not stopped. Many black ministers do not see black
land ownership as important to their agenda. I cannot argue with the
fact that there are other important issues, however, being the good
Christian that I am, I believe that it is a sin not to be good
stewards of the land.
          Our foreparents have a history of good land stewardship. It was
through recently freed slaves-freed, uneducated and deeply religious
slaves-that we were able to amass that fifteen million acres of land
in the early 1900s. They recognized the importance of nourishing and
being nourished by the land. It was obvious that land stewardship was
deeply ingrained in their religious faith. Modern-day black Christians
have somehow lost the connection between the land and God. Like the
politician, the church too must be judged and held accountable by how
it stands and participates on the land issue.
          FINALLY I WANT TO SAY to our white brethren in the religious,
political and grassroots arenas that the so-called rural crisis can
never be over unless blacks are full participants in its solution. You
cannot advocate agricultural legislation or programs that do not
contain remedies for the black land-loss problem. For you, too, must
share in the blame for the current state of blacks in
agriculture. Prior to the current crisis blacks were fighting the
battle virtually alone. Yet in too many cases it was the white and his
friends at the courthouses and the county FmHA offices that were
causing blacks to lose their land-land that was used to increase white
operations. We have been and continue to be more than willing to
welcome you to the struggle and even fight for issues that may not
have a direct bearing on the small black farmer. We do this because we
believe that a policy detrimental to any family farmer is wrong and
should be fought. But one of my fears is that once the current crisis
is over blacks again will be left to fight alone.
          I see encouraging signs in the joint efforts of black and white
farm organizations like the Federation of Southern Cooperatives,
Prairiefire, Family Farm Coalition, and others. I think we are on the
verge of creating a movement unparalleled in American history. We must
take advantage of the opportunity for it will not present itself
again. If we do miss this opportunity then it is possible that
grassroots and progressive white leaders will also be participants in
our imaginary press conference, because the farms will be owned by a
few corporations that will give us all a lesson on what it means to
control the land. 
          
            Edward Pennick is director of the Emergency Land
Fund. Mark Ritchie, a native Georgian, is an agricultural policy
analyst with the Minnesota Department of Agriculture.
            The articles by Pennick and Ritchie are based on remarks they made
recently in Atlanta at the conference, "Urban Connections to the
Rural Crisis," sponsored by the Federation of Southern
Cooperatives and the National Council of Churches.
          
        
        
          Rural Advancement Fund Celebrates 50 Years of Farm
Advocacy
          By Amberg, RobertRobert Amberg
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, pp. 11-15
          
          This year the Rural Advancement Fund/National Sharecroppers Fund
celebrates its fiftieth anniversary as an advocate for family farms
and rural communities. Initially formed as an annual "National
Sharecroppers Week," cosponsored by the Workers Defense League and the
Southern Tenant Farmers Union, the formal organization began without a
paid staff and served as the non-profit, funding arm for the fledgling
Southern Tenant Farmers Union. National Sharecroppers Week evolved
into the National Sharecroppers Fund (NSF) in 1943 and in 1966 created
the non-profit Rural Advancement Fund to receive donations from
supporters. Through the years RAF/NSF has grown in both scope and
influence to become an award-winning organization with an
international program and a staff of twenty-three that continues to
argue forcefully for the rights of small farmers around the world.
          In 1937, though, NSF's focus was the South. While the nation as a
whole was still mired in the depths of the Great Depression, the South
and its predominantly rural population were faring worse than
most. Agriculture was being revolutionized by mechanization, chemical
fertilizers and pesticides, and big business, with the result that
millions of sharecroppers, tenant farmers and farmworkers were
displaced or forced to work for less-than-minimal pay. The estimated
annual income for sharecropper families of the period was only $300,
and the substandard living conditions contributed to diseases like
pellagra, hookworm, syphilis and malaria. Educational opportunities
for sharecroppers were nonexistent and the illiteracy rate was the
highest of any occupational group in America.

          Norman Thomas, a six-time socialist candidate for president and a
long-term supporter of the National Sharecroppers Fund, speaking on a
CBS radio broadcast for National Sharecroppers Week, described the
situation: "We are speaking tonight in behalf of a group which
conservatively estimated amount to 7 or 8 percent of our entire
national population. We have life at its lowest economic level in
America. They work, black and white alike, under armed riding
bosses. In large areas they, especially the colored workers, have no
right which the bosses are bound to respect. At best they are charged
ten cents on the dollar at the plantation commissary for the credit
advanced thousands of them, and they end every season in debt to the
landlord, which means in practice that they are tied to his
land. Other more direct forms of peonage--let's call it slavery--are
fairly general."
          Against this backdrop of misery and exploitation, eighteen
men--black and white--met in July 1934, in a schoolhouse in Tyronza,
Arkansas, to form the STFU. They were led by H. L. Mitchell [See
Southern Changes, March 1987] and Clay East, admirers
of Thomas. The union's goal was to work collectively for better
working conditions and greater benefits for farmworkers hard hit by
the labor-reducing Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933.
          While the goals seemed simple, the union had the weight of history
and culture against it. The union was interracial when Jim Crow was
still law. Further, STFU's constituency worked outside the typical
industrial setting and often viewed themselves as independent
producers. Finally, the union's leaders, Mitchell, East, J.R. Butler
and Isaac Shaw were Southerners who had been heavily influenced by and
eventually gravitated to socialism, the kind of socialism that had
incubated in the immigrant ghettos of the urban Northeast and been
practiced by many of this country's industrial labor unions.
          By 1936 the union had a Southwide membership of over two thousand
and a continual shortage of cash. In an effort to ease the cash
crunch, Sidney Hertzberg, a young staff member of the Workers Defense
League who had worked with STFU during the summer, came up with the
idea of a National Sharecroppers Week. From 1937 to 1944, this
educational and fundraising event was held annually in New York. The
week of manuscript and print auctions, concerts and plays eventually
included as sponsors such celebrities as Fiorello LaGuardia, John
Steinbeck, Margaret Bourke-White, Eleanor Roosevelt, Upton Sinclair
and A. Philip Randolph.
          World War 11 slowed the organizing efforts of STFU and by 1943 it
was obvious that an ongoing committee to raise funds year round was
necessary. The Fund would regard STFU as its primary responsibility
and take over the running of National Sharecroppers Week. But, as
reflected in the minutes of the first meeting of the National
Sharecroppers Fund, the incorporators took a step toward moving the
organization in a direction independent of STFU when they said that
"gifts should be given rather to functional groups and pressure
groups working in the general field of improvement and eventual
abolition of the sharecropper system." This step eventually
transformed NSF from a labor organization to a
farm-rural-international organization.
          BY WAR'S END, THE changes in agriculture begun during the thirties
had radically altered the lives of small farmers and farmworkers. Many
abandoned their native South in search of industrial jobs in the
North. Others, lucky enough to own land, stuck it out in the face of
increasing competition from their better-equipped and 

better-financed
neighbors. Still others, landless and without marketable skills,
became a new class of farmworkers whose work was restricted to the
planting and harvesting of crops. NSF chose to work with the last two
groups--the small farmers who had opted to stay and the migrant
farmworkers who had little choice.
          In 1950 NSF established the National Committee on Agricultural Life
and Labor. NCALL pressured state and federal governments by
distributing information and focusing the collective efforts of over
forty individual organizations working with rural issues. The
establishment of NCALL signalled a more direct role in politics for
NSF and a recognition that the problems of farmworkers are sometimes
solved away from the fields.
          NSF was guided in this period of transition and growth by Fay
Bennett and Frank Porter Graham. Bennett became executive secretary of
NSF in 1952, a post she held for eighteen years (she continues to
serve on RAF/N8F's Board). She saw NSF in the role of an umbrella
organization, and with Graham, a former U.S. Senator and President of
the University of North Carolina who served as chairman of the board
of directors, moved NSF in that direction.
          While NSF had broadened its range of political activities, it
continued funding like-minded organizations working directly with
rural people. In 1953, NSF sponsored the formation of the Migrant
Children's Fund, an organization devoted to addressing the health and
educational needs of migrant families, and throughout the fifties NSF
supported organizing efforts by the National Agricultural Workers
Union (formerly STFU).
          In 1962, the year of NSF's 25th Anniversary, NSF sponsored the
Bricks Conference, a three-day meeting on rural affairs which was
widely attended by government officials, ministers, farmers and
community leaders and represented another change in direction for
NSF. In the past NSF had worked in opposition to most government
agencies, but now, because of the influx of federal monies and FSF's
reputation as an advocate for rural people, the organization was asked
to work with government.
          SHORTLY AFTER THE BRICKS Conference NSF began work on the first of
many contracts with the U.S. Department of Labor and the Office for
Economic Opportunity. Offices were opened in Atlanta and Knoxville and
programs implemented on illiteracy, job training and placement for
displaced farm workers, the construction of self-help housing and the
formation of rural cooperatives. With funds generated by NSF's new
tax-exempt subsidiary, the Rural Advancement Fund (RAF), NSF set up
day-care and 

education centers, housing programs and a rural credit
union. A Washington office was opened during this period to increase
NSF's lobbying efforts and to take better advantage of new federal
programs.
          The late sixties and early seventies brought new internal changes
to RAF/NSF with the departure of Fay Bennett and the death of Frank
Porter Graham. Jim Pierce, a labor and civil rights activist, took
over as executive director and began building a rural demonstration
and training center. The Graham Center, located in Anson County, N.C.,
opened in 1974 based on the idea that "creative approaches to the
farm problem could make good and profitable use of marginal land and
resources."
          THE GRAHAM CENTER'S free training program was aimed towards small
farmers and their families and offered comprehensive training in all
aspects of practical small farm operation and management. Courses in
soil management, biological pest control, marketing, and crop and
livestock production were supplemented by courses putting agriculture
in a social and historical context. The Graham Center also housed a
resource center which offered research and public speaking on rural,
political and economic issues to church, university and farm
groups.
          The Graham Center's approach to problem-solving--bringing farmers
to one site for conferences and demonstrations--represented a real
change in tactics for RAF/NSF. In the past the organization had always
gone out to the farmers and their problems, meeting them on their own
ground. Now, the situation was reversed and many members of the staff
and board were uncomfortable with the change. In addition, federal
money had begun to dry up and the Graham Center was proving to be a
constant drain on capital and resources rather than the
self-sufficient model it was chartered to be.
          This fiscal and identity crisis precipitated the phasing out of
training programs at the Graham Center in 19814 Kathryn Waller,
executive director since the late 1970s, moved RAF/NSF back to its
roots by instituting a traditional, grassroots organizing effort in
the mold of STFU. Waller, along with program director Cary Fowler,
also charted new territory for RAF/NSF by instituting an international
program to address Third World problems and the worldwide loss of
plant genetic diversity.
          Beginning in 1982, RAF sent representatives into the field in
North Carolina and South Carolina. The goal was to organize farmers
into a cohesive, multi-racial, farmer-led unit that could address
issues affecting farmers and rural communities. The United Farmers
Organization (UFO) is now a 1,500-member organization active on a
number of fronts. UFO operates toll-free hotlines with volunteers
trained by RAF to offer advice to farmers facing foreclosures. UFO's
legislative committee, with other farm groups, recently won a victory
when the U.S. House of Representatives passed the Agricultural Reform
Bill to ensure the rights of borrowers. Benny Bunting, Chairman of
UFO's legislative committee, said, "This takes a giant step towards
the preservation of family farms. It also sends a message to FCS and
FmHA of Congressional intent to help the farmers; maybe now, a little
compassion will be forced on them." In the winter of 1987, UFO and
other farm groups distributed $2.5 million worth of donated seed corn
to farmers suffering the effects of the 1986 drought in North and
South Carolina. Most of these farmers would not have been able to
plant without this gift of seed.
          Seed is the foundation of Rural Advancement Fund International
(RAFI). While the struggle for worldwide genetic conservation appears
to be only distantly related the struggle facing farmers in the
American South, the mandate is clear. As RAF program director Cary
Fowler 

says, "The type of seeds we have available to plant into the
ground have a lot to do with the kind of agricultural systems that
we'll have as well."
          RAFI works globally for plant genetic conservation and the control
of this invaluable natural resource by its rightful owners. Most of
the world's plant genetic diversity exists in the Third World. It is
the critical raw material needed by U.S.-based multinational seed and
pharmaceutical companies in the production of new varieties. Thus,
those who control this genetic diversity control the very future of
agriculture.
          RAFI advises governmental and non-governmental agencies on how best
to preserve their genetic resources, argues on behalf of Third World
countries at the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization in
Rome, and assists in the development and dissemination of innovative
seed-saving strategies through publications like The Community
Seed Bank Kit.
          RAFI is also involved in the rapidly growing field of biotechnology
and its effects on agriculture. RAFI publishes
Communique which serves as an early-warning signal for
Third World countries of impending changes that could radically affect
their agricultural economies.
          In the 1980s, RAF/NSF has also moved to diversify its efforts in
rural communities. Volunteers trained by RAF monitor courtroom
procedures for the poor and disfranchised in Robeson County, North
Carolina. Robeson County has a long history of racial injustice and
its present district attorney has successfully prosecuted more capital
murder cases than any prosecutor in the United States. RAF staff
members in Robeson County have built community coalitions that seek a
public defender for the county, a citizen's review board for the
county's legal system and equal justice for poor people.
          In this decade, RAF also instituted a voter registration project in
eastern North Carolina. This effort produced an increased turnout of
30-40 percent in some key precincts in the last election which, in
turn, helped elect a number of minority candidates to local and
statewide office.
          As RAF/NSF celebrates its fiftieth year of service to family
farmers and rural communities one appropriately recalls words from
STFU's Ceremony of the Land:
          
            "In man's greed for gold, he has destroyed the
fruitful ness of the earth In his lust for power and dominion he has
brought misery upon us all. The land cries out against those who waste
it. Thy children cry out against those who abuse and oppress
them. Speed now the day when the plains and the hills and all the
wealth thereof shall be the people's own and free men shall not live
as tenants of men on the earth..."
          
          
            Robert Amberg is communications director and photographer
for the Rural Advancement Fund. A book-length history of RAF/NSF by
Tevere MacFadyen will be published this winter.
          
        
        
          Lost Causes &Then Some
          By Kennedy, StetsonStetson Kennedy
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, pp. 16-24
          
          This is the second of two articles on the once and future South, as
viewed from the perspective of a life-long organizer, activist and
writer. Forty years have elapsed since publication of the author's
book, Southern Exposure. The players have changed, but in too many
respects the game remains the same.
          World War II, as anticipated, generated a degree of black
disaffection which came up against American apartheid after the manner
of the proverbial irresistable force against the immovable
object.
          "They ain't agonna do it--not so long as Gene Talmadge is
Governor, they ain't!" the "Wild Man of Sugar Creek" was
bellowing.
          As is the wont of those enamored of the status quo, 'twas said that
legislation would be of no avail against race prejudice, and that only
education could do the job "in time." But America's blacks had had
enough of gradualist soft-soap. When a Southern judge admonished a
black woman before the bar, "You people can't expect equal justice
all in a minute," she retorted, "God knows it's been a long
minute!"
          In all of my scrawling and drawling I contended that there was no
more educational a process than the experience of working, studying,
playing, praying, living and traveling together-and hence the efficacy
of civil rights legislation in all these fields.
          I went on to point out that Southern blacks, during Reconstruction
and ever after, had proven that they had no desire to supplant white
supremacy with black. And to my white compatriots I argued further
that desegregation would not hurt, and that they would feel much
better about themselves when it was all over. And I often concluded
with the observation of the preacher who said, "Since we're all
hopefully headed for an integrated Heaven, we might as well start
practicing now."
          My first book, Palmetto Country, appeared at the
outset of the war. Charged by someone to pick it to pieces, Florida
academia concluded sadly that it could find no error. A "premature
anti-fascist" before the war, I was prevented by a back injury from
joining the armed forces. With all my classmates headed for the
shooting war, I resolved to fight fascism at home by infiltrating the
Klan and other terrorist groups. There were plenty of people
inveighing against the Klan, but no one seemed to have the hard
evidence needed to take it into a court of law.
          First on my list of some twenty groups eventually infiltrated was
the White Front of Miami, which even after Britain got into the war
was still distributing Nazi Propaganda Ministry materials, and
threatening to drive "all the Jews on Miami Beach into the sea." As
the war progressed, I put together a manuscript for another book,
under the working title The Four Freedoms Down
South.
          Meanwhile, Palmetto Country had caught the eye of Dr. George
S. Mitchell, who in 1944 invited me to join him in Atlanta as
editorial assistant at his post as Southeastern director of
CIO/PAC. My job was to write educational materials suitable for the
union's rank-and-file.
          "Stick to four-letter Anglo-Saxon," Mitchell said. "I
don't want to see any Latin derivatives whatever."
          I did as directed, turning out a series on the poll tax, white
primary, and other restrictions on voting in the South. After being
first published in the SRC's Southern Frontier, reprints were ordered
in the 100,000-range, and distributed to CIO locals throughout the
region, apparently with good effect. One of my union buddies,
Georgia-boy R. E. Starnes, organizer for Steel, had a way of enhancing
the effect by handing them out with the admonition, "I wouldn't
spit on a union man who wouldn't give a dollar to help reelect
FDR!"
          In 1945, word came from Frank McCallister of the CIO's advisory
council to the War Labor Board that the president of the Senate had
relied heavily upon my "Plain Facts About the Polltax" in introducing
an anti-poll tax bill. Rather than let Uncle Sam do it for them, the
poll tax states busied themselves abolishing it on their own. In
Georgia, even Ole Gene Talmadge jumped on the bandwagon, writing in
his Statesman, "I decided that the best way to keep
the negroes from voting is to let all the white folks vote, and then
pass the word that Mr. N-----r is not wanted at the polls."
          When I approached him in my nomme de Klan
guise as 

"John Perkins," I tried to pull his leg by saying that Ellis Arnall
was claiming credit for abolishing the tax. Ole Gene just smirked,
"Well, you know credit is like water--it sort of flows
around."
          The disunity/cheapness of Southern labor was no less of a
depressant than black exclusion. While Operation Dixie was striving
mightily to organize the unorganized, I ventured to voice to director
Van Bittner my concern that while his staff was doing its job of
getting people signed up, the unions were doing an abysmal job of
making confirmed unionists out of them once they were in. After scant
reflection, Bittner replied, "Millions for organizing; not a penny
for revivals."
          I was not surprised, therefore, when for example the Lockheed plant
shut down in Marietta, Georgia, the brethren and sistren of the union
local voted unanimously to empty its treasury for a farewell beer and
barbeque binge, after which they went back to being the same old
non-unionists they had remained at heart.
          In those days journalist George Seldes (now 97 and still producing)
was putting out his newsletter In Fact, dedicated to "exposing
falsehood in the press" (it would take a lot more than four pages
today), to which I sometimes contributed. Seldes knocked himself out,
trying to convince labor that if it didn't launch its own media it
could not hold its own, much less prevail, against all the anti-labor
propaganda being leveled against it. The union bosses paid him no
"nevermind," and labor has paid the price ever since.
          By 1946 my wartime book manuscript had changed its name to
"Southern Exposure," and was scheduled for publication by
Doubleday. But then came a telegram from editor Bucklin Moon: "Get
here fast as you can. Bring all documentation. Lawyer says everything
in it libelous."
          When my cartons and I reached the lawyer's offices on Wall Street,
he howled, "Whadaya mean calling Prentiss a fascist? I play golf
with him every weekend!"
          But those were the days when publishers had a measure of principle
and courage, and we went to press with nothing changed.
          The impact of the book was all I had hoped for, and more. In
Atlanta it was banned, ostensibly for using (once) that fourletter
word (Hemingway had just done it in To Have and Nave
Not, so I thought I could too). Sales jumped appreciably.
          Mississippi's Sen. Theodore "The Man" Bilbo was more to the
point. From a hospital bed where he was being prepped for surgery for
cancer of the mouth he called in reporters and read to them from
Southern Exposure and Lillian Smith's Color Blind. He much preferred
his doctor's throat-cutting style, he said--they were going to cut up
and 

down, while books such as these cut across.
          On the other hand, Ellis Arnall graciously reviewed it for the
New York Times, and sat down to write his own
The Shore Dimly Seen. Dr. Clark Foreman asked me to
help research one for him, and I started under the title
Moneybags &Scalawags, but the money ran out. From the
black and labor press came endorsement of my strategy for achieving
"total equality." Perhaps most encouraging was a review in a Virginia
paper, titled "Under Exposed." After dutifully castigating it, the
writer concluded, "But perhaps you should read it after all, and
search your own conscience, and make up your own mind." I took
this to be one more sign that the South might yet change its apartheid
ways with less bloodletting than was generally being prophesied.
          
            TOGETHERNESS A MANY-DOORED THING
          
          Integration was destined to enter through many doors. For a long
time, whenever some "visiting fireman" from up North came to town,
anti-apartheid Southern whites and blacks received them with what
hospitality they could muster, but behind tightly-drawn blinds, lest
someone hurl a stick of dynamite. At Highlander Folk School in
Monteagle, Tennessee, small groups of whites and blacks braved fire
and shotgun blasts in order to studying organizing, and do a little
square-dancing. At Clayton, Georgia, Lillian Smith and Paula Snelling
hosted interracial weekend rap sessions on the iniquity of Jim
Crow.
          The unsegregated annual meetings of the SCHW demonstrated that what
had not been possible in Birmingham was entirely possible in New
Orleans. And the SRC, true to its promise, was using its good offices
to persuade, for example, the city fathers of Macon to hire a black
policeman (with the proviso that he not carry a gun, and not arrest
any white folks). History took it from there--
          From my vantage point, however, it seemed to me that the CIO
deserves more credit than any other single organization for
softening-up the white South for righteousness. Without regard to the
degree of success which its Operation Dixie achieved in terms of
members of locals, it was the CIO which gave the South's white and
black working folk their first taste of solidarity, and I saw it
happening.
          When we first started holding union meetings at CIO HQ, 75 Ivey
Street, Atlanta, Mitchell and I were dismayed to see that whites and
blacks segregated themselves, front and rear. We thought we had found
the solution when we jumbled all the chairs in such manner that there
were no discernible horizontal rows. But we had left the aisle down
the middle, and the brothers and sisters promptly segregated
themselves left and right. Finally we wiped out the center aisle,
too. This time they got the idea, and sat down wherever they could
find an empty chair.
          Another of those traditional chasms was crossed when a union local
decided to have a covered-dish supper. The perplexing problem of who
would serve whom was solved by the white ladies taking it all upon
themselves.
          Then there was the matter of the drinking fountain at union
headquarters. In the dark of night, some journeyman plumber took it
upon himself to run a pipe three feet off to one side and attach to it
a smaller auxiliary fount. No signs were affixed, but everybody knew
which was who's. Again under cover of darkness, someone disconnected
the auxiliary, and it stayed that way, a mute symbol of a South in
transition.
          Many a native white organizer "came through" in a well-nigh
religious sense on the race issue. Steel's Starnes was a sterling
example. Inside the lionheart which enabled him and others to stand
before a mill and say "I'm going to organize it" there was a poet, and
he often sent me samples. One came with the handwritten note:
          
            Stet look this over. Be sure to correct the
spelling the typewriters they are making now days dont know how to
spell. Let me know if the PAC can use it but don't put it in the Union
Leader with my name on it if these people knew how I felt on this
subject they would lynch me before night. In fact I think they have
already got the tree picked out to hang me on.
          
          What he sent me was:
          
            Since we Rebels joined forces with the Yanks 
            We've felled
the Axis with their hateful pranks.  
            Our Bosses tell us to "hate
the n---r," 
            But thair is one thing that I can't figure-- 
            We all
go to work day and night 
            Regardless of wheather we're
black or white.  
            The pay we get decides our fate 
            In spite of all
our petty hate.  
            So it's time we workers were getting wise, 
            and
forgetting our hates, organize!
          
          
            
          
          There were also the likes of Bishop Shaw of the AME Church,
Birmingham, who got up before a CIO regional convention and said,
"When I first heard of this CIO, I asked 'What does it stand for?'
The answer I got was, 'White and colored in the same union.' when I
heard that, I put on my war-boots and my preachin'-coat, and I been
preachin' the principles of CIO-ism ever since!"
          Bishop Shaw went on to relate how, as a member of a CIO bargaining
committee, they got into the "front elevator" of the mill boss's
skyscraper, and rode up to his offices on the top floor. They told the
secretary to tell the boss that the bargaining committee was there and
wanted to talk to him. In no time at all the boss popped out, saying
"Come right in, boys! Seddown and have a chair! Have a
cigar!"
          "Power was on the throne!" Bishop Shaw exulted. He concluded
by relating how he had told the boss, "We made you rich, now you
let us live decent!"
          Nor will I ever forget the black coal miner from Kentucky, who
spoke of the difficulty of telling, when the miners emerged from the
pit all covered with coal dust, what color they were underneath.
          "White or black, you're a coal miner still," he
said. Referring to the equal rights language in CIO charters, he went
on to say, "I think we ought to either live up to it, or take it
out." And he concluded, "If we ever goin' to get anywhere, we
got to get there together!"
          
            WHEN THE SIGNS CAME DOWN
          
          I am not going to take space to tell how it was that blacks and
whites did get together in the fifties and sixties, and march on and
on until apartheid had been overcome and they could shout "Free at
last! Great God Allmighty, free at last!" While I marched with King at
Albany, Oxford, Selma, and St. Augustine, and chronicled the period in
the pages of the Pittsburgh Courier, those events are still fresh in
human memory, and need little recounting just yet.
          What may be worth stressing is that the motive power came from
blacks themselves. And while there was adult leadership and
participation, in a very real sense the freedom marches were a
children's crusade (as what war isn't?). It was the spectacle of
skinny-legged sub-teen girls who did not flinch when inches away
police dogs gnashed their teeth that finally moved the American public
and all three branches of Government to remedial action.
          I recall how, on the morning after the Supreme Court decision of
'64 rending asunder the integument of apartheid, the first black I saw
was riding a bike.
          "Okay," I said silently to him and myself, "you're on
your own from here on out. At last you've got the same legal legs to
stand on as all the immigrant groups who have hacked their way into
the Mainstream."
          It wasn't that I begrudged the lifetime I had spent in The
Cause--far from it. I was as elated at having lived to see the outcome
as he must have been. But I was tired, and there 

were so many causes
crying out.
          My personal contribution to the Jubilee was to gloat in The
Courier, "Every day, gains are being made which can never
be taken away!"
          Some speech-writer for that other Kennedy (the one in the White
House) must have picked up on it, for soon the Nation had the message
on no lesser authority than that of JFK.
          I, as a student of Reconstruction and human struggles for
liberation generally, should have known better. I don't know why he
was so confident, but my faith was based upon black militancy. I
didn't think blacks would ever allow anyone to take any of it from
them. Now, a single generation later, it is all too apparent that the
gains of the Second Reconstruction, like those of the First, can and
are being whittled away.
          It is not the bedsheet brigade this time (though they are with us
yet), but plainclothed Klux in Washington, whose stock-in-trade is not
to terrorize but bamboozle.
          Before getting into that, let me say what a great day it was when
the "White" and "Colored" signs came down all over America. I raced
from dumpster to dumpster, retrieving them as artifacts for some
future Museum of Horrors. (Alas, termites got them, which may be just
as well.) Best of all was watching Woolworth's clear its shelves of
what had so long been best-sellers. Perhaps they can recycle them as
"Open to the Public," or even "Welcome" signs, I mused.
          I must say I was extremely proud of the good grace which I most of
my white Southern brethren were able to muster for the desegregation
process, after having sworn for so long that they would "die first."
Perhaps the fundamentalist churches, albeit unwittingly, deserve a bit
of the credit, having so often put them through the paces of
redemption and being born again. In any event, Mr. and Mrs. Charlie
came through with flying colors. I was utterly enthralled when the
ladles of both colors sat down to luncheon together for the first
time. For once the tradition of chivalry stood the South in good
stead, as they vied with one another not merely in civility but
conviviality. Nor was my enthusiasm more than slightly dampened when I
recalled that lynchings, too, had sometimes been carried out with a
certain air of noblesse oblige.
          
            CHANGING, FOR BETTER OR WORSE:
          
          To be sure, the South has changed mightily--oft-times for the
better, but not always.
          Ever since its conquest by Europeans, until recently, the South was
something of a self-contained continuum, with nobody much to deal with
but damn yankees. Yet today the future of the South does not rest
exclusively in the hands of white Southerners, nor white and black
Southerners, nor those folks up yonder. While all of these still
count, the fate of the South may hinge upon decisions made in such
faraway places as Geneva and Tokyo.
          This is not to say that the old hallmarks of Southern progress--the
Constitutional formula for counting blacks as three-fifths of a
person, Dred Scott, Secession, Emancipation, Reconstruction, Klan
terror, Deal of '76, Booker Washington's half-a-loaf and Henry Grady's
New South--have lost any of their historical meaning. It is just that
if you're dead, you're dead, and all causes are lost ones. We need to
watch out, in other words, for such things as mushroom clouds, aerosol
cans, AIDS virus, and the penis rampant.
          The very logo of the SRC--progressing as it has from map of the
South, to map of region within the Nation, to region upon the
globe--reflecta our emancipation from the old provincialism. While
there will always be a role for old-fashioned regionalism, the only
regionalism which holds forth the hope of salvation nowadays is that
which looks upon Earth as a region of the solar system.
          The very concept of progress, as applied to the Southern scene, has
itself been subject to change. During the first half of this century
we were quite confident that one gain led to another, and that the
path of the species led onward and upward. If we look to Starnes on
the cutting edge once again, in 1947 he was going around saying,
"Things really are getting better. They used to kill you for trying to
organize a union. Now they just knock all your teeth out." Starnes is
still around, but I do not know what he would say today, when
anti-union propaganda has reached such a state-of-the-art as to almost
make unionists hate themselves.
          By mid-century I had already become sufficiently' alarmed to
conclude my remarks with the caution, "Great 

progress is being made;
but reaction is making great progress too." Within a few years, the
terror known as McCarthyism had demolished much that was decent and
caring about America (in much the same fashion that government'
industry, agriculture, transport, environment, and solvency are being
wrecked now). In one of those Question &Answer periods a little old
lady who had given her entire life causes to help make a better world
asked me tearfully, "Was it all in vain!"
          I did not know the answer then, nor do I now. It all depends--
          
            HOW NOW TO PROTEST?
          
          Someone, after reflecting upon mankind's unending struggle to
create that better world, concluded somewhat cynically "The forms
of exploitation change from time to time." That being true enough
so far, it would seem to behoove us to consider whether forms of
protest and struggle should also change accordingly. How best can we
defend, consolidate, and advance--during what remains of this
century--the gains which have been made?
          Many of the traditional forms will never become outmoded--we need
all the petitioning, lobbying, voting, organizing, sitting-in,
meeting, marching, and confrontation we can get. One thing we do not
need more of, however, are the liquor-and-TV riots which erupted
during the "long hot summers" of several years ago. While I for one am
capable of looking upon these as a form (albeit inappropriate) of
reparations for the nest eggs blacks never inherited because our
ancestors robbed their ancestors of the fruits of their labors, going
after TVs and Jack Daniels is no way to go after civil rights. I
happened to be in Budapest during the Hungarian revolt of '56, and
while all shop windows were smashed, nothing was touched. "A
testament to the purity of our revolution," a Hungarian said to
me.
          As for the "burn, baby, burn" approach some blacks resorted
to when Mainstream America turned a deaf ear to the demand that doors
be opened, it was an effective attention-getter (like hitting the mule
over the head with a 2 x 4), and even had its roots in folksay,
"Throw your trunk out the window, and let the whole damn row bum
down!" Whether the scene be Watts, Miami, Philippines, S. Korea,
Haiti, or some place else, the gasoline cocktail has been one of the
few weapons within reach for the assertion of People Power. Burning
down one's own neighborhood, however, can hardly be described as a
well-directed form of protest. It is too much like the foreclosed
mid-western farmers who blew out their own brains, as if they were
somehow at fault.
          I do have a couple of suggestions on tactics for the future, one of
which I would call "Non-Stop Protest." Discrimination has a way of
being non-stop, of going on forever unless someone puts a stop to
it. In the sixties it was so gross and omnipresent you could strike
out in almost any direction and land a telling blow. Nowadays it is
more insidious, and needs to be ferreted out and targeted.
          Once an offending public or private enterprise has been identified,
the offended community would serve notice for it to cease and desist,
or face non-stop picketing until it did so. Ephemeral pickets are one
thing, but picketing "in perpetuity if need be" by community
organizations on a rotating basis would be a prospect few
establishments would care to face.
          The other suggestion is that we make massive use of protest
posters. Throughout Europe the poster is not only a potent weapon but
a recognized art-form. We have the artists, ideas, and plenty of walls
which could use some decoration and dedication.
          American labor would also do well to look to its defenses and
consider new forms of struggle. Actually, labor is in need of an
awakening not unlike that brought on among blacks by the Montgomery
bus boycott and Winston-Salem sit-in. There is no way that labor can
"overcome" until it comes up with a mind, programme, platform, and
media of its own, capable of contending successfully against the
phalanx of industry-subsidized institutions arrayed against it. So
long as American labor continues to swallow the cyanide-laced Kool-Aid
that its interests and employer interests are one and the same, its
doom is sealed. Knowledge of which side one's bread is buttered on is
essential to the survival of any group, labor included.
          What's more, labor must make common cause with women, minorities,
and other short-changed groups, and not let its well-known patriotism
get it suckered in by any jingoist who comes out of the wings. Any
time you find labor and management backing the same candidates, you
can bet your boots that somebody is being suckered--and that it isn't
management.
          Beyond all this, the globalization of industry and the labor market
is posing--in the form of wage rollbacks and plant closings--a threat
to American labor of the same magnitude as the Klan terror which
negated black rights after the Civil War. The unions may be able to
follow 

industry from Ruse Belt to Sun Belt, but the bottom line
question is: How can even a Japanese-run plant in the South compete
with its own Made-in-Japan models, except by paying U.S. workers
Japanese wages?
          Anyone who has lived in as many has-been world powers as I have
would hate to see it happen to us, for the economic and psychic
consequences are traumatic indeed. Toynbee (of whom let it be said
that no man ever amassed so many facts or drew so many erroneous
conclusions from them) said with reason that the fate of nations is
decided by their response to challenge. Are we a flash-in-the-pan
nation, or aren't we? How can labor participation help American
management, design, and engineering compete? Must the world's
industrial wages be brought up or our's go down--

or is there some
other answer to this dilemma?
          
            TOWARDS THE THIRD RECONSTRUCTION
          
          While I may or may not have been the first to raise the standard of
a Second Reconstruction to carry out the unfinished business of the
First, I do not want to miss this opportunity to call for yet a
Third.
          That the South does indeed stand in need of further reconstruction
is self-evident. The agenda is replete with items of both Old Business
and New.
          To arrive at specifics we need only look back to what we were,
around at what we are, and ahead to what we would like to be (as
compared to where we seem to be going).
          Where once our region was beset by a complex of problems somewhat
peculiar to it, today we are caught up, along with every other region
on the planet, in an on-going freeway pile-up of problems which make
the Flood, Plague, World Wars, and Great Depression seem like Sunday
School picnics. While some of these problems are amenable to regional
amelioration, many are not. It took virtually the entire human race,
actively or passively, to get us into the messes we are in, and it
will take no fewer to get us out.
          Even so, the day of Operation Bootstrap is not done. States and
regions can still take it upon themselves to clean up their own acts,
and hope and prod that others may do likewise. It is high time
something more constructive was being done in the name of state's
rights and regional cooperation than secession, Dixiecrat bolts, and
the abortive attempt of the erstwhile-Confederate states to avoid the
integration of higher education by setting up a jointly funded
regional college in Atlanta to which each state could ship its
blacks. Time now for regional action on such matters as dumping, acid
rain, offshore drilling, pesticides, and unplanned development.
          To whom should we look for salvation? While there is much talk of
God and Country, Mammon is on the throne, devouring all things,
including the elements. Is our only hope perhaps to make remedial
measures more profitable than the on-going destruction?
          In a simpler age, we fancied that all we had to do was join a good
union, register, and vote. Now it is plain to see that nothing less
than a network of Debriefing Centers can keep us from voting against
ourselves. We used to take pride in our ability to see through
bunco-artists, but after being twice hooked on Reaganism, what can we
say?
          There are some who are saying, "Thank goodness, we've put all
that racism behind us!" But don't you believe it. It would be nice
if it were all over and done with, and we could sit back and enjoy the
Promised Land of Equal Opportunity and Justice. But we are not there
yet. In a great many essential respects, we are very far from
it. There is such a thing as desegregated racism, and we've got it.
          We may no longer be Jim Crowed, but we are just as black ghettoed
as ever.
          Instead of just a token black here and there, we have a whole token
black middle class, but the black masses remain as impoverished,
jobless, and hopeless as before.
          There is one item of unfinished business that we may as well
forget--the forty acres and a mule promised all Freedmen during the
First Reconstruction. We can charge that one off to Profit &Loss,
since it now takes upwards of 1,000 acres to make a go of it in
agribiz, and we stopped making mules. Even if we were to start them up
again, there wouldn't be anybody around who knew "Gee" from "Haw."
          Cottonpicker came, and blacks went; but here come the robots, who
can't tell a blue collar from a black skin, and won't do nothing for
you anyway unless you can talk to them in Japanese.
          Nobody dares call anybody "n----r" anymore, but injury without
insult is injury right on.
          We may have the vote, but where can we find a people's candidate
who can afford to run?
          Lynching has gone into limbo, but look who's on Death Row.
          Sure, we stopped putting the blowtorch to Bootjack McDaniel, but
any time the bugle sounds we join forces with the Yanks to firebomb
thatched villages, with the best intentions in the world.
          No more chaingangs, just concentration camps for black males.
          No more sweatbox, just a rapacious cellmate with AIDS.
          Ole Strom Thurmond and the latter-day Dixiecrats all gone over to
the GOP--an outfit which folks say isn't exactly anti-black, it just
doesn't care about people.
          Nowadays you hardly ever see the attorney general of Mississippi up
before the Supreme Court, arguing against things like school busing
and affirmative action; mostly it's the U.S. Attorney General.
          Same old Klan out in the woods rehearsing for a black holocaust,
but decked out now in battle fatigues and armed 

with automatic
weapons.
          Time was (1940) when the per capita income of Southerners was
$309. That presented problems of sorts, but nothing like the
$2,370,000,000,000 national debt that somebody has run up on our
credit card. This is not conservatism, nor even reaction; it is
anarchy and drunken-sailorism. (Reminds me of the refrain of a poem
penned by a tippling classmate of mine: "There'll be muckle moaning
at the bar, when my turn comes to pay.")
          One remarkable thing about our plight is that we seem to be
blissfully unaware of it, like the patient who having been prepped for
surgery goes to the table in such a state of euphoria he doesn't care
whether he lives or dies. In our case, we have been administered
tranquilizers and painkillers in the form of lowered taxes and
increased plastic spending power--a sort of nothing down, cash rebate,
pay later proposition which few seem able to refuse.
          Where all the talk used to be of Black Belt and Bible Belt, now all
we hear is Rust Belt and Sun Belt. The big idea seems to be to
persuade industry to forsake the Rust Belt altogether and get a fresh
start in the Sun Belt. Still baiting our hook with those
old-reliables--free land, tax exemption, and non-union labor. (What we
fail to realize is that it was organized labor, and nobody else but,
who made the American standard of living what it is today.)
          Strike-breaking and union-busting "ain't what it used to be," since
the command post was moved from the Pinkerton Agency to the White
House.
          Mean old slave trade a thing of the past; nowadays we just leave
'em and work 'em wherever they're at. All it takes is a few
dime-a-dozen whipping bosses to keep them from getting any notions
about free speech, solidarity, elections, and stuff like that.
          No need to worry so much now about a Southern wage differential, as
a S. Korean.
          Stopped bringing in coolie labor a long time ago; doors still open
to wetbacks and islanders, but American industry is solving that
problem for us by pulling up stakes and moving offshore and across the
border.
          Offshore industry is not all we've got. We used to say that America
would never be in any danger of takeover by a military junta, but now
we have seen how offshore government has been formulating foreign
policy and waging wars in our name and at our expense, but outside of
our laws and Constitution.
          An unlamented loss is the Southern demagogue, whose distinctive
flavor was exceeded only by his deviltry. In place of Ole Gene and The
Man in the Senate cafeteria demonstrating the respective merits of
crumblin' or dunkin' cornbread into pot-likker, we have such
mainstream models as a Marine colonel playing Rambo and a Dude Rancher
cast as President.
          Dies, Rankin and McCarthy all gone to their graves, but who needs
thought-control when all you have to do is scatter a few cliches and
flags around, and people will vote "Right" every time.
          Problem used to be: unfree people who wanted to be free; problem
now is, unfree people who think they are free.
          Thought we had a Magic Bullet to stop VD, but now you need a
wetsuit to go out on a spree.
          Long before anybody else had heard of drugs, some residents of the
black ghetto were sitting around "on the nod" from cocaine. Now all
the world seems to be on the nod from one thing or another. Can it be
because we are fast turning the world into one big ghetto, with all
that that entails in emptiness and despair?
          Anybody remember the good ole days when we had the likes of IT&T
for absentee owner, instead of the Sheik of Bahrein?
          Sho nuff, Ole Massa and Mr. Charlie done both gone with the wind,
but here come Mr. Takahiro!
          Our agenda could go on and on, but you see what I mean when I say
that ye olde problem-of-the-South has not only been transmogrified but
transcended. We may have been Problem No. 1, but we don't need any
final solutions. Like the man said, all the world's a stage, and if
the thing catches fire there will be no way to save the South Wing.
          Talk about Lost Causes--if Life and Earth make the list, the UDC
and SRC alike can hang it up. Old South and New; North, East and West;
white, black, brown, and yellow; rich and poor; free and unfree;
sinners and saints--we're all in the whale's belly together, and the
whale is headed for the beach.
          Somebody do something, quick!
          
            Stetson Kennedy, a Florida native, played a prominent
role in the pioneer civil rights movement of the thirties and
forties. Taking it upon himself to infiltrate the KKK and a score of
other racist/terrorist bands, his books Southern Exposure, I
Rode With the KKK, and Jim Crow Guide were the
first by a white Southerner to raise the standard of "total equality."
They not only helped "soften up the South for righteousness," but,
translated into a score of foreign languages, served to give Uncle Sam
a global hotfoot to "do something." At 71, Kennedy lives near
Jacksonville, Fla., where he is putting together a selection of his
writings under the title, "Land Be Bright," and an autobiography,
"Dissident-at-Large."
          
        
        
          South Leads in Black Officeholders
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, p. 25
          
          Mississippi leads the nation in total number of black elected
officials and Alabama has the highest percentage of black
officeholders in the United States, according to the annual Black
Elected Officials: A National Roster, published by the Joint Center
for Political Studies.
          Although blacks in the South continued to post electoral gains, the
overall increase in black officeholders slowed for the January 1986 to
January 1987 period surveyed; the nationwide increase last year was
4.1 percent, compared to 6.1 percent the previous year and 6.2 percent
two years ago.
          The ten states with the highest numbers of black elected officials
are Mississippi (548), Louisiana (505), Alabama (448), Georgia (445),
Illinois (434), North Carolina (353), South Carolina (340), Arkansas
(319), Michigan (316), and California (293). Nationally, the total
increased from 6,424 to 6,681.
          Not surprisingly, the geographic distribution of black elected
officials closely parallels the distribution of the total black
population in the U.S. The South has 53 percent of the nation's black
population and 62 percent of all black elected officeholders. The
second largest concentration of black officeholders, 19.2 percent, is
in the North Central U.S., where 19.8 percent of the nation's black
population is located. The Northeast, with 18.5 percent of the total
black population, has 10.6 percent of black elected officials, and 5.7
percent of all black elected officials are in the West, where 8.9
percent of all blacks live.
          Southern blacks have had good success in translating their
population concentration into electoral gains at the state and local
levels but have managed to win few federal offices. Only three of
twenty-three blacks in the U.S. House of Representatives are from
Southern states--Reps. John Lewis of Georgia, Mike Espy of
Mississippi, and Harold Ford of Tennessee.
          A total of 71 black elected officials were elected last year in
jurisdictions where no black American had ever before held elective
office. Also, the number of black women elected officials continued to
climb (to 1,564), and has now almost tripled since 1975 (530).
          Seven blacks hold statewide office and 410 serve in
legislatures. At the municipal level, 303 blacks serve as mayors and
2,485 as council members. The number of black mayors in cities larger
than 30,000 population increased from twenty-eight to thirty-four.
          There is a direct correlation, the Joint Center for Political
Studies said, between black voting age population and the number of
black elected officials. Mississippi leads in black elected officials
but also has the highest proportion of voting-age blacks (30.8
percent). Voting-age blacks are 66.6 percent of the total voting-age
population in the District of Columbia, where 67.8 percent of all
elected officials are black.
          There are no black elected officials at all in Idaho, Montana and
North Dakota, where blacks are less than .05 percent of the total
population.
          For a copy of Black Elected Officials: A National
Roster, 1987, send $29.50 to Publications Office, Joint Center
for Political Studies, 1301 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., #400,
Washington, D.C. 20004.
        
        
          Sermonette on the Movement
          By Hayden, CaseyCasey Hayden
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, pp. 27-29
          
          Mary King is like her ancestors. She walks a very straight line for
a long time. She was always like that: solid, linear, historical,
careful, analytical, objective, thorough. And stouthearted. The
amazing thing is that she wrote this book at all. To have gone back
over all this history had to be such an emotional experience, so
heavy. A strong persona, Mary, made of strong stuff. In the Freedom
House at Tougaloo Mary set her hair in pink curlers when the rest of
us could hardly keep up with our combs. When she left there she went
with cartons and cartons of WATS line reports, pots and pans, and
little scraps of paper. The Packrat. This is definitely the kind of
head it took to write this book. It is so full of so many details,
specifics.
          It is, I think, a good book. It is personal, of course. Everyone's
memories--everyone's slice of it--are personal, different. But she has
spoken well and carefully to a good many of the major questions of the
period. This book will be widely read in years to come, disputed and
quoted as an authority. Primarily, however, its value will be in
keeping alive a time which is rapidly becoming forgotten and/or
misunderstood. Blacks today are viewed vaguely, if at all, like any
other immigrant group. Like the Irish, they should just kind of meld
in, (without intermarriage, of course). We'd like to forget slavery
and the rigid caste system that followed. Really, slavery,
Slavery. Not easily overcome. So it is good, Mary, to keep this
information alive. You do history a favor.
          I appreciate getting to write about your book. The movement was
everything to me: home and family, food and work, love and a reason to
live. When I was no longer welcome there and then when it was no
longer there at all, it was hard to go on. Many of us in this
situation, especially the Southern whites, only barely made it
through. I count myself lucky to be a survivor. But that is another
story. For old times' sake, Mary, here are some comments on this
story.
          
            The Movement
          
          This story in Mary's words, meticulous Mary, comes out sounding
like what we were doing was the most natural and proper thing in the
world, that we were heroines from the very beginning, that each move
was carefully planned. I think for her, it probably was. Actually, as
I recall, one thing led to another and it was all quite underground,
illegal, dangerous and on the road. There was a lot of bumming of
cigarettes from each other and long cross-country drives in the night
to meetings and a lot of going home with someone afterward, or taking
someone home. It was outrageous, really. Exciting, liberating, spicy,
when we were young and in the South. Sometimes I have longed for the
movement so profoundly. The only nostalgia that compares is for my
grandmother's backyard when I was a child--the pomegranates and ripe
figs, roses and swast peas, ferns and irises and crepe myrtles and
oleanders, pecans and walnuts and swings and wet grass on little bare
feet in the summer time. The movement was rich like that. And in like
manner there is no going back.
          There was a comfort in that time that was born of the 

absolute
certainty that what I was doing was the right thing to be
doing. Nothing compares to that except the carrying, bearing and
nursing of my children. When we were young and in the South we were so
beautiful and naive. It was a children's crusade, really. We were the
fairhaired girls and nothing could touch us. Looking back we marvel at
our courage, but at the time there was no courage, no fear. We were
protected by our righteousness. The whole country was trapped in a
lie. We were told about equality but we discovered it didn't exist. We
were the only truth-tellers, as far as we could see. It seldom
occurred to us to be afraid. We were sheathed in the fact of our
position. It was partly our naivete which allowed us to leap into this
position of freedom, the freedom of absolute right action.
          I think we were the only Americans who will ever experience
integration. We were the beloved community, harassed and happy, just
like we'd died and gone to heaven and it was integrated there. We
simply dropped race. This doesn't happen anymore. And in those little
hot black rural churches, we went into the music, into the sound, and
everyone was welcome inside this perfect place.
          We were actually revolutionaries, in my opinion. Mary will tell you
we weren't, but I think we were. We loved the untouchables. We
believed the last should be first, and not only should be first, but
in fact were first in our value system and it was only the blindness
of everyone else not to recognize this fact. They were first because
they were redeemed already, purified by their suffering, and they
could therefore take the lead in the redemption of us all. We wanted
to turn everything not only upside down, but inside out. This is not
mild stuff. It is not much in vogue now. We believed, pre-Beatles,
that love was the answer. Love, not power, was the answer. All the
debates about nonviolence and direct action and voter registration, in
my view, were really about whether love or power was the answer. And
we did love each other so much. We were living in a
communtiy so true to itself that all we wanted was to
organize everyone into it, make the whole world beloved with us, make
the whole world our beloved, lead the whole world to the consciousness
that it was our beloved and please come in to the fire, come in here
by the fire. Come on in with us here by the fire and break taboos left
and right. This is where it is truly safe.
          The movement in its early days was a grandeur which feared no
rebuke and assumed no false attitudes. It was a holy time.
          This is of course, just my personal experience, as is Mary's
experience, as is all of life.
          
            On Being Radicals
          
          Some of us were radicals. We liked to think of being radical as
going to the root of things. Of course, I was with the New Left folks
a lot, the rowdies, although they were quieter and more scholarly
then, before the war. Unfortunately radicals of the right came up with
clearer answers to the questions we raised than we did. And better
P.R. The failure of liberalism which we correctly identified has in
fact issued forth in a right swing. I don't know any left-wing
radicals today, really. However, in reading Mary's book, and in memory
of the old days, I found myself making marginal notes in some parts of
the book. The following approach to the women's movement is an example
of the style in which we thought, mostly at the time about race. Even
for those of us who do not pretend to be politically involved it is
good to do these exercises now and then for old times' sake, to keep
the form intact: Traditionally, the notion that women are trapped by
and need to be liberated from their childbearing function, their
biology, is widely accepted in the women's movement. I think it's
incorrect. If carried to its logical extreme this position would
result in the eradication of the human race.
          Why not take biology, the body, as positive and see the problem in
the society, the culture's attitude toward birth? No one talks about
labor much anymore, and never about labor as a source of value and
seldom about labor as in bearing children. Both are undervalued and
their place in the rewards of the culture are not reflective of the
truth of their value to the experience of being human. Anyone who is
present at a human birth, and especially the conscious mother, knows a
great secret. Freedom is not a question of the control of the birth
function (although certainly that is useful to have at our command) so
much as recognition and dignification and reward of this function and
the child-rearing function that follows from it. This line of
reasoning carries one into deep waters, of course. We used to think
like this all the time, these radical approaches with astounding
implications.
          Mary talks about organizing lower class women, a mass movement. We
used to refer to the movement as a mass movement, back when it was
happening. The word masses, like the word labor, is seldom used. What
are some issues which touch all women rather than primarily or
disproportionately benefiting upwardly mobile professional women?
          I think about this one: Why is every second woman I talk to over
thirty suffering from irregular and heavy menstrual periods? Why are
the doctors giving out hormones, DNC's and hysterectomies with abandon
to handle the problem. What is the root cause? What is the relation of
all this to the hormones we eat, for instance, in all meat and dairy
products? Is anyone testing for this? Who should decide what we eat,
anyway? (One can get into this one on cancer and pollutants and
petroleum by-products and nuclear power, also.) Similarly, given the
value of the experience of giving birth, and the need for women to
claim it as their own, what is the feminist reaction to the shutting
down of birthing centers nationwide by the insurance companies? It is
the insurance companies who control the experience of the woman in the
act of giving birth, the insurance companies and the AMA. This issue
is as important as abortion. The conscious experience of birth changes
the relationship of the mother from unconscious to conscious and thus
contributes to the survival and spiritual development of the human 

race. The next logical step in this thinking is to look at nursing
homes, the profit motive's impersonal and depressing answer to how to
orchestrate life's other most significant transition.
          Of course, the AMA and the insurance companies are big groups to
take on. This didn't slow us down. We were brash and young. To address
these issues means to address basic societal restructuring. It means
all the same things it used to mean when we were into it. These issues
cut across class lines. This is as it should be, as Mary
suggests. These issues are about survival and spiritual truth. This is
also as it should be. We need to think radically, even if it sounds a
bit mad. Very few people, after all, know how.
          
            What Goes Around Comes Around
          
          I know there is for you, Mary, something of a full circle in this
book. I know it took you twenty-five years to come to terms with much
of this history, with yourself. This means a healing. The idea of
coming full circle is important. Very important now in my life. It was
important then, too. We used to hold hands and stand in a circle to
sing "We Shall Overcome." When we were debating how to continue to
work and create together at Waveland after the summer of 1964 (which
was a momentous time and a time when we couldn't seem to get at
deciding what to do anymore) I remember talking about circles. Instead
of lines and boxes and hierarchy in the diagrams of how to organize
SNCC I was drawing circles indicating people working together and the
circles overlapping other circles as we all generated programs and
things to do together. That was how the movement really was. Our side
lost. But we were right. Hierarchy could not replace the circle dance
(as Milan Kundera has also pointed out, I found out after writing
this).
          Bob Moses changed his name to his mother's maiden name, around this
time of the women's memos. It was going back to something else to make
the present full, to say an understanding. He was the only one who
knew what to do. Bob wanted to do his doctorate at Harvard on the
philosophical differences in Swahili and English, I understand, after
he and Janet and the kids got back from Africa. After the SDS reunion
there was some money left over which came to the New York group and we
used it to throw a party to raise some more money for a film on Ella
Baker. At the party Bob spoke and he talked about a Swahili word which
meant the mother of the tribe, the spiritual guide of the
community. He said Ella was that. He told about when he was a kid in
Harlem and his family was very poor and the only way they could afford
milk was through a milk co-opt Years later in the South he learned
that this milk co-op had been organized by Ella Baker.
          Things do not always fall apart. Sometimes what looks like falling
apart is only part of a coming full back around. I think we have to
hope for that, for a time when the truths women and old organizers
know will be honored and the secret compassion we have secured in our
hearts will find value in the population, among the people. Or that
the people will find we have shared this all along. Somewhere in the
questions that the Swahili/English text would raise must be the
question of whether history is linear or circular, or maybe
spiral. What is progress, really? How is history to be served? How do
we serve each other? What is to be done? 
          This was the question which led to my drafting of our second memo,
the Kind-of-Memo. It was so painful to see all the floundering about
trying to figure out what to do, to be burning out oneself, and to see
the community dissipating. It seemed like one should at least keep
talking about what was really happening, what really mattered, with
whoever would listen, whoever would talk back. That seemed to be what
was to be done.
          
            Tell It Like It Is
          
          When I was working several years ago with Elaine Baker, another
Tougaloo Freedom House grad, on an oral history project in a remote
part of southern Colorado, we came up with this idea of putting tape
recorders and tapes in the local library. Then we had the idea to get
a grant and do it all over the country, so anyone anywhere could come
in and record their life history and put it in the local oral history
archive. We were working on an old SNCC axiom that everyone is as
valuable as everyone else, and so is everyone's experience as valuable
as everyone else's. Radical equality, like a mother's love which sees
each of her children as equally valuable. Mary can be an inspiration
to all us survivors. We can, like her, write it down, record it,
somehow pass it along. We can seize the time and make it our own, make
our story our own, in our own style and fashion, as Mary has. For
instance, a book about my life would look like a sixties comic book
and be called "The Amazing Life of Casey Cason Hayden Cason, How She
Escaped Death and Lived To Tell About It." Getting it published or
broadcast is not the main thing. We all remember the discrepancy
between reality as we experienced it in the movement and what we read
about that reality in print. We know that publication does not
validate experience, nor do we need it for our experiences to be
valid. What you record will be used, be useful, someday. It will be a
service to the future. Save it for your grandchildren.
          Well, this is not a review, exactly. It is more like a sermonette
combined with notes scribbled down the side of a page. But it is part
of the healing and the moving forward and upward which is the root of
this book. So in closing I will say the only thing that I really do
want to say a great deal and which I think you will be glad I said,
Mary:
          For the Zen teacher body and mind are one. So for a brief time in
history, in our very own lives, art, religion and politics were
one. Those of us with SNCC in the South in those days were political,
it is true, but more radically, we were observers, participants, and
midwives to a great upheaval, uprising, outpouring of the human
spirit. This was the spirit of the thousands and thousands of poor
Southern blacks who were in fact the movement. The form, the style,
the very life of the movement was theirs. They were there when we got
there and there when we left. Many of them could not read or write and
they could barely speak the English language. They will never see this
book. They, and not we, were the heroes, the heroines. I was
privileged to have been their servant for a while. To them, for all I
learned from them and for all the beauty I witnessed, I extend my most
sincere and humble thanks.
          
            Editor's Note: Freedom Song by Mary King, William Morrow
and Co., $22.95, 592 pp.) appeared this year and has been hailed by
many reviewers as a monument to the civil rights movement. Ms. King
worked for the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee during the
early sixties and has recorded her experiences during this time. In
1986 she sent the first draft of her manuscript to Casey Hayden (a
Texas native lately of the Southern Regional Council staff, who now
works for the City of Atlanta) and asked if Hayden would like to write
a statement of her own which might be used as an introduction. The
following was Hayden's response to this request. The essay appeared in
abbreviated form as a preface to Freedom Song and is
presented here as a reflection on the period and the
book.
          
        
        
          Avedon's West
          By Ponder, ArtArt Ponder
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, pp. 30-31
          
          Richard Avedon is generally known as a fashion photographer, the
man who creates the "idealized," sexist icons for the covers of such
magazines as Vogue and Self. Others may know him as a contributor to
Rolling Stone or the photographer who turned his large format camera
on the influential and powerful, making revealing portraits of
numerous "movers and shakers," George Wallace, Ronald Reagan and Jimmy
Carter among the herd. His most recent effort, however, is in sharp
contrast to those earlier identities. In "In The American West," a
traveling exhibition recently on view at the High Museum in Atlanta,
he takes as his subject not Vogue stereotypes, but the dispossessed,
the drifting, the working class, the "ordinary people" of an American
region. He does so in such a way as to startle nearly any viewer, and,
in the end, make an ambiguous comment about the West, a comment devoid
of humanity and thirsting for understanding.
          In 1979 Avedon began what developed into a five-year project, in
which he attempted to, as he says in the foreword to his book In
The American West, photograph "the men and women who work at
hard, uncelebrated jobs, the people who are often ignored and
overlooked." Toward this end, Avedon roamed the West, visiting events
and places such as county fairs, rodeos, coal mines, and slaughter
houses, looking for faces and bodies that would serve his vision of
the West. For Avedon, this is a process akin to auditioning actors for
a play or film, though here potential actors have no idea they are
under consideration. After selecting a person, he and his crew of
three or four assistants would erect a piece of large white backdrop
paper, always in the shade to give flat, even, light to all his
photographs, and position the subject for his or her portrait. Using
an 8x10 view camera, capable of rendering the most minute details with
clarity, Avedon would make his picture. About these subjects and the
subsequent results, Avedon has said: "These disciplines, these
strategies, this silent theatre attempt to achieve an illusion: that
everything embodied in the photography simply happened, that the
person in the portrait was always there, was never encouraged to hide
his hands, and in the end was not even in the presence of a
photographer."
          Such could not be further from the truth, for all of Avedon's
pictures radiate with the presence of the photographer nearly as much
as the subjects themselves. Like the portrait "Gordon Stevenson,
drifter, Interstate 90, Butte, Montana, 8/25/79,n all of Avedon's
subjects float in negative white space, rooted to nothing but perhaps
the edge of the frame, stripped of place and context, able to speak
only through their physical appearance.
          In Avedon's view of the West no one is given the dignity to be
viewed in their personal landscape. No one is seen in relation to
place. For students of Southern culture, this resonates with
exploitation, as Southerners have long been characterized as being
dependent upon a relationship to place, or in Eudora Welty's overused
notion, to have "a sense of place." Who would not look alienated, who
would not look dispossessed when asked to stand rootless against
seamless white paper? What would we think of Lewis Hine's photograph
of a young spinner in the Roanoke Cotton Mill if Hine pictured her in
an empty white space rather than with the spinning machine she saw too
much of? When pressed by critics concerned with the perceived
exploitative approach, Avedon invariably hides behind the artist's
veil. In a recent interview for Atlanta Art Papers, he
quipped: "...let's assume that it's correct that I take advantage
of people. What has that got to do with the business of an artist?
What difference does it make if I am a good or a bad man? We are
talking about the works of art which will live long after I'm
gone....But are the photographs true to the human condition? And has
damage been done?" He asks his own question and his exhibition
answers with a profound "yes," when we understand that he is offering
a misinformed, distorted and exploitative vision of an American region
that, by the nature of its circulation and hype, influences the views
and opinions of many.
          ONE OBSERVER OF THE exhibition commented that "many look as
though Avedon had stormed their homes and forced them up against the
white seamless backdrop paper, their pants unbuttoned, hair
disheveled, and their demeanor reflecting utter resignation before
this master of control. Others seemed to have been dragged from their
jobs..." (Spot, Fall 1985). Avedon, however,
contends that with portraiture "the surface is all you've got. You
can only get beyond the surface by working with the surface." This
leads him to abstract all his subjects in a white background. In
Avedon's portrait of the West there are no causes for dispossession
and despair, simply dispossession and despair.
          The show at the High Museum was sponsored in part by Rich's,
Atlanta's large department store chain; shows in other cities were
also underwritten by department stores, reflecting the high regard
bestowed upon Avedon by the corporate fashion machine. At the grand
gala opening in Atlanta, with Avedon in attendance, the museum patrons
and art aficionados wandered amidst the larger-than-life portraits of
drifters, miners and such, facing the working class of another region
in a way they may never have observed folks of similar plight and
occupation in the South. That Avedon's work forces viewers, some
reluctant ones, to look into the eyes of victims in America is one of
the powerful triumphs of the exhibition. One Atlanta
Journal-Constitution writer overheard a shocked Atlanta
matron responding to the show: "I know Jesus says you are supposed
to love everyone, but I just can't. I just can't. I can't love dirty
people or fat people."
          A VIEW OF THE AVEDON show (or the book) is like viewing the
collection of a well-traveled entomologist; we see many types, all
recorded by the collector in a similar fashion, but we know nothing of
any of them except their name and where they were found. Like a
collection of insects, Avedon's collection of faces and occupations
from the West are clear, sharp and well-presented, but without the
slightest bit of humanity. In a public lecture in Boston earlier this
year, he explained his right to photograph people however he wants:
"To say it in the toughest way possible, and the most unpleasant
way, what rights do Cezanne's apples have to tell Cezanne how to paint
them." Avedon knows no difference between the inanimate and the
animate. Years of fashion photography have conditioned him to only be
interested in the surface and the form, but not the person or the
life. In an Avedon session, he and the camera are the animate forms
and whoever the subject--factory worker, drifter, rancher--are
inanimate forms to be directed, arranged, and "framed" by the heavy
black lines of his large film format. Most tragically, his subjects
are silenced. Richard Bolton, a critic and an artist in Boston,
reflects on Avedon with sharp criticism: "His approach is
reminiscent of police photography--in the police photograph, one
cannot help but look like a criminal; the format itself communicates
guilt."
          Countless viewers of the Avedon show, unaware of exactly how they
feel about his work, offer such gut reactions as "powerful," "moving,"
and "disturbing." The power of Avedon's work rests with the ability of
these large, voyeuristic images to awake horrors in the minds and
hearts of viewers. Not unlike the tabloid report of human suffering or
catastrophe, Avedon's work provokes shock and horror. The real
tragedy, however, is that the provocation is an end in itself, and his
approach never gets beyond the surface he holds so dear, generating
not the least bit of understanding. Devoid of understanding and
compassion, his subjects are left to drift helplessly and silently,
with no voice to offer us their sagas of life and work.
          
            Art Ponder is a drifter and a sometimes contributor to
Southern Changes who is currently stationed in
Atlanta.
          
        
        
          Women and 'Men's Work' During the War Years.
          By Thomas, Mary MarthaMary Martha Thomas
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, pp. 31, 38-39
          
          Riveting
and Rationing in Dixie: Alabama Women and the Second World War
by Mary Martha Thomas. (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press,
	       1987.145 pp. $16.95, cloth.)
          Beyond the dull, dull, dull style there's an
	       impressive research job and an intriguing view of
	       social change in Riveting and Rationing in Dixie.
          Some women, of course, had always worked outside the home, notably
blacks and poor whites. But the war, for the first time, created a
large need for women to fill tradition-

ally male occupations. Thus the
female labor force increased by 6.5 million from 1940-45, and the
proportion of women who were employed increased from 25 to 36
percent.
          As always, race mattered. "Before the war, white women had
worked in laundries, restaurants, hotels, and retail and wholesale
trade. These are all fields characterized by low pay and poor working
conditions." During the war, white women moved up to higher-paying
male jobs. Some black women moved up from "from agriculture and
domestic work to the trade and service jobs that the white women had
vacated."
          The engineers of the war effort--all male, naturally--faced two
large problems: first, to convince housewives to take jobs in
manufacturing and labor; second, to convince the women to give the
jobs up when the war was over and the heads of households had come
home.
          This inherent conflict led to rather schizophrenic
recruitment. Some ad campaigns depicted welders--helmets 

pushed
back--applying lipstick, to show that femininity could be undiminished
in a temporary male job. Meanwhile, women workers at the Huntsville
Arsenal were being called "modern Amazons." A foreman bragged on "a
slim girl, weighing merely 105 pounds but 'can take it' better than
any man he ever saw."
          Author Mary Martha Thomas, a history professor at Jacksonville
State University, observes a "certain uneasiness about women
assuming these new roles." Early in the war effort, she writes,
Alabamians supported the effort to recruit women to the war effort
with a great concern over day care and other obstacles to working
women. But by 1943, "social workers, the press and the public
shifted their concern to what they saw as the rising tide of juvenile
delinquency" and called on women to "pay more attention to
their maternal duties." Similarly, women's leaders began as early
as 1942 to argue that women, substituting so well in other areas for
men, should be allowed to serve on juries. But a committee of the
Alabama House of Representatives defeated such a proposal in 1945.
          By 1950, statewide female employment was only slightly higher than
in 1940. In short, says Thomas, the "forces of continuity seem to
have prevailed over the forces of change during the war years in
Alabama."
        
        
          The Struggle Goes to Hollywood
          By HRWHRW
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, p. 39
          
          In the eyes of a South African filmmaker who has seen Cry
Freedom  while visiting the United States recently, Richard
Attenborough's epic film about Donald Woods and Stephen Biko is a
technical success but flawed in its judgment.
          From her perspective, the film, which is currently drawing large
audiences in major U.S. cities, has the welcome potential of showing
millions the crushing reality of apartheid, but it obscures the basis
of Biko's life and, ultimately, the reasons he died.
          "I'm very positive about the actual film. It is beautifully made
and Denzel Washington is extremely good as Biko. Kevin Kline also
gives a good performance as Woods. But Cry Freedom  is
about the education of a white liberal, not about Steve Biko and his
role in South Africa."
          She believes that Woods, by structuring his book Asking For
Trouble as he did, and Attenborough, by using woods's book as
the basis for Cry Freedom, have done "the antithesis
of what Steve stood for. The story of Woods may be heroic, but not
compared to that of Biko and other blacks who seldom have the
opportunities to express their own stories."
          Shaun Johnson, reviewing the film in the Nov. 20-26 issue of the
Weekly Mail, a dissident newspaper published in
Johannesburg, arrives at essentially the same point but is less
critical of Attenborough. "Cry Freedom is surely the
biggest-budget, widest-angled, most-marketed anti-apartheid statement
the world has ever seen, and is likely to see for quite some time. It
is beautifully crafted. It is Donald Wood's story, played under the
shadow of Steve Biko."
          Johnson observes that Attenborough has produced a "story for
foreigners and the reaction of someone in the midlands or midwest is
what will decide its fate...in Cry Freedom, the struggle goes to
Hollywood, or, more correctly, Hollywood goes to Harare."
          The South African filmmaker said the American audience she was with
appeared to react powerfully to Cry Freedom. "It's terrific that
the film is going to be shown. Audiences will know a great deal more
about Biko and about prison, torture and the absolute ruthlessness of
apartheid. The security police in the film are marvelously authentic
in that sense. But in terms of how Attenborough has structured the
film, it may upset many black South Africans who have grown tired of
their lives being portrayed through the experiences of whites."
          On that basis, the film can be criticized as a reflection of the
evil it attempts to illuminate. The question is whether it was proper
for Attenborough to use a white character to tell a black story. The
director has responded to such criticism by saying he couldn't raise
$22 million to tell Biko's story, which merely feeds the argument.
          Weekly Mail reviewer Johnson liked the film for what
it is, saying "Biko's full story, will (and must) be recorded
elsewhere. Let this slice stand."
          The South African filmmaker wishes Attenborough had been more
courageous. "I think the error lies in misreading the responses of
the world's audiences. It is the role of the filmmaker to advance new
insights. Biko's personality, his youth, his humor, his image, would
have carried a film. The western world would have accepted him as a
hero, though ironically neither he nor the black consciousness
movement wanted heroes at all. They were quite an extraordinary group
of people. Biko was an outstanding figure, but others had equally good
contributions."
          Despite her reservations, she applauds Attenborough's skill in
making a superb movie, which arrives at a time when it is much
needed.
          "At the moment we have a state of emergency in South Africa and
Americans are getting no news. It is against the law to film any
police or security action without official permission. The fact is,
there are still thousands in prison and the security police can still
pick up anybody they like anytime they please. One needs to remind
people that it is happening still and Cry Freedom is a
timely replacement for the sort of news that ought to be coming out of
South Africa."
          Among the most powerful of the film's images are the names
scrolling across the screen at the end, listing eighty other activists
besides Biko who have died over the past decade from "suicide" or
"falling down stairs" while in the hands of security police.
          In late November, South African censors made the surprising and
welcome announcement that Cry Freedom could be shown
uncut in South Africa. Some apartheid watchers interpret the move as a
gamble on the part of the Botha government to win points abroad by
trying to show that the film will have minimal adverse effect in South
Africa.
        
        
          A Letter from Lillian Smith
          Edited by Gladney, RoseRose Gladney
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, pp. 32-33
          
          As writer, intellectual, and social critic of 20th century Southern
and American life, Lillian Smith corresponded with a variety of
notables about subjects of major historical, political, and cultural
interest. The following selection from her correspondence with Eleanor
Roosevelt (copied from the original in the Eleanor Roosevelt Papers,
Franklin D.  Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, New York) provides a
glimpse of the extent, variety, and timeliness of the interests and
concerns that underlay Smith's goals and achievements as a writer. It
is from the first volume of Selected Letters of Lillian
Smith, forthcoming from the University of Georgia Press.
          Prior to the publication of her best-selling novel Strange
Fruit (1944), Smith supported herself by directing Laurel
Falls Camp for Girls near Clayton, Georgia. However, her public
writing career began in 1936 when she and her assistant camp director
Paula Snelling decided to co-edit a magazine, first called
Pseudopodia, then North Georgia Review,
and finally South Today. Designed to encourage fresh
critical views of Southern literature and culture, it quickly became
the region's most liberal literary voice, publishing and reviewing the
works of blacks and whites, males and females, and calling for an
immediate end to all forms of racial segregation.
          In 1937 the Julius Rosenwald Fund, which had since 1928 focused
primarily on developing black education, established a fellowship
program open to Southern whites as well as to blacks in order to
broaden its efforts to improve race relations. Because of the related
interests and focus of their magazine, Smith and Snelling applied for
and received joint Rosenwald Fellowships in 1939 and 1940, enabling
them to travel widely throughout the South studying economic,
political and cultural conditions.
          In 1942, '43, and '44, they were again employed by the Rosenwald
Fund to travel throughout the South in search of potential fellowship
recipients among the region's college students. Eleanor Roosevelt was
also involved with the Rosenwald Fund; indeed, her response to this
particular letter indicated that she would be unable to meet Smith
because she would be "in Hampton attending a Rosenwald meeting."
          As the following account indicates, Smith's impressions of Southern
college students and her assessment of major issues facing the region
in 1942 sound eerily familiar some forty-five years later. Likewise,
as in Smith's correspondence as a whole, this letter reveals the mind
and spirit of a woman keenly observant of the world around her,
especially conscious of the importance of all aspects of human
relationships, and clearly aware of her role in shaping and
interpreting the age in which she lived.
          April 7, 1942
          Mrs. Franklin Roosevelt,
          The White
House,
          Washington, D.C.
          My dear Mrs. Roosevelt:
          Paula Snelling and I have this past week completed a trip through
the South during which we have interviewed for the Rosenwald Fund the
young Negro and White college seniors who have applied for Rosenwald
scholarship-aid grants.
          We have found these interviews profoundly stirring and want in some
way, to share our findings with you. Some of our talks with the young
Negroes were very disturbing, some most heartening, nearly all sincere
and realistic. We found in the young whites--though there were
exceptions--a shocking ignorance of their South, a concern primarily
with their personal affairs, a restlessness about the future, 

little
awareness of the international picture and our place in it. We found
few educated whites who had ever met an educated Negro; few young
Negroes who had met a racially unprejudiced white. We interviewed only
the "cream" of the senior classes in 22 colleges.
          Throughout the South, as we expected, we found many liberals giving
up their liberalism "for the duration." Especially did this seem to be
true of those who are labeled "friends of the Negro." The Negroes feel
this too and are depressed and disheartened by the knowledge that many
of their white friends disappear when crises arise.
          Down in the Delta we found reaction rising like a great
wave. Cotton is 26 cents in the Delta now and the general attitude
among the planters is that neither Mr. Roosevelt nor God Himself is
going to keep them from making some money while the making is
good. There is a childish desperation in their attitude that would be
awfully funny were they not so powerful. (Among my various activities
is that of being a director of a summer camp for little rich
girls. Some of these planters send their children to me in spite of my
"liberalism." But this spring I find them on the defensive, very
antagonistic to all liberal movements, growing suspicious of what I am
teaching their children in my camp; so suspicious and antagonistic
that I dared not tell them that I was on Rosenwald Fund business for
their hospitality would not have been equal to such a strain being put
upon it!)
          There is something heartbreakingly valiant about the young of the
Negro race, so eager to prove to white America their willingness to
die for a country which has given them only the scraps from the white
folks' democracy. There is resentment also; a quiet, strong
resentment, running like a deep stream through their minds and hearts;
something I think few white Americans are aware of, or want to
face.
          I shall be in Washington Friday, April 10th, at the Hay Adams
House. I shall call Miss Thompson Friday morning and shall be honored
to talk with you if you wish me to do so. I know you are a very busy
person and I do not want to burden you further by a talk with me
unless you think it will be useful to you to have in more detail this
recent skimming of southern opinion.
          Should you let me talk with you I would like to discuss with you
also the possibilities for making this new venture of the Rosenwald
Fund a more creative and vital youth project. Some of us think--and
Dr. Embree shares this opinion--that the project should be more than a
mere selection of young whites and blacks for graduate study. Could
they feel themselves a part of some big and creative effort, something
that had to do directly with their South, that had adventure in it, it
would become a significant experience for them, rather than merely one
more year of university study. They need somehow to be brought
together, to have actual experience with each other, though heaven
only knows how we can work it out in a South where such an idea can be
mentioned now only in whispers. But how can the South ever work out
its bi-racial problems when its intelligent and educated young whites
and Negroes have never met an educated member of the other race?
          I believe Miss Lucy Mason recently wrote you about Paula Snelling
and me and our magazine The North Georgia Review which
has now changed its name to South Today. I merely
mention this kindness to us so that it will help you identify us.
          There are many of us who are deeply grateful to you for your
unwavering stand for the democratic decencies.
          Most sincerely yours,
          Lillian E. Smith
          
            Rose Gladney is assistant professor of American studies
at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa.
          
        
        
          The 1987 Lillian Smith Book Awards
          By Davis, ThadiousThadious Davis
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, pp. 33-34, 36
          
          When Georgia author Lillian Smith died in 1966, the Southern
Regional Council established an award not only to honor her work and
her memory, but also to foster in others the spirit of her courageous
struggle for human rights in the South. Smith's first novel,
Strange Fruit (1944), explored the human tragedy
resulting from racial segregation. That novel catapulted her to fame
as a white Southerner with a social consciousness who spoke out
against a major problem in her native region. With the publication of
Killers of the Dream (1949), she provided both an
intensive psychological analysis of the effects of segregation on
whites and blacks and an uncompromising call for an end to a
debilitating system. Her visionary writing was accompanied by social
and political activism. Whether functioning with national
organizations, local groups, or personal friends, Smith committed her
energy to persuading others to work for social justice and racial
equality under the law.
          The Lillian Smith Book Awards have been presented since 1967 in
recognition of outstanding writing concerned with the Southern
region. Recipents have not been restricted to Southerners,
but they have been expected to contribute understanding of social
issues and human problems affecting Southerners and the South. In
sponsoring the awards, the Southern Regional Council recognizes those
writers who have translated Smith's "struggle into terms
appropriate to our own lives" today, as SRC President Paul
M. Gaston puts it. Gaston points out that the intent is "honor the
authors not so much for their own sakes. . . but so that others will,
because of the award, learn about and read their books."
          This year the Lillian Smith Book Awards have been 

jointly awarded
in the non-fiction category to Thomas L. Johnson and Phillip C. Dunn
for A True Likeness: The Black South of Richard Samuel Roberts,
1920-1936 and to Pauli Murray, posthumously, for Song
in a Weary Throat: An American Pilgrimage. The 1987 Smith
Award in the fiction category is to Mary Hood for the collection of
short stories And Venus Is Blue.
          A TRUE LIKENESS IS A COLLECTION of the photographs
of Richard Samuel Roberts, a black Floridian who in 1920 moved to
Columbia, S. C., where he operated a photography business in the black
commercial district until his death in 1936. Selected from some three
thousand extant glass plates, Roberts's photographs document the lives
of blacks in Columbia and the surrounding area. They make a unique
contribution to the historical record of black communities in the
urban South during the period between the world wars. Roberts provided
a rare glimpse into the activities and culture of emergent
middle-class towns people in the early decades of the modern South. He
photographed people and the artifacts of their material culture:
studio backdrops, city streets, public buildings and private homes;
weddings, christenings and wakes; family groups, school children and
individual portraits; prominent citizens, day laborers and community
leaders.
          Anthony Paul Dunbar, a member of the awards committee, observed
that "Not only are the pictures artistically and technically
excellent but they record a life that very few people knew existed. If
you read the captions to the photographs you will see the civil rights
movement emerging."
          Published by two regional houses, Algonquin Press of Chapel Hill,
N.C., and Bruccoli Clark of Columbia, S.C., A True
Likeness is the result of a collaboration between Roberts's
surviving children (Wilhelmina Roberts Wynn, Gerald E., Beverly N. and
Cornelius C. Roberts) and Phillip C. Dunn, an art professor at the
University of South Carolina specializing in photography.
          With the support and assistance of the South Caroliniana Library's
field archival program, Dunn cleaned and restored the glass negative
plates, developed contact prints from which he selected "the most
powerful and significant," and made exhibit-quality prints. Dunn and
his co-editor Thomas L. Johnson state that the true value of Roberts's
work lies not merely in its "intrinsic aesthetic appeal as a
photography collection of undeniable technical finesse and formal
beauty," but in "it's revelation--its true representation--of a
lost world of a people whose identity was lost not only upon the white
world but also upon itself." Essentially, the recovered
photographs of Richard Samuel Roberts attest to the vitality of a
Southern black community and deposit a cultural legacy for the
descendants of that community as well as for those of a white
community that never knew of its existence. His pictures recapture for
all an aspect of Southern life rarely seen by outsiders and nearly
forgotten by insiders; in the process, they further an understanding
of the multicultural South.
          PAULI MURRAY'S Song in a Weary Throat, published by
Harper and Row, is memoir of self and society by a 

woman who insisted
on her full humanity as a person of color and as a female. It recounts
with unusual clarity, passion, and compassion Murray's journey toward
achievement in the face of racial and sexual discrimination. Murray
chose her title from a verse in her book of poetry, Dark Testament and
Other Poems: "Hope is a song in a weary throat." Hope is the
keynote that sustained her through long years of commitment to civil
rights and moral justice. Robert J. Norrell, chairman of the awards
committee, termed it a "powerful statement of one person's
challenge to a world that put a lot of obstacles before her but that
she would not let daunt her."
          Murray chronicles her life as "An American Pilgrimage" which took
her from early childhood in Baltimore to formative years in the black
South of Durham, N.C. She presents her youthful ambitions and dreams
along with the nearly devastating effects of discriminatory practices
upon them. She recounts her efforts to become a lawyer during a period
when both her race and sex limited her opportunities for professional
education. The University of North Carolina would not admit her
because of her race; Harvard University would not admit her because of
her sex.
          Murray not only became a civil rights attorney and legal scholar,
but she also was a founding member of the National Organization for
Women. From the 1930s through the 1980s, she remained a tireless
teacher-activist for the advancement of blacks and women, a cause that
she understood as necessary for the advancement of all Americans. In
1973, she entered the seminary and in 1977 became the first black
woman to be ordained an Episcopal priest. She ends her pilgrimage with
an account of the celebration of her first Holy Eucharist, a communion
service at the Episcopal Chapel of the Cross in Chapel Hill, N.C.,
where her white and black ancestors had worshipped for generations and
where she herself felt all the strands of her life as a poet, lawyer,
teacher, friend, and minister come together in "the spirit of love
and reconcilation drawing us all toward the goal of human
wholeness." Murray died in 1985 while completing Song in a
Weary Throat; the book is a fitting tribute to her quest for
wholeness--for herself and all Americans.
          MARY HOOD'S And Venus is Blue is a collection of
seven stories and title novella. Published by Ticknor and Fields, the
work is about white Southerners in the contemporary world of change
and transition. In these accomplished stories of physical and
psychological survival, Hood shatters stereotypical views of the
South. Though incorporating details of cultural reality not restricted
to the South (Harlequin books, Datsun cars, etc.), she treats rural
people with the expansive perception of one who recognizes the quiet
valor of their determination to remain fully human in dehumanizing
times. One female character envisions the world as
"untrammeling. . . widening in ripples about her," and sees herself as
"the stone at the center that sets things moving."
          Without condescension or caricature, Hood captures the often hidden
meaning of ordinary life, distills it with compassion, and renders it
for others to share. Her special gift is for articulating the often
unspoken conflicts of the heart among the working-class poor. A rural
family man, for instance, struggles against the limits of his
existence:
          There was a little air stirring. The pines on tomorrow's cutting
were tall against the first stars. Up toward Hammermill the sky was
lighter. Cheney could see, after his eyes got sharper, the glint of
the mayonnaise jar he had brought his tea in for lunch....He picked it
up. the lid was missing. Cheney tossed it--it hit on something and
smashed I'm so goddamn tired of being poor, he said.
          His voice may not be eloquent, but the scene incompasses with
accuracy and authority the contrast between the potential of the
natural world and the reality of the unending human effort to create
an inhabitable space within that world.
          Hood lives in Georgia, whose northern foothills and mountain areas
provide settings for her stories. Her fiction has evoked, for some
readers, comparisons with Flannery O'Connor, another Georgian and
master of the short story form. However, according to awards committee
member Mary Frances Deriner, Hood's people and landscapes are neither
O'Connoresque nor grotesque, but are instead the "essence of the
modern South."
          Race and Justice
          Of the 5,710 judges and prosectors who play a role in deciding who
will be executed in the United States, 178 (3.1 percent) are black.
          
            Thadious Davis teaches at the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill and was a member of the committee which
selected this year's Lillian Smith prize winners. Other committee
members were Robert J. Norrell, Center for the Study of Southern
History and Culture, University of Alabama; Mary Frances Derfner,
Charleston, S.C.; and Anthony P. Dunbar, New Orleans, La. In making
its selections, the committee reviewed approximately forty strong
entries in fiction, history, and autobiography! memoir published
between July 1, 1986, and June 30, 1987.
          
        
        
          On Guard Against Good Intentions.
          By Littleton, GeorgeGeorge Littleton
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, pp. 37-38
          
          The Thanatos
Syndrome by Walker Percy. (New York: Farrar, Straus, and
Giroux, 1987. 372 pp. $17.95.)
          In Walker Percy's latest novel, The Thanatos
Syndrome, Dr. Thomas More, a psychiatrist recently paroled
from federal prison, uncovers a nefarious scheme to "improve the
quality of life" for the unsuspecting denizens of Feliciana Parish in
southeast Louisiana. Such improvement is realized through the addition
of the heavy sodium ion into the region's water supply. Dr. More
becomes suspicious when his female patients present themselves
rearward during analysis, and the hospital's black janitor, a hunting
companion for forty years, addresses his friend with "standard,
U.S. politeness, like a drive-up customer at Big Mac's."
          In typical Percy fashion, this limited plot is carried along by the
author's wry and perceptive analysis of modern America and revealed
through his well-wrought but tiny band of characters. Opposing
philosophies are offered by the Qualitarian scientists from Fedville,
who tamper with the water supply to gather statistical data to support
their convictions, and Father Simon Rinaldo Smith, an alcoholic
Catholic priest who, isolated in a fire tower above his hospice for
society's rejects, prattles on about his visit to Germany in the late
1930s. Providing the logical and philosophical link between these
elements is Dr. Tom, the novel's detached but keenly observant
protagonist.
          The story opens when Dr. Tom, fresh out of Fort Pelham Federal
Detention Center, notices a variety of unusual occurrences, including
the simian sexual behavior of his female patients and their
willingness (and ability) to answer questions completely out of
context. For instance, Dr. Tom might suddently inquire as
to the exact location of Evansville, Indiana. His patients roll up
their eyes, as though reading a computer printout, and provide
latitudes and distances from major urban centers. Not knowing whether
it is he or his patients who have changed during his detention, he
seeks the help of his cousin, Dr. Lucy Lipscomb, epidemiologist,
soybean farmer, and computer expert.
          Together, they not only discover that sodium is in the water
supply, but that it is being put there covertly by a select group of
transcendent Qualitarians who plan to reveal their "numbers" just
prior to the upcoming national elections. The Qualitarians, led by
Drs. Bob Comeaux and John Van Dorn, will show that their project has
undeniably improved the quality of life in Feliciana, and that any
candidate who opposes their project opposes improved life for all
Americans.
          In the novel's vaguely futuristic setting, the Qualitarians are
they who believe in death with dignity. They believe it is better to
terminate, through pedeuthanasia and gereuthanasia, a life that is a
life without quality. They rhetorically ask Dr. Tom if he would
condemn a little child to a life without love, or have someone
needlessly suffer with AIDS.
          When confronted with their colleague's discovery of the sodium
project, Comeaux and Van Dorn smugly defend their plot and invite
Dr. Tom to "join the team." The heavy sodium ion affects certain
neurological and psychological traits through cortical suppression,
they explain. Results of the project include drastic reductions in
crime, child abuse, and homosexuality. Math scores improve 100 percent
in schools within the test area, and students have total recall of
imports, exports, and geographical relations. Black youths from the
Baton Rouge housing projects apprentice themselves at gas stations and
factories, and inmates et the Angola State Prison Farm sing spirituals
in the fields and refuse to return to the cities upon release. Teenage
pregnancies are eliminated by changing the female cycle from menstrual
to estrus. How, ask the Qualitarians, can such results be argued
with?
          Dr. Tom, always the devil's advocate, mentions civil rights, secret
assaults on people's psyches, and their speech and language function
being reduced to two-word utter-

ances and the inability to write a
complete sentence. Furthermore, the Qualitarians do not partake of the
ion themselves, and there is the secondary discovery that Van Dorn is
running a child pornography ring at his boarding school as part of
what he calls the "sexual liberation of the Western world."
          Meanwhile, Father Smith refuses to leave the fire tower. Fixated by
the memory of a trip to pre-war Germany, Father Smith recounts, in a
twenty-page intermezzo called "Father Smith's Confession," how he
spent time among the country's most eminent psychiatrists, and how
they argued over a book entitled The Release of the Destruction of
Life Devoid of Value.
          Although he was not particularly taken with the psychiatrists, who
as a group were great humanitarians and lovers of children, he
recalled their debate over the relative importance of love of self and
love of country. He also recalled them scoffing at Hitler's radio
ravings over the presence of the "alien" within the pure organism of
"Das Volk."
          The true object of Simon's fascination was his cousin Helmut, a
Brownshirt who aspired to become a full-fledged SS and join the ranks
of the German army and fight for the Fatherland in the imminent
war. Helmut's devotion to his cause and country inspired Simon in ways
he had never known. Father Smith confesses to Dr. Tom that, had he
been a young German at the time, he would have followed his cousin
Helmut into the Hitler Jugend. Interestingly, he said, Helmut had
little interest in the Jews, saying only that they had volunteered for
the Jugend and had been turned down.
          Father Smith's next visit to Germany was as an American soldier
liberating a children's hospital. Its director had been one of the
psychiatrists he had known from his earlier visit. A nurse there
showed Father Smith a special room where the doctor regularly
exterminated children with experimental gases.
          Preparing to leave the fire tower, Dr. Tom asks Simon why he became
a priest. Simply, says Simon, because one must choose life or
death.
          The book ends when Dr. Tom returns to the boarding school to rescue
his children from the pederasts. In the novel's funniest scene, the
staff of Belle Ame are forced to drink molar concentrations of heavy
sodium, whereupon Mrs. Cheney presents rearward to Coach, causing
Dr. V. D. to thump his chest, bare his teeth, and attack. Their
apelike aggression is mollified with a bag of Snickers until the
police arrive to arrest the whole gang and shut off the sodium
shunt. The crime rate rises, math scores plummet, and Felicianians
engage in their conversation of old, as strange now as ever.
          The Thanatos Syndrome is an eminently readable, very
funny detective-adventure story peopled by a familiar crew we have all
loved and despised. It is also a novelistic prophesy about the fate of
modern America. Although the nature of this prophesy is
ambiguous--after all, reduced crime and disease control are lofty
achievements--we are partially tipped off by the book's title. Dr. Tom
calls the resulting behavior of the sodium recipients a syndrome. The
drive towards Thanatos is the drive toward self-destruction. But it is
not the unwitting sodium recipients who are self-destructive; they
remain intact, carefree as the animals they have come to resemble. It
is instead the scientists, the transcendent, magnificent demigods of
our age, who have decided to improve the quality of life for those
below them, and in so doing lead our society towards death.
          An important parallel develops between the Qualitarians planning an
improved society high in their Fedville offices, and Father Smith's
consideration, high in his fire-tower, of the transformation of
Helmut's personality. The divergent issue is that Father Smith
realizes the best intentions can turn imperceptibly to horror and
cruelty. One day the boys in Brown are filled with love of country,
the next they are manning the crematoriums. Thinking of the Fedville
crowd, Father Smith remarks that compassion is the first step toward
the gas chamber.
          In an early essay entitled "Notes for a Novel About the End of the
World," Percy acknowledged that his Catholic world view is "informed
by a certain belief about man's nature and destiny that cannot fail to
be central to any novel I write." A certain dose of this view is
present here, especially in a general reverence for life and a
consideration of man's free will unfettered by science, heavy sodium
ions and the like. But the import of this novel's prophesy is more
than a rehash of familiar principles.
          The importance of the individual, already diminished by the
enormous killing potential of modern weapons, is degraded even more as
the aura of technology mixes with the aura of power. The purveyors of
such power become transcendent over the world and truly believe they
know what is best for those below them. In The Thanatos Syndrome,
Fedville administers a "shotgun prophylaxis" to cure society's ills,
forgetting that what is best for one is not necessarily best for
another. Thus, we as individuals must be on guard against those who
would become extremists in pursuit of their good intentions. So too
must the powerful remain sensitive to what it means to be human. We
may be screwed-up, Percy seems to be saying, but it's better than
being dead.
          
            George Littleton is a writer on the staff of the Alabama
Commission on Higher Education in Montgomery.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By 
            Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 9, No. 5, 1987, p. 40
          
          This is the 200th year of the U.S. Constitution, but that document
remains shrouded in fiction, misunderstanding and ignorance. Millions
of Americans know so little about the Constitution, it is a miracle we
have been able to hold on to it.
          Speakers and writers, who should know better, continue to pay
homage to the Founding Fathers for the "Bill of Rights"--the first ten
amendments to the Constitution. The original constitution drafted at
Philadelphia in 1787 did not include the "Bill of Rights." Those
amendments came later during the ratification process. That is why
they are amendments.
          Indeed, the fifty-five affluent white males who met in Philadelphia
had no authority to write a constitution. They were only legally
empowered to revise the old Articles of Confederation. They drafted a
constitution anyway. The legal problems they created in doing so were
probably resolved by the subsequent ratification of their unauthorized
constitution.
          In 1787, slaves were hardly considered people. The Founding Fathers
reached a compromise at Philadelphia and upgraded each black to
three-fifths of a person. Women were ignored. The new constitution
reflected the culture. It also set certain forces into motion which
finally led to The Civil War and the end of slavery as an
institution.
          The Civil War and emancipation of blacks had no effect on
disfranchised white females. The Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth
amendments were added to the Constitution. These amendments, with the
exception of the Fourteenth, were all pegged to color or "previous
condition of servitude." Gender or sex proscriptions were conspicuous
by their loud absence.
          Nevertheless, another century after the Civil War, the civil rights
movement using those amendments spawned a whole new era regarding the
status and rights of women. What had happened? Is the mere passage of
time a sufficient explanation or is there something more?
          I heard an interesting explanation at a women's conference in
Birmingham last week. Approximately half the 200 women present were
white. One of the great loves of my life, sixty-two year old Shirley
Chisholm, was keynote speaker. But the words of a white female friend,
Ann Braden, really jarred my thinking.
          Ann and I served as panelists during a workshop on racism and
coalition-building. Years ago, Ann was a young reporter in Anniston
and covered Bull Connor's Birmingham. She later wrote an interesting,
frank and truthful book and many in the South will never forgive
her. She is unlikely to forgive them and now as a senior citizen
remains outspoken and a self-described "unabashed radical."
          For the women delegates, Ann described racism as the "indefensible
assumption that white males, by right, should rule all things and
everything was created for their benefit." She said that is why native
Americans (Indians) were wiped out by the settlers without the
slightest guilt or remorse. She also said that is why our foreign
policy is so dangerous in a world three-fourths non-white.
          Ann's definition of racism reduces sexism to a component of
racism. If her definition is correct, and I think it is, American
history begins to make sense for the first time.
          How else can one explain why intelligent, learned men would deny
their own mothers, wives and daughters certain fundamental rights
these men risked their lives to secure for themselves?
          Ordinarily, one would not consider that racism, but it obviously
was the exaltation of white males by white males at the expense of
people they love and were closest to.
          Women's rights did not move to the front after the Civil War and
black emancipation because these developments were aimed at the
institution of slavery and not racism. Racism remained in vogue; only
slavery was outlawed.
          A century later, the civil rights movement aimed its attack
directly at racism and the women's movement caught fire.
          The proof is in the pudding.
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut Jr. is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
      
    
  
