
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 9, Number 2,
	       1987
        
          Voter Participation Is Now the Challenge
          By Willingham, AlexAlex Willingham
          Vol. 9, No. 2, 1987, pp. 21-24
          
          Since the enactment of the Voting Rights Act, black voter
participation has improved dramatically, often operating as an
integral part of winning coalitions. However, under-registration and
low voter turnout continue to handicap the black population in the
South. This is the uncomfortable fact behind claims of an influential
black vote made after the Jesse Jackson campaign in the 1984
presidential primaries and again after the 1986 elections. Such claims
were fueled by certain black political leaders and also by
conservative whites smarting over the defeat of incumbent Southern
senators who failed to attract black votes in 1986. Both groups have a
special interest in exaggerating the importance of the black vote. But
the reality is that blacks in the South, even some in key
jurisdictions, are neither registering nor voting in respectable
numbers.
          A case in point is the 1986 campaign in Georgia's Fifth
Congressional district where John Lewis won election over Julian
Bond. The district is centered in Atlanta and includes black voters
with an active history of participation. Both Bond and Lewis are
well-known veterans of the civil rights movement and voter
registration work. For the heated run-off between them less than sixty
percent of the eligible blacks in Fulton county (the bulk of the
district) were registered to vote, and barely more than a third
actually cast ballots. Limited registration and turnout did not
prevent the election of a black Congressman there, but only because
court-ordered redistricting provided a large black majority; in a
district with the same black registration and turnout, but with a
smaller black majority, a viable white candidate might have beaten
Bond or Lewis.
          In the Second Congressional district in Mississippi, black
citizens--though a majority--were unable in 1982 and 1984 to elect a
U. S. Congressman. In 1986 when the district elected Mike Espy to
become Mississippi's only black congressman, it was considered an
upset although he was elected over a white in a district with 57
percent black population. Despite the large percentage of blacks in
the South, Lewis and Espy will serve with just two other black
colleagues among the 138 Southerners in the 100th Congress.
          In a real sense, these are protected victories, won through the
reapportionment process. And reapportionment, the most important
election reform strategy of recent years, has been so successful it is
now nearly exhausted as a remedy. The single-member district is now
widely used throughout the South. From courthouse to statehouse,

thousands of at-large elective offices once unattainable to minority
candidates have been transformed into districts which give ample
expression to black voting choices and, due to segregated housing
patterns, just about assure election of black candidates.
          The momentum for districting remains strong. The Alabama
legislature has enacted local courtesy laws enabling a cluster of
Black Belt counties to convert to singlemember districts for the
election of county governing bodies and school boards. Another l70
Alabama jurisdictions may convert to single-member districts under
terms of a pending lawsuit. In Mississippi all county supervisors are
elected from single-member districts. Even Southern legislatures, the
bodies responsible for reapportionment, are elected from single-member
districts in eight of the Southern states; only a few multi-member
districts remain in Arkansas, Georgia, and North Carolina.
          Generally, the federal courts have upheld single-member districting
as one effective remedy for electoral discrimination even as
legislative and administrative policies have moved in regressive
directions. In Thornburg v. Gingles, a 1986 decision on North
Carolina's legislative reapportionment, the U.S. Supreme Court
disallowed several at-large features of a districting plan and
specifically emphasized that the election of racial minorities should
be considered a critical factor in evaluating election systems. The
Thornburg decision has been considered pivotal because the Reagan
Administration entered the case and made a special argument, rejected
by the Court, that would have restricted the reach of reapportionment
law.
          Mere conversion to single-member districts does not settle the
issue of discrimination in elections. The problem is illustrated in
cases such as that of the Mississippi county supervisors where,
despite single-member districts, blacks account for only 38 of the
state's 410 supervisory positions although blacks are a substantially
larger percentage of the state's population. A similar pattern holds
among the Southern state legislatures. Even with the large-scale
conversion to single-member legislative districts, for example, blacks
would have to more than double their present number of state
legislative seats merely to match their numbers in the region's
population. As single-member districts come more into use, a remaining
issue--and one likely to dominate the 1990 round of
reapportionment--is how to draw districts so as to create effective
minority constituencies.
          Recent reforms have been based on certain key assumptions which
justify the priority given to the reapportion-

ment strategy: that
Southern state voting policies would be retrogressive, that blacks
would under-participate relative to whites, that cross-racial
coalitions would be unlikely, and that minorities would not be elected
to single executive and state wide offices. These assumptions can now
be reviewed.
          Southern state policies on voter participation, traditionally
hostile to the black voter, have been improving. Flexible voter
registration hours, satellite registration sites and deputy registrars
are now more common. Election officials in several states publicly and
systematically encourage voter registration.
          While barriers to voting have diminished, differential rates of
voter participation continue. And when this is combined with white
racial bloc voting the results could be an artificial constraint on
the political development that will come to the region. In the past,
allowance has been made for underparticipation by using the
redistricting process to draw black districts with extraordinary
majorities. This practice has been effective in the short-run but has
serious drawbacks as a long-run tactic. Such compensatory districting
may encourage packing, a new wrinkle in racial gerrymandering which
could be a threat remaining long after the classic vote dilution
techniques--including at large voting--have been swept away.
          One danger is that ostensibly black-controlled districts may be
intentionally drawn where powerful white factions continue to control
political office. For example, by putting most of the 30 percent black
population of a given county in a single almost exclusively black
district, blacks might elect one of five commissioners, who would
consistently be on the losing end of 4-1 commission decisions. The
remaining blacks in the county might be split among several majority
white districts where they compete with a dominant voting bloc and
have no ability to influence decisions. A perception of representation
might develop, among both blacks and whites, which reduces the
minority community to its "own" elected officials. This result would
lead to disillusionment as surely as the failure of blacks to win
offices in districts with only slight black majorities.
          Recent reforms have been based on a pessimistic assumption about
the prospects of cross-racial voter coalitions. The reality of white
racial bloc voting, particularly when combined with the differential
rates of participation, is a strong factor in assessing the racial
impact of election mechanics. But voter coalitions are critical to
future advances. The building of such coalitions will depend, in large
measure, on racial attitudes of white voters, but a key ingredient
will be maximization of the voting potential of the minority
population.
          Furthermore, single-member redistricting reforms do not reach
certain levels. They have brought mixed results in Congressional
races; they are ineffective in single executive and state-wide
offices. Except for the special case of judges, only one black holds a
state-wide elected office in the South.
          The significance of voter registration and education are clear. Yet
there is growing doubt that current efforts and organizations will be
capable of meeting the challenge. The Voter Education Project (VEP),
historically responsible for increasing black voter participation in
the region is facing major problems.  For several years now it has
been in serious financial, organizational and structural
disarray. Even before its current troubles, the political dynamics in
the region were presenting an increasingly difficult challenge to
voter registration efforts.
          The crisis at VEP was not entirely caused by internal factors. It
grew out of two things. First there was the overall shift in voting
rights efforts from community organizing to formal litigation, a shift
that came to dominate voting rights strategy in VEP's Deep South
territory. Second, there was a shift in the object of organizing from
support for overall consensus candidates (often at the presidential
level) to mobilization in the context of highly partisan local
campaigns. Key elections sometimes feature competition among black
candidates in majority-black single-member districts; at other times
they consist of black incumbents unopposed for reelection.
          In 1985, when the national philanthropic foundations issued the
report criticizing VEP, the focus was on over allocation of money to
administration as opposed to field work. But VEP, or any other
organization doing effective voter participation work, will have to
come to grips with the changing conditions of Southern politics and of
the role of minority voters therein. Some dramatic efforts to address
the issue have had little impact. In 1984 lawsuits were filed in
several southern states seeking to compel state officials to
affirmatively register voters. VEP itself shifted tactics and went to
court over registration practices in Georgia.
          But this overall
effort has stalled and cannot be expected to bring results in the near
future.
          The Jackson Campaign and its Rainbow Coalition proposed a seductive
way out of the voter participation dilemma--charismatic leadership
based in black church organization. Whether that will have a long-run
impact on minority voter participation is doubtful (there is some
reason to believe that black church politics is an extension of the
partisan pattern now emerging). In the short run the Jackson
mobilization has not significantly expanded black voting and, indeed,
Rainbow candidates have become one more element competing for support
within the same restrictive franchise.
          The Jackson method also places heavy emphasis on race in its
mobilization drives. But conditions in the South today require an
active voter to exercise the franchise in circumstances where such
cues are not dependable guides because election choices are more
matter-of-fact calculations. Powerful white factions seeking to
realign Southern politics, and restrict bi-racial governance,
encourage racial cueing by blacks as a strategy for
delegitimation. Emphasis on the racial cue also invites counter
mobilization by elevating this visible aspect of the candidate (or
proposition) among Southern white voters a group not unaccustomed to
making its election choices by such a standard. Depressed voter
participation in the Southern black population remains despite the
Rainbow Coalition suggesting the challenge for groups seeking an open
and responsive political process.
          Counting VEP, about fifteen organizations now conduct 

voter
participation work in low-income and minority communities. Only two of
these are based in the South, although half of them have operations
somewhere in the region. The proliferation of voter registration
groups has intensified competition over scarce dollars, local
constituencies, and skilled organizers, without providing local
capacity to respond to basic participation problems. In local
communities, groups historically constituted for voter participation
work now struggle without much assistance and are actively solicited
by partisan factions.
          Partisanship is a fact of life in the new Southern politics, posing
difficult problems for traditional tactics. Partisanship will be
exaggerated by the increase in black elected officials. Conclusions
about the precise impact of partisanship are difficult given the rapid
pace of change. However, certain features are clear. The new
mobilization is not a strategy for empowerment. It is primarily
effective in influencing the direction of the vote rather than the
quality of participation or input beyond election day. It is
beneficial insofar as such mobilization helps sustain some voter
turnout. Partisan mobilization tends to be episodic and
personality-driven. It seems to increase the role of money in
elections. It is of limited impact in low-profile elections even when
the issues being decided are vitally important to minorities.
          Current levels of registration and turnout suggest that partisan
mobilization is not a viable substitute for traditional voter
registration work. It does not seem capable of addressing the legacy
of discrimination or the sense of uncertainty about the efficacy of
the vote that is behind minority under-participation. To leave the
exercise of voting rights to partisan mobilization will mean that the
historic struggle to enfranchise black Southerners will lose its
potential as a democratizing force and become reduced to mere
politics-as-usual.
          What can be done? Nothing easily. Because philanthropy gives its
funds to non-political groups, its predisposition favors litigation
strategies which are safe from charges of partisan involvement. As we
have seen, however, the benefits to be expected from litigation are
diminishing and low voter participation among minorities may actually
have begun to undercut the benefits of redistricting. Proponents of
voter registration should avoid putting so many eggs in the litigation
basket and return to providing support for organizational
community-based work designed to register and vote the
population. This is no simple matter. Persisting underparticipation
and partisan domination of the electoral agenda raise difficult
strategic problems for groups working to expand minority
participation.
          Improvements in official voting policies are still needed at both
the state and federal levels. But formal changes in state policies are
not a substitute for community-based organizational work. Any overall
strategy will necessarily develop out of experiences in local
communities--rather than top down. Targets of opportunity must be
pursued by placing resources in places where there are realistic
chances of making gains. A regional organization, in the tradition of
VEP, could be pivotal in the process.
          Above all some organization needs to plunge in to systematically
collect and analyze information on what is happening in the aftermath
of the recent reforms. Research associated with voting rights
litigation provides some interesting illustrations about how to answer
these questions. But the case-by-case nature of this work does not
facilitate the systematic generalization needed now.
          The Voting Rights Act, the federal courts, and an experienced bar
remain in place to protect against wrongdoing by state officials, but
the main line of defense against vote dilution is increasingly
becoming that of informed citizens taking action in local
communities. Strategies to promote full participation in Southern
politics have varied over time as activists have struggled to overcome
voting practices that were among the nation's most restrictive and
discriminatory. Successful adjustments have resulted in significant
change yielding a more open political process today. Another shift is
necessary now if the historically disfranchised are to consolidate
past gains and continue the march towards a just political system.
          
            Political scientist Alex Willingham is research director
of the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Arthur Raper, 1899-1979: A Life Looking 'for the Heart of the
Thing'
          Interview by Kuhn, CliffCliff Kuhn
          Vol. 9, No. 2, 1987, pp. 4-10
          
          Introduction
          No Southerner had a deeper commitment to regional reform than
sociologist Arthur Raper. Born on a farm in Davidson County, North
Carolina, in 1899 and schooled at the University of North Carolina,
where he studied with Frank Porter Graham and Howard Odum, Raper
mirrored the South's problems and promise. His books on
sharecropping-Preface to Peasantry, Sharecroppers All and Tenants of the
Almighty-powerfully described the causes and devastating human
and environmental consequences of plantation agriculture. His work The Tragedy of Lynching remains the classic work on
the subject. Through his work with Gunnar Myrdal on An American
Dilemma and as research director for the Commission on Interracial
Cooperation, forerunner of the Southern Regional Council, Raper played
a leading role in interracial activities that informed and anticipated
the transformations of the 1950s and 1960s.
          In 1979, Arthur Raper gave what proved to be his final interview
for community radio station WRFG's "Living Atlanta" series, depicting
life in Atlanta between the World Wars. The interview ranged broadly
and represented a looking backward by one of the South's seminal
figures shortly before his death. Following are excerpts.
          Parts of the interview can be heard on two radio documentaries
produced by non-commercial station WRFG. In addition to the fifty-part
"Living Atlanta" series, in 1986 WRFG produced a three-part series, "A
Southern Profile: The Life and Times of Arthur Raper," addressing such
issues as Raper's place among the regional sociologists and
intellectuals, the etiquette of race relations in the South, and the
transformation of Southern agriculture through a look at Greene
County, Georgia. For more information, contact Cliff Kuhn c/o WRFG,
P.O. Box 5332, Atlanta, GA 30307.
          Radio Free Georgia Broadcasting Foundation, Inc. 
          BEFORE I CAME to Atlanta I was at Chapel Hill with the Institute for
Research in Social Science, Odum's operation, and there I worked with
Guy Johnson and Rupert Vance and the other fellows. I was very much
interested in what Vance, particularly, was doing in his work.
          The way I got to Atlanta was that I was in my little cubbyhole one
day and I heard Odum and Alexander-Will Alexander-coming down the
hall. I'd met Will Alexander at Fisk or when I had been at Vanderbilt,
one or the other, in '24 or '25, getting my master's. They were coming
down the hall at Chapel Hill, and I heard Odum say to Alexander, "Now,
let's stop in here. You might like to talk with this fellow a little."
So they came in and Alexander-I recognized him of course, and I think
he remembered me a little bit. And he said, "Why don't you come down
to Atlanta where the people are? You have brick buildings
and things here. Why don't you come down there and work with us?
          He said about two more sentences and I said, "When do you want me
to come?"
          And so he named some time which wasn't very distant away. Maybe
that was in the spring and I went down there in the fall.
          My original position in Atlanta was secretary of the Georgia
Interracial Committee. The Commission on Interracial Cooperation had
state committees, and my original job was to be secretary of that
state committee. They had urban or county committees, mostly urban
committees in the leading urban communities in Georgia. Practically
every place it was the elite whites and the elite blacks in their
separate worlds that were on these committees. I don't think that's
wrong. I think that's the kind of committee you need. If you're going
to do something in a Southern community as of at that time in the
field of race relations, that's exactly what you needed. Now, what
could come later in a way was built on that, because that had to
happen first, I think. I think those people had to be so they could be
in touch with each other and be known and be appreciated and respected
across the line. I think much of what happens grounds back on that.
          And they would talk about what the situation was. Maybe some
trouble is threatened over here because there's so many people
unemployed, or there's people over here--

likely to be some trouble
because it's said that a black man, a Negro, insulted some creditor
when he challenged his debt, or something like that. These people
would sense when something was coming up that was going to get hot,
and they tried to take care of it before it got to that stage. It was
not a committee to solve problems. It was a committee to anticipate
where problems might arise. And in that extent, it's a very, very
basic concept, and you can't have-you can't have a good interracial
committee without that kind of insight and that kind of
commitment. They were committed to this community and to this
relationship.
          There was the assumption that if you didn't have more equitable
educational facilities, if you didn't have more opportunities for
people to participate in the political process, if you didn't have
more opportunities for people to have access to health facilities,
equitable health facilities, why, you were building up problems for
yourself. Well, this one I remember was used in the field of health,
and this was told with great relish at one of the annual meetings,
about the Negro maid who was in the home of her employer, and she
says, "Why, that child there is coming down with diphtheria just
like my children have had for a couple weeks." Okay. You can see
that. You can respond to it. You can get a public health facility
understood and financed. You can illustrate the whole way through the
same type of things. You don't ignore and demean a part of your common
life of a community without paying the price for it.
          And I began going to those communities and talking with these
interracial committees, and I soon found that I wasn't too excited by
that. It wasn't too challenging. But something that was tremendously
interesting to me was that when I got to Atlanta I realized, of
course, that Floyd Corry who I had been very closely associated with
at Vanderbilt, lived down in Greene County. He was there, was running
his own store, and his uncle was one of the leading lights left in the
county.
          And when I got there, Father Corry, Floyd's father, just latched
onto me. He had lost his property. He was sort of a scion of a rundown
part of the family. But he still had the name and he had the kinship
contacts. He was buying cows and selling them. This was in the
Depression there. And he would tell me about, well, now, this old
house up here on the hill with these pines all around it and
everything gone to pot here, but this was where somebody lived, and he
told me his name and who his connections were and what had happened to
him and the whole business. And so part of what comes out in Preface to Peasantry and later comes out in Tenants of the Almighty was because I had this entree
to this family that had roots there way back, and had status. Because
I was accepted so utterly by this family who was so genuinely a part
of the picture there.
          The plantation was already crumbling. It was already propped up
with very high-priced gear and fertilizer, and propped up with a lot
of borrowing and propped up with a lot of tenants that couldn't pay
back their credit-priced stuff that they had consumed while they were
producing a crop, and then that threw the landlord into a hard place
to handle. Well, all of that was going on, and then came the boll
weevil, and it just knocked it down. And that was well before the
'30s. It was ten years before the '30s, in 1918,'19 and '20 in that
particular area. Plantations closed down. In Greene County, more than
half the people left some parts of the county. The cotton crop fell
from 20,000 bales one year to-I don't remember the exact figures, but
this is the order of it-from 20,000 bales to, say, 6,000 bales to
1,500 bales to 323 bales, I remember, from 20,000 just two or three
years before that. And, actually, the fertilizer that they had spent
on the cotton crop-not this last year when it was 323, but the crop
before that-the cotton hadn't even paid for the fertilizer bill, to
say nothing of all the rest of the expenses you have in growing
cotton. It just simply went broke.
          And when I'd get back to Atlanta I would go over to the city
welfare office there in Atlanta where Ada Woolfolk was director, and
she wanted me to help her think about, now, what can we do with these
people that are coming in here, and they're stranded and they don't
have anything and they're not well and they have no skills and no
education, very little, most of them, and what can we do with them?
And I began to develop maps to see where they came from 

in Georgia,
and a lot of them had come from Greene County and surrounding counties
where the situation was practically the same as it was in Greene. And
it was then in 1926 end '27 that I got the lead into this refugees to
the city that later became tremendously significant and an evident
fact. But I saw it very, very early.
          Then they set up this study of Lynching and they asked me to be
secretary of that, which I did. They had 20 more Lynchings in '30, and
they said, "What the heck happened here? Let's find out."
You've got to prevent Lynchings with facts about why people
Lynch. Well, who got Lynched? What was he accused of?
          See, the irrationality quotient in the Lynching phenomenon was
tremendous. There was just an assumption in some areas that you had to
have a Lynching every now and then to preserve equitable race
relations. The phobia was black men abusing a white woman. And part of
that is reflected in this tremendous emphasis that your Southern
politicians in the filibusters and what not had always been talking
about, Southern white womanhood.
          Before we'd gone very far we had these statistics about how many of
them had been-the South, how many of them had been black, how many had
been for this crime and the other, and what the relationship was
between the number of lynchings and the price of cotton, and all this
and that and the other. Most of it was not for sex or sex-related
crimes, as reported by the white newspapers. It was mostly economic
and etiquette matters. Even the statistics that we had where about
one-sixth of them were accused of sex-related crimes-it wasn't that
much. It wasn't as much as a sixth, because there was an element-and
everybody knew it-there was an element of fabrication built into that
to protect the status quo.
          When we had got that research together and got the thing said, and
it was getting into the newspapers getting accepted, because the kind
of people we had on the Lynching commission in the South, you don't
say-when those men-and, incidentally, there wasn't a single woman on
that Lynching commission-but when those men came out and said,
"This is our report. These are our findings," they were
accepted, and they've been accepted ever since. Well, when you find
out what you've been Lynching for, and when you get it from a source
that you can't challenge-and it wasn't challenged-well, then you are
on a different basis to call the sheriff or say, "Well, let's just
don't let this thing happen." And of course the women did come in
and played a tremendous role there.
          WOMEN HAD been sort of shut out of the church: they couldn't become
preachers. They were shut out of the courts: they couldn't be
judges. They were shut out of the sheriff's office. They wanted to do
something. They were hurting to do something. So here, now, was this
Lynching thing, and we'd done the statistical work on it. Jesse Daniel
Ames just grabbed onto it like a puppy that's hungry for a bone-or
like a big dog that's hungry for a bone. "This we will do." And
she got them organized very quickly. They were women that had ability
and they wanted to do something. And she had this emphasis on working
with women and knowing how to work with-and she did know how. So she
got the women organized here pretty quick, and she'd call them in
there to a meeting, you know, and they would come. And what these
women have done-they have signed that they are going to prevent
Lynchings in any way they can, and that they are going to call on the
sheriffs and they are going to call on the police and they are going
to call on the judges and they are going to be active in this
thing. And, my gracious, they were. And they were going to tell the
politicians, "Lynchings don't protect our virtue. We don't need
anybody to protect our virtue. And if you get up in the Congress of
the United States and say that you are Lynching to preserve our
virtue, we're going to call you down. Now, don't you do it." And
all of this filibustering, that's full of that stuff, up till 1930 and
'31, it dropped out.
          It gave them something to do, something that was important,
something that was vital. And they had a very good organization there
for nearly a decade, and I think it did have something to do with the
decline of Lynchings. I think the overall situation was moving in that
direction anyway, but that was one of the things that was in the
overall situation was these alerted women throughout the South to be
on their toes about this thing.
          When the federal anti-lynch legislation came up, she was very much
opposed to that. I don't think she ever concurred in it as a desirable
thing. I didn't think it would be easy at all. I'd never been in a
community where I'd really gotten acquainted with the people where I
didn't find some people willing to testify against the Lynchers, if
they could do it without their barns getting burned down or without
their church being split wide open or people stop buying at their
drugstore. They wanted to. They wanted--it seemed 

to me, they wanted to
be put in a position where they would take an oath and say, "Well,
yes. I didn't want to bring this into the open, but I had sworn on the
Bible to tell the truth. They asked me this question and I answered
it." They sort of wanted to do that, I thought, and I thought we'd be
way ahead if they did and had the opportunity, had a protected
situation within which they could give their testimony, because when
you've got a Ku Klux Klan judge and a prosecutor who sympathizes with
him, and then jurymen that they select by their own processes with
Negroes not on it and women not on it, at that time. a very closed
operation.
          Why, you could do anything in the courts. And they did. And this, I
thought, would open that thing up some and would be real boon for the
region.
          I was with Myrdal, because I thought, well, what Myrdal was doing
here was important. I didn't run away from Alexander. I just, with
Alexander's not too enthusiastic permission, went to work with
Myrdal.
          Myrdal comes down to Atlanta and says he wants to talk with two
people. Well, who are the two people? The head of the Ku Klux Klan and
Mrs. J. E. Andrews, the head of the Association of Women for the
Preservation of the White Race. So he gets out with Mrs. Andrews and
is talking with her, and she was saying that what I was doing at Agnes
Scott was that I was over there pretending to teach but what Raper is
really doing is making white women available for nigger men. And
Myrdal knew me somewhat, and he said-it just got too much beyond him,
and he said, "Well, wait now, Mrs. Andrews, have you ever had
sexual relations with a Negro man?" And she didn't know what to
say and couldn't say anything hardly. And they went on with their
conversation and he left.
          AND MYRDAL CAME back to our office. He was somewhat agitated and
what not. And we went on out to the house with Ralph Bunche and we ate
a meal out there at our house, which was verboten, of course, but we
did it anyhow. And then we went on down to Greene County. And by the
time we got to Greene County we learned that Mrs. Andrews had sworn
out a warrant for Myrdal, that Myrdal had insulted her. She got to
thinking about it later and she decided she had been insulter!. So she
could get a warrant all right, because she had connections in the
political set-up with the Klan. So she got her warrant, and called up
Martha to know where I was. She wanted this warrant served. I was with
Myrdal. So Martha kept her on the phone for-how long? Half an hour?
Forty-five minutes? Then she got in touch with me as soon as she
could.
          Incidentally, we'd had dinner that night with the chain gang in
Greene County. Because somebody raised the question some little
pipsqueak said, "What do we do with Dr. Bunche?" And once the
question was raised, everybody had to protect his flanks, you see. But
if the question hadn't been raised, why, they'd have done the same
things that we did with Ralph Bunche when I took him to my house and
we had dinner. We'd have just eaten and then gone.
          Oh the piece de resistance on this one
is the people, when they decided that they wouldn't let Bunche come in
and eat with the whites, they had sent him a plate of filet mignon,
just like all the rest of us, out into the black camp.
          I said to Myrdal, "Now, look, they've got this warrant sworn out
for you."
          He said,"What do we do?"
          I said, "Whatever you decide to do."
          He said, "Well, hmmm. What do we do?"
          Oh, he'd been asking me to run for governor of Georgia. I should
run for governor of Georgia. "What else can you do here if you
won't take political responsibility and stand up to these bozos and
he]p educate them? Let them count the votes. Go out there and do
it. You're scared, Raper."
          I said, "No, I'm not scared. I live here."
          He said, "What we going to do?"
          I said, "Well, the best lawyer in town was with us down at that
convict camp dinner tonight-Colonel Fawlkes. You can go talk with him
and he can tell you."
          The sheriff was there, too. So we went down to Colonel Fawlkes
house, and Colonel Fawlkes called the sheriff. The sheriff said,
"Well, I will not be in my office for official business until 9
o'clock tomorrow morning." This was about 10 o'clock at night. So
I said to Myrdal, "You just decide what 

we're going to do. I live
here all the time, and this stuff is going on always, as you heard
Mrs. Andrews this afternoon."
          He says to Colonel Fawlkes, "Well, look. What would they
do?"
          "They'd have a trial."
          "Have a jury?"
          "Yeah, they'd have a jury."
          "Who would select the jury?"
          "Well, they'd be selected by the outfit in Atlanta."
          "This would get in the papers, wouldn't it?"
          "Yes, it would get in the papers."
          "Well, I'm an international figure."
          And although he wanted me to run for Governor of Georgia and stand
up for my principles, I noticed that he wasn't taking the warrant and
standing for his. He said, "This would make it an international
incident, and I'm here for the Carnegie Corporation. They put a lot of
faith in me. I'm a well-known social engineer." So we decided that
he'd better leave before that warrant got there at 9 o'clock the next
morning.
          So we rode all that night and we went across the rickety bridge-it
was then-down between Fort Benning and Phenix City, Alabama, 2 o'clock
that morning, and got over to Tuskegee, and we took our rooms and they
had a little bath connection between us, you know. We went to sleep,
and the next morning about 8 o'clock he came stomping in
there. "Raper, what in the hell happened at Runnymeade? Now, you
tell me. What happened at Runnymeade?"
          I said, "What happened at Runnymeade was that the people made
King John sign some papers."
          "Yeah. And what? What happened?"
          I said, "Well, one of the papers was that you can't arrest
anybody unless you've got a warrant. But Mrs. Andrews has a warrant
for you."
          Well, there we were. I haven't ever been inspired maybe but once or
twice in my life. But that was one of the times. And, incidentally, he
never did ask me any further about running for Georgia.
          Then I went back to the study of rural Georgia. I went with the
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Argicultural Economics, to
Greene County in the fall of 1940. And I was busy as six bees, keeping
myself propped up on every leaning side down there so I didn't get
thrown out.
          In the meantime I was running all over the South, checking on
things, and going to committees and conferences, and accepting
invitations here, yonder, and there, to help write a report and the
like. I had an advantage. I had a travel account. And all these
organizations that are looking for a speaker-well, they're frequently
looking for somebody that don't cost them anything. So, from that
point of view, I was very attractive, just from the logistical point
of view. But they also was willing and even eager, seemingly, to have
somebody get up there and talk about the plantation system, and have
somebody get up there and talk about the unevenness of education
between whites and blacks, between the educational expenses in Atlanta
and in the rural counties, of the soil washing away and filling up the
rivers and rendering people very, very poor.
          I was amazed and frankly very pleased at the invitations that I had
to speak. I remember to the Kiwanis, I guess, in Atlanta, the name of
my speech was "It Could Happen Only Once." And I took the
forests and the soil then the installment buying and this and that and
the other. I had the thing worked out on about ten points. And I look
back at it every now and then and I think it was quite insightful. But
they took it. They listened to it. I saw those folks later and they
would talk. I'd meet them in other meetings, you know.
          Then came the New Deal, and it did have an NWA program, and it did
have a WPA program, and it did have something for the schoolteachers,
and it did have some notions about some clinics and the like. And Gay
Shepperson presided over a sort of resurrection of hopes and spirits
of the people of Georgia. I had ready access to her office on any kind
of public information that she had, and I worked out for every county
in Georgia how much money was going for CWA, Civil Works
Administration, for the whites, and how much for the blacks, and how
much per capita, if it was on a basis of people employed; if not, on a
basis of the population. And we had that whole thing for all of those,
all of those agencies. And we had, with the Rosenwald Fund, worked up
some figures on what the disparity of costs were for education for
whites and blacks in Georgia by counties, then when this New Deal
program came in for education and they were going to give something to
the teachers, how much of it went to these that were getting so little
and how much went to these others, how much went to Atlanta to the
whites and how much went to Atlanta to the blacks.
          Wherever the general standard of education was the highest, the
differential between the whites and the blacks was the least, and
where the general education expenditures were the lowest the
differentials were the greatest. And that was something that we'd
documented to the hilt. So we were interested to see where these New
Deal funds went. And they were usually on the side of the angels. If
they didn't get the whole way to heaven, why, they at least were sort
of in that direction.
          WELL, MR. TALMADGE thought this was all pretty bad. And in his Statesman, you know, the weekly paper that he had, he
railed about this, these programs every week. But they just went right
on. He was railing, and a lot of people were asking him to snap his
red galluses. But a lot of other people were glad to have some money
coming down to the county. And somehow or other they had said "We
like Talmadge. We like old Gene. But we also want the WPA money to
come down here. We want the money to come. Whatever money is to come
down here, we want it to come." And I think they wanted that to
happen more than they wanted to praise Talmadge.
          I don't know how much of the renaissance in the South came out of
the New Deal, but I think--I expect if you analyze this back--and this
would be a good thing for a historian to do--analyze that back, you
will find more coming out of the New Deal than almost any one thing
that's happened in the South in the last 100 years. I would be pretty
sure of that. Especially changing attitudes of people toward
themselves is the greatest change it made. The NYA helped some kids
get an education. The CCC helped some kids plant some trees and get
their stomachs full of good 

food and get their faces clean and their
feet clean. But the main thing it did is it gave these people maybe a
first chance they had had to believe they could ever be anything
except a sharecropper's son or a sharecropper's daughter. More poor
kids got to school under the NYA than anything else that's happened in
the South-the National Youth Administration. This is what they went
out there to do, and this is what they did. And they-they just saw a
different world from what they had up until then been able to even
envision.
          See, when I was working in Greene County, working on this Tenants of the Almighty that we published, MacMillan,
1943-I had working in my office five NYA youngsters, and those kids-no
one of them would have ever been associated with a project like
interviewing farmers and asking them what they would have expected to
get from the Unified Farm Program, and what difference has it made
when they had canned fruit, or what difference had it made when they
had a fenced garden, or what difference had it made when they were
able to get a production loan at a low rate of interest, what
difference did it make when they had a clinic, and this and that and
the other. Well, those kids just simply saw a new world when they were
working with that material. And then the pictures that Jack Delano
made there in Greene County-and we had them up on the wall, and we
were talking about--"This is what they're doing for the land
erosion back over here, and here's what they're doing in this area to
get a forestry going. And fire towers--be sure if the fires break out
that they get them put out before they burn the whole business
up." And the whole way through, those five kids there were just an
illustration of the process that was going on.
          And another thing that happened here was this tenant purchase
contract that they had with the Farm Security Administration. I can
tell you a story about that. Alexander had been saying, and he wrote
in Preface to Peasantry, that what we had to do
was get the ownership of the land into the hands of these producers,
that that was the only way we could have an adequate civilization
here. He had worked on that. We had talked about it. He had promoted
it in every way he could. And so he called me into his office one day--
this was before he left Atlanta--says, "I think we got it. I think
we got it. I think we got it."
          I said, "What?"
          He said, "I think we got this tenant purchase thing. I think we
got it. John Bankhead thinks he thought it up."
          Well, Alexander was the kind of guy who had very practical sense,
and if he saw that it was the way to get John Bankhead to promote that
legislation, why, he would devise every scheme in the world he could
to help get John Bankhead reconfirmed every morning that he had
thought that up.
          Well, these tenant purchase contract folks-there was, back here,
this dream of 40 acres and a mule, and that had been dashed. Then here
comes along an agency that says, "You can have this land. It's
yours. You can pay off your indebtedness with a low rate of
interest." And there was practically no hanky-panky in that
program. It was done by local committees, and the elite, again, made
up most of the local committees. But the elite didn't get the
farms. The rung down, not the bottom of the tenant but the top of the
tenant group got those farms. And out from those farms went children
who have done anything that has been done in America.
          We know one family in Greene County. They lived right next door to
us. And we said to the Hopkinses, "Now, look. Why don't you apply
for one of these tenant purchase contracts?" They were right
beside of us and were working on the land there on that old plantation
we were living on when we were in Greene County.
          And they said, "No, we won't do it."
          Why? Well, I talked with the man about it, Mr. Hopkins, Frank
Hopkins, and Martha talked with Mary Hopkins, his wife, that, well,
this would be a good idea to do.
          "No, there's a joker in it. We'll get squeezed again." He
said, "My father tried twice to move from sharecropper into
ownership, and each time bad years came. he had to give up everything
he had and go back into sharecropping. I'm just going to
sharecrop."
          Well, we kept saying, "No, you don't need to do that now." I
think they saw we were sincere, and then they saw some of these other
people moving onto these farms. And 

they did move onto their own
farm. They paid for it in five years. Well, there it is. I'm glad that
it happened. I'm glad that I was associated with something that is
that vital.
          Of course, I didn't anticipate, then, frankly, agribusiness and
what that has done in terms of this tremendous emphasis on bigger
units to finance and pay for bigger machines and to pay bigger
fertilizer bills and pay for bigger insecticide bills. I didn't
anticipate that then.
          There was, when I left, in, say, the middle of '39-there was still
the assumption on the part of most, I think, of the Interracial
Commission members that segregation-we would make it as best we
could. We wouldn't openly challenge it. I had openly challenged it,
but I just did it personally. And I think I didn't earn any points
with Odom and Alexander when I did it. I went to the Southern
Conference on Human Welfare in '38 [the first SCHW meeting was held in
Birmingham in 1938] and took a very active part and was a sponsor to
the one they had in '40. Alexander and Odum both had the feeling that
this Southern Conference on Human Welfare was sort of a flash in the
pan, as indeed it was. But the people that I knew in the South were
nearly all there, and I wanted to be there with them, and I was.
          And in some ways they were right. But in other ways I think the
South in race relations is very much farther along by having had the
southern Conference on Human Welfare, even if it did later on peter
out, and for good and sufficient reasons. But it did something. The
people got together and they talked and they looked at each other. It
was a plus, I think, and I'd do it again. If I had been ten years
older, I think, I don't know whether I would have done it or not. I
was still under forty. But if I had been fifty, I don't know whether I
would or not. Maybe I would have been with Alexander and Odum. The
Interracial Commission had its backgrounds and it had its committees
and it had its-never did write down what it believed in. Alexander
said, "We won't do that. We'll decide as we go along." He was
right in doing it, because couldn't anybody pick it up and say,
"This is what the Interracial Commission believes in." The
whites and blacks at the Interracial Commission had always chosen
their place of meeting. It had always-it had never been secret, but
neither had it been advertised in public. It was purposely kept sort
of quiet because it didn't want to be annihilated. "We can
grow," we thought, "if we don't kill ourselves."
          Well, then, the police and some of the folks in Birmingham looked
around a little bit: "Hmmmm, we better go over and check on this
thing." So they came over and decided they had to segregate us,
and when they did it made us mad. We were here and we had this meeting
set up, and this was the way we were going to go, and now you won't
let us go. "We'll have a meeting only after this where we can have
it unsegregated." That came out of that meeting in 1938. "We
will not have another Southwide meeting where we have to be
segregated." That came out of that meeting. That was a part of the
findings of the meeting. It was put in the newspaper.
          Okay. So that-and, as I say, I didn't gain any points by having
been identified with something that was pushing up on the mores, as
that was. And that was exactly what it was doing.
          Every member of the Interracial Commission was an ultimate
integrationist. He had nowhere to go except towards integration or
else deny his affiliation with the whole effort. Now that's the
dynamism of that earlier work that was done with the Interracial
Commission when it was being careful, when Alexander wouldn't put
down, "This we verily believe."
          I think what happened was that the people who were in this process
knew in themselves that, insofar as this better thing to be done, why,
everybody was going to feel better. You feel better when you have been
considerate of this other fellow who is treated inconsiderately by so
many people. You feel better. You see he feels better, or she feels
better. You sleep better. The doors on your house don't have to be
locked quite so securely. The laws don't have to be quite so demanding
in terms of restrictures here and here and here in life.
          I think the people who were the farthest along with it were happy
that they saw other people every now and then coming towards their
side. They thought they were with the future. This is the future,
therefore I can abide it somewhat. It hurts, but let's keep going.
          I don't think your ultimate integrationist ever thought integration
was going to solve the whole thing. I think some of the other people
who had been against it and then flipflopped over to it made demands
on it that some of us who had worked through the process never
expected. We didn't think it was going to make a tremendous, immediate
difference. But it was a process which had to be entered into and
carried on through. And the sooner and saner you can get started, why,
the better off you are.
          When you look at the Southern situation, the racial situation, so
far as the mechanics of the thing is concerned, it has made more
advances than many of us in 1940 could have expected. But these
advances that have been made haven't gotten the heart of the
thing. The heart of the thing lies deep in the culture of the white
man and in the culture of the black man.
          So that's where the real problem is-the integration, we had to come
through that phase. But we ain't there yet. We ain't there yet, and
we're not anywhere close to that. But we've gotten up the mountain far
enough that we car be over it and see what some of the other peaks are
and how high they are. The latter and more troublesome half of the
journey is still there. 
          
            Historian Cliff Kuhn was a co-producer of the "Living Atlanta" series and the producer
of the "A Southern Profile" series.
          
        
        
          Super Tuesday? Titanic Tuesday? South's Stake Large On Super
Tuesday
          
            Clyburn, JamesJames
	       Clyburn and McTeer, VictorVictor Mcteer
          
          Vol. 9, No. 2, 1987, pp. 16-19
          
          
            James Clyburn
            I want to thank you for
inviting me here this evening, but before I say anything I want to
make it clear that I'm not too sure exactly why I should be discussing
the Southern regional primary. South Carolina, as you probably know,
decided to forego changing anything regarding presidential elections
and we still are planning to nominate or select our delegates by
caucus. Of course, that will take place in March and it may influence
a few votes.
            The Southern regional primary comes almost naturally from the 1984
presidential elections when the South voted overwhelmingly for Ronald
Reagan. That fact led many Southern Democrats to complain that the
National Democratic Caucus did not heed its warnings and did not give
ample opportunity to a more conservative candidate for
president. Southern Democrats also felt and did not hesitate in
expressing their feelings that the Republican caucus in 1984 was much
more in tune with the South's problems as well as the South's
concerns.
            Tom Murphy, the Georgia Speaker of the House, summarized [a common]
attitude when he said that "the South is tired of the Northern
press saying who is going to be the next president." Therefore, we
now have in front of us the Southern primary which is supposed to give
the South a different say-so in the political agenda of the
country.
            Proponents of the primary, or Mega Super Tuesday as it is now being
called by the Northern press, have several goals. Number one, they
hope to increase the number of Southern candidates and hopefully
increase the chances of winning.
            Second, they hope to increase their chances of at least influencing
the presidential nominee and hopefully capturing the vice-presidential
slot.
            Three, they are attempting to influence the nomination of
candidates who have views that they consider more in tune with what
they consider to be the Southern way of thinking.
            And fourth, they hope to encourage both parties to focus on
regional issues.
            Inherent in all of these reasons is the desire to attract 

many
white male voters back into the Democratic fold. Whether or not the
South shall rise again-as some have said will happen as a result of
the regional primary-to my way of thinking is open to question. The
Iowa and New Hampshire primaries will take on added significance in
the wake of a Southern regional primary. It is possible that a
Northern liberal could do quite well in the Southern regional primary
just because of the appearance of being a winner.
            A more crucial question to me is, what will be the impact of the 25
percent black vote that makes up the electorate in the Southern
region? There is the opportunity for further strife and division. If
the regional primary is used as a platform for a conservative agenda,
what will be the position of black leadership in terms of their
agenda?
            Any question of a Southern primary also has to take into
consideration the so-called Jesse Jackson factor. Jackson, who is all
but certain to run in 1986 could walk away with a lion's share of the
black votes and also a good many white votes. Now, if this scenario
develops, what will be the position of the white voter that's left in
the South as well as white voters in the other four or five distinct
regions of the country? There is a possibility of further alienation
and therefore a repeat of 1984.
            I have several concerns about the motives [behind] the Southern
primary. First, there is the presumption that the primary backers are
trying to create a bloc of Southern delegates to use in bargaining or
trading at the convention. Now I don't know how many of you have had
the opportunity to participate in the Democratic convention as
official delegates, but it's been my pleasure or displeasure to
participate as an official delegate in the last four national
Democratic conventions, and in two of those conventions, especially
the one in 1972 and then the one in 1980, I was in the middle of the
trading and bargaining that goes on behind the scenes. If you think
black delegates who happen to have gotten elected in their state
caucuses or their primaries wield any kind of influence in those back
rooms, you've got another think coming. What happens when these blacks
get together? I can tell you there are just a few people who will end
up controlling those blacks. I'm not too sure that that is what we
have in mind, those of us who are sitting in this room.
            Another concern is that it seems to me a little bit ironic that all
of these years of hearing the black vote described as a "bloc vote,"
we now see our white counterparts finding that same strategy
appealing.
            Secondly, what are the compelling issues which create the community
of interest among these Southern states? When you start looking at the
Southern Democratic voters you have to realize that there is a big
difference in the interest of the black Southern voters and the white
Southern voters.
            What causes the assumption that these states can find national
candidates who agree with their positions? In fact, agreements under
these kinds of issues are pretty hard to come by. If there is
agreement, I suspect it has a lot to do with what you might call
traditional Southern thinking about things.
            Thirdly, if the South can have a primary, how long will it be
before we have a mega Super Wednesday in the West or a super, super
Thursday in the Midwest or a big Saturday in the East? Is that the
direction we wish to see our politics headed?
            And finally, if we create this bloc of Southern states loosely by
the so-called traditional Southern issues, where does that leave black
voters? Keep in mind that black citizens of the South have not fared
all that badly with presidents from states like Missouri,
Massachusetts, or Texas, for that matter. Will we be creating a bloc
within a bloc? Does the Southern primary even further dilute black
influence in these states...just when it seemed that we were about to
find our way into this nation's political and economic mainstream? 
          
          
            Victor McTeer
            I wish to preface my comments by saying that I'm not speaking for
Jesse Jackson; I speak for myself and as a Jackson delegate.
            I handed out some documents listing the dates of each one of the
caucuses or primaries. My secretary and the person that did these
forms made a mistake. I had told them to call it "Super
Tuesday" and inadvertently they called it "Titanic
Tuesday."
            Super Tuesday, as a concept, grew out of white conservative
[thinking]. The concept was basically that the South was the key to
electoral success; that it would allow for a heightened impact and
heighten attention to the area.
            In the South we know that this will be the weekend where the
minority vote will have the greatest single impact. This is obviously
due to the large percentage of black population there. It is also an
area, however, where whites predominated in terms of their historic
control.
            We know that in the rural South the party has suffered a massive
white disaffection from traditional party alliances in a startling
move towards two-party politics. Now this disaffection is a crucial
fact. Why is it that the white folks decided to leave?
            Number one, I suggest, is because of the entry of blacks into the
process. Number two, the use of racialist politics and tactics by
Republicans to play upon and benefit from historic anti-black
attitudes of the white community. And number three, a distinct
inability by white Democrats to be able to produce anything for black
candidates other than very substantial noise.
            Therefore, in states like Mississippi, Alabama, and Louisiana, we
have seen some of the greatest black advancements in politics coupled
with the most stringent white opposition. It is this area that the
Democratic Party chose to make its Super, Titanic Tuesday primary the
showplace of the nation.
            Well, now that we've moved from the outhouse to the White House,
from slave ships to championships, now that the ships on the bottom
have started to edge up, and now, while we know we prefer Roosevelt in
a wheelchair rather 

than Reagan on a horse, now that we know that
we're picking up our rocks all over the place, we must ask ourselves
the essential question, will the white folk ever get out of the
ditch?
            I want to ask Jim [Clyburn] here a few questions.
            Will whites essentially return to the party primary process in the
party elections? Will the white folks come back?
            Number two, will Democratic Party candidates attempt to organize
both the white and the black communities or will Rev. Jesse Jackson's
obvious and potential advent into the process (1) assure him the
minority vote and (2) assure that whites will not attempt to organize
in the black community?
            Will the solid South (at least as it is perceived by some white
candidates) actually become the split South?
            Now think of it like this. Suppose you give up as a white candidate
on being able to take Mississippi, Alabama. Why? Black folks. You know
Rev. Jackson's gonna do well there. What you do is you go to Florida
and Texas. Why? Strong, white, traditional leanings. Texas. The
Chicano vote has not yet crystallized at all. There is not yet the
strong black activity. You can pick up enough delegates in those two
states to counteract the rest of the remaining South.
            Is it possible that Bert Lance, Charles Manatt and Rev. Jackson sat
down one day and said, "Let's assure Reverend Jackson 600 votes for
the Democratic National Convention." What do you think about that?
We had 384 in 1984 when the highest projection prior to the convention
was that we would come out with approximately 200.
            What will be the impact of Jackson's candidacy? First, I suggest to
you that it will be very difficult for most black people to walk into
a polling place and see Jesse Jackson's name on a ballot and not cast
a ballot for him. I suggest to you that black moderates, who in 1983
and '84 scoffed at a Jackson candidacy, would be extremely
hard-pressed to scoff at that same candidacy in 1988.
            The essential problem for Rev. Jackson is a problem of
get-out-the-vote and get it out in a massive nature. Of course, we
know the black church will be available to help him. But it also seems
evident that the Democratic Party process will not be effective in
attempting to organize.
            The next question is how will whites react to the Jackson
candidacy? There is something called the Jesse Jackson mystique: on
one side of the coin that Jesse was able to bring black people out to
vote in a fashion unlike any other politician in the South. But there
is a negative side to the mystique, primarily fostered by Democratic
politicians, which is damaging to Rev. Jackson's campaign as well as
damaging to the overall democratic process, and that is that Jesse's
involvement in the political process will assure substantial white
opposition.
            It is possible that as a result of Super Tuesday we will see a
redefinition of the term "South." There will probably be a
little South and a big South. The little South will be everything that
Jesse wins, the big South will be everything that everybody else
wins.
            I suggest to you that there are serious rumors afoot that many of
the potential candidates will simply give Jesse the little South and
will not engage in significant get-out-the-vote, believing that there
are two aspects to this campaign; pre-the convention and post-the
convention. Pre-the convention they will attempt to ignore the issues
of the black community in an effort not to upset the white men. Post-
the convention, since they will judge that black folk have nowhere to
go, they will expect that blacks will in turn support the Democratic
nominee. There will be no discussion about patronage, appointments,
restructuring of priorities. There will be little organizational
discussion about issues in the black community-in the little South.
            [Do] you remember the term "brokered convention," the
scenario where there's no clear winner and there must be
negotiation. It is not inconceivable that a Jackson candidacy with
four to six hundred delegates, in the absence of a clear candidacy for
numerous whites, could develop into a brokered convention. That could
mean something substantial, not just for Jackson delegates, but also
for the black moderates who may choose to support other candidates.
            Jesse, if he is to have a vital candidacy, unfortunately must do
well on Titanic Tuesday. Its interesting to know that while the
Manatts and the Lances created this evident monster in order to
benefit a Southern candidacy, it has in a sense become a linchpin for
Rev. Jackson. If he does not do well on Titanic Tuesday, then he will
have problems in other parts of the country. On the other hand,
because of the likelihood that he will do well, it seems evident that
many Democratic party leaders will attempt to downplay the importance
of Titanic Tuesday.
            It seems unlikely under these circumstances that we 

can win. I
would suggest to you that Jackson as well as the other blacks who will
run on his coattails in legislative, federal, and other races will do
certain things.
            First of all, they will personalize issues. One of the most
interesting aspects of the Mike Espy campaign [See Southern Changes, Vol. 8, No. 6] was the affirmation
of issues in a Mississippi campaign. The fact that the farm issue
should become a distinct linchpin of a black candidate's position in
the state of Mississippi was indeed unique.
            This will not be an unusual tactic in 1988. What should happen and
will continue to happen is that blacks will demand their fair share of
the political process. I'm really not sure that this Democratic Party
is prepared for massive numbers of Southern blacks to feel disaffected
as a result of the events occurring at a convention as occurred in
1984. Black people may vote with their feet. They may not come.
            It will be essential, I believe, that either we approach the
prospect of a brokered convention or that we make demands for specific
benefits, specific announcements, specific guarantees, appointments,
patronage, and other aspects of the party process if we will
effectively play the game in 1988.
            Titanic Tuesday, in all likelihood, will be an event that we may
never see again. I earnestly believe that we will see a heightening of
black participation. We will probably see more black candidates
running than ever before. We will probably see black candidates and
black leadership in the South defining issues. The important questions
for white Southerners and Democratic purists is whether they will join
in the redefinition of issues as opposed to the constituency of
race. 
          
          
            EDITORS'NOTE: The
theme of the 1986 annual meeting of the Southern Regional Council,
held in November at a retreat center near Atlanta, was "Electoral
Politics and Political Participation in the South: Strategies for the
Future." James Clyburn, South Carolina Commissioner of Human Affairs,
and Victor McTeer, a Greenville, Miss., lawyer and Jesse Jackson
supporter, were among the panelists at a session considering the
potential impact of the 1988 Southwide presidential preference
primary. Edited portions of their exchange follow.
          
        
        
          The Color of Death
          By Bruck, DavidDavid Bruck
          Vol. 9, No. 2, 1987, pp. 1-3
          
          According to the headlines, the Supreme Court's McCleskey decision last month on race discrimination
and the death penalty was a disastrous defeat for the effort to
abolish capital punishment in this country. But the executioner's
victory in McCleskey was a costly one.
          There are two reasons why this is so. First, the Supreme Court's
pronouncement that it can't and won't do anything about the huge
racial disparities in death sentencing is certain to produce even more
questioning about a death penalty system that requires us to cut back
on our most basic notions of racial fairness in order to provide elbow
room for the executioner. And even more importantly, McCleskey  may mark the beginning of the end of this
country's irresponsible and deadly illusion about the death penalty:
the illusion that the Supreme Court will save us from our own
mistakes.
          In McCleskey , the Supreme Court was faced
with proof that the state of Georgia is more than four times more
likely to sentence a convicted murderer to death for killing a white
person than for killing a black person-and likelier still when the
prisoner is black. But even though this evidence was far stronger than
that usually relied upon to show racial discrimination in jury
challenges or employment cases, the Court said that where capital
sentencing was concerned, more is needed. In death cases, the Court
ruled, the condemned prisoner must do the impossible by somehow
presenting direct proof that his or her own prosecutor and jury
consciously discriminated on the basis of race.
          If this argument sounds familiar, it's because you've heard
something very similar from the tobacco companies for more than twenty
years. Every time someone who's dying from years of cigarette smoking
produces statistics to show that smoking makes people sicken and die,
the tobacco industry's lawyers and flak men come back with this line:
"Well, maybe a lot of people who 

smoke all their lives get sick, but
how do you know that that's why you got sick?"
          Warren McCleskey established a link between race and death in
Georgia two-and-half times greater than the proven link between
smoking and heart disease. But just as no dying smoker can prove that
her particular case of heart disease or lung cancer came from
cigarettes, McCleskey can't prove that he wouldn't have been sentenced
to death in a color blind system. All he can-and did-prove is that a
lot of people on Georgia's death row are probably there because of
race, and that he's probably one of them. What he proved, in other
words, is the risk of race discrimination. And whether
we're willing to tolerate that risk depends on just two things: how
much we care about eliminating racism in our justice system, and how
badly we want to get on with killing the nearly two thousand people on
Death Row.
          Now the Supreme Court, five votes to four, has said that if this
country wants to strike that balance on the side of death, we're free
to do so.
          In the aftermath of McCleskey , the Supreme
Court's refusal to face up to race discrimination must surely be
reckoned as one of the heaviest costs of the death penalty
itself. We've already discovered how the death-selection system drains
the money, time and energies of our courts, distorts our response to
the victims of crime, puts innocent lives at risk, and makes
celebrities out of criminals. Now, in McCleskey ,
we have seen how the pressure for death is even starting to overtake
the way this country is supposed to think about racial justice.
          To be sure, Justice Lewis Powell's majority opinion in McCleskey tried to limit the effect of its decision
to criminal sentencing. But opponents of racial integration will
surely argue before long than they shouldn't be required to do more to
justify a racially-suspect hiring decision or public school assignment
than Georgia was required to do in justifying an execution. That's why
McCleskey v. Kemp  may well erupt a few years
from now, like a forgotten land mine, as precedent for further
decisions cutting back on the ability of civil rights plaintiffs to
prove discrimination.
          But it's not at all clear that Americans are willing to compromise
any part of our hard-won victories over racial inequality for the sake
of more and faster executions. The immediate effect of the McCleskey  decision may be a slight increase in the
trickle of executions across the South. But in the long run, McCleskey  is going to leave thoughtful people
wondering whether this dreary and dangerous game is worth the
candle.
          The other effect of McCleskey  is to make us
understand that the death penalty is not a matter for the courts, but
for 

the sound moral and political judgment of the American
people. We've all become used to letting the Supreme Court make our
hard decisions for us. However much or politicians may rail against
the Court, its presence lets them pass the buck. They can-and do-pass
sweeping death-sentencing laws without much thought for the
results. The legislators get on the evening news, and the courts are
left to sort out the details-like who, if anyone, gets killed.
          Every other Western democracy has already abolished capital
punishment. In each country-in Canada in England, in France, in
Australia-public opinion still favored the death penalty, but
legislators faced up to the facts recognized that the death penalty
achieved nothing of any value, and did away with it. The reason for
these acts of courageous political leadership was that the leaders of
each of these countries were themselves responsible, and
felt responsible, for whether executions would
continue. By contrast, much of the explanation for the shallowness of
the death penalty debate in the United States has been our
politicians' knowledge that the real decision would be made at the
Supreme Court-and that there was some easy political advantage to be
gained in the meanwhile.
          McCleskey is the end of our collective evasion
of responsibility for the moral and public policy catastrophe of our
current death row explosion. The Supreme Court has accepted that the
system is weighted by race, and has responded by telling us that if
that is the sort of system we want, we can have it. McCleskey reminds us that the Supreme Court only
determines what we can legally get away with. What's right and what's
wrong are questions that we now have to answer for ourselves. 
          
            David Bruck is a
lawyer in Columbia, S.C., who frequently writes and lectures on
capital punishment.
          
        
        
          Shirley Chisholm Gives Democrats Some Advice
          By Lewis, FeliciaFelicia Lewis
          Vol. 9, No. 2, 1987, pp. 18-19, 22
          
          At 62 the first black woman elected to Congress and the first black
woman to run for president has neither slowed her pace nor quieted her
voice: "Most persons recognized that Shirley Chisholm says what she
has to say."
          And among what Shirley Chisholm has to say is that the Democrats
need a Southerner on the ticket in '88, that the Democrats should be
cautious about continuing to take the black vote for granted, that
black women have and increasing-though difficult-role to play in
U.S. politics, and that Jesse Jackson definitely should run.
          "People may say Jackson will split the party again, 

that he can't
win.  Catalysts for change in a society, however, know they have to
set the tone, chart the course and gain a bit each time.  When I ran
in 1971-72, nobody was ready for me.  I was not only a black person, I
was also a female person.  But I started something.  We cannot achieve
things through revolution in this country, therefore the only other
course is through evolution."
          She believes "Super Tuesday" will work to Jackson's benefit.
"There's no doubt that he would end up with a tremendous number of
votes.  And that would definitely push him as a real force to be
reckoned with.  I think that is why so many politicians have a fear of
what Super Tuesday can really do because they do know that Jesse went
over very big in the South.  And when you see that concerns of the
black population, blacks again will move behind Mr. Jackson and this
concerns the power boys."
          Chisholm says, "The Democratic Party is in trouble with black
people in this country.  It has had as its most faithful followers
through thick and thin the black population of America.  But over the
past 40 years the white ethnics have deserted the Democratic Party
from time to 

time.  They deserted the Party in 1980 and '84 when
Reagan was elected president.  Now our Democratic Party is saying we
have to get back the white ethnics if we're going to the White House.
We recognize how important it is to get back those wonderful persons
who made up the great coalition of labor, minorites and
women, but in trying to call home these groups, blacks have been taken
for granted once again."
          She said labor unions are reassessing their political situation and
suggests a similar reassessment is needed by blacks.  "All these blue
collar people who are in labor unions went for Reagan.  Labor
leadership went for Mondale for labor has always been allied with the
Democratic Party.  But they coln't deliver the labor vote in '80 and
'84."
          The party's attitude is, 'Where are blacks going to go anyhow?
They don't have anyplace else to go.  So even if they get mad, they
still have to come back to us.'  But a lot of black folks today are
saying, "Oh no, we don't have to do that at all.'  They are not afraid
to move in other directions."
          Republicans are giving Democrats hope for 1988, provided the
Democrats can "get their act together," Chisholm said.  "The economic
situation in this country has placed a lot of people who were middle
class yesterday into the lower class today and has brought about
disproportionately high unemployment all over this country."
          She said it is vital "that we have a Southerner on the Democratic
ticket in 1988.  We missed the boat last time out in putting tow
Democrats who were essentially of the same philosophical ilk on the
ticket, thus leaving out a large section of the country."
          Chisholm sees an increasing role in politics for black owmen.  She
is the national chairwoman of the National Political Congress of Black
Women.  "Its broad-based objective is the political empowerment of
black women.  Four members on our board of directors ran for elections
this past time and won.  However, it's going to be difficult for black
women to be elected to the the United States Congress.
When Barbara Jordan, Shirley Chisholm and Yvonne Burke left, our
places were not taken by black women."
          It is difficult for a black woman to run, and difficult to be
elected, she said.  "Two of the reasons are that people, black people
also, still have feelings about supporting women for office, whether
they are black or white.  And secondly, to run a Congressional
campaign takes tremendous money.  And unless you have good fund
raising mechanism and unless you have the where-withall to have
knowledgeable sources to plan the strategy, the tactics for your
campaign, it's most difficult."
          According to figures from the League of Women Voters, Rep. Cardiss
Collins of Illinois is the only black woman currently serving in
Congress.  Women overall hold only twenty-five of the 435 seats in the
House of Representatives and no Senate seats.  Of fifty governorships,
women hold three.  And of a total of 7,450 state legislators, only
1,105 are women, although more than one-half of all Americans are
women.
          
            Felicia Lewis is editor of the Alabama
Tribune, a black-oriented newspaper.  Her interview was
conducted while Chisholm was in Montgomery recently to speak at a
fundraiser for a local organization.
          
        
        
          Black Women's Economic Development Project
          By Caver, CarolynCarolyn Caver
          Vol. 9, No. 2, 1987, pp. 15-16
          
          One black woman is having trouble naming her business; another
walks past ten other black women to get a black man's opinion; musing
aloud, another says women just don't have the stamina to stand up
under the pressure of business; another wants to get ahead but
continues to hire staff who don't perform. These women are linked by
two r invisible yet powerful threads. Each woman is committed to the
social and economic development of black Americans, including
themselves. And each faces powerful barriers that block her
success.
          External barriers from a male-dominated power structure conspire to
keep black women in subservient and secondary positions in our
society. Latest statistics show the median income of white men to be
$15,401; $6,421 for the white woman; $8,967 for the black man and
$5,543 for the black woman.
          In addition to being detrimental materially, external oppression in
the form of social disapproval, low expectations, and little
encouragement has damaged black women emotionally, psychologically,
and spiritually. After having her leadership doubted for hundreds of
years, is it a wonder that the black woman harbors doubts about
herself? In effect, black women see themselves through the eyes of
whites and black men: inferior, powerless, less smart, and less
capable, especially in business.
          We have internalized these negative messages. They have become
negative "scripts" guiding our self-defeating actions as blacks and as
women. They have become internal barriers, complementing the external
barriers that created them. The external barriers are real, and we do
not make light of them; however, the Black Women's Leadership and
Economic Development (BWLED) Project believes that internal barriers,
the ones in our own heads, are the real killers.
          The goal of the project is to identify and break down barriers that
stop black women from operating successful economic ventures and
taking responsibility for our own welfare and that of the black
community. The project provides an avenue for black women to love and
support each other and, at the same time, challenge each other to
dream, to envision what we want, and then to get it.
          The following example illustrates the great need for the Project. A
black woman in south Alabama created a catering business. Happy and
excited, she got her business off to a good start. The community
received her and her product well. With the market tested and the
prognosis good, she soon had more callers than she could handle
alone. She asked her husband, who had not been supportive of the
venture, to keep her business books. He said he would, but he didn't
appear to have any real energy or interest. Her business seemed like
heaven, an avenue out of her dead-end agency job to independence--but
within a matter of days it slowed to a trickle. She began to feel torn
between her responsibilities as a wife, mother, and new
entrepreneur. Her initiative to find business declined. When asked
about it, she only says, "My family was not very supportive and I
was being pulled in too many different directions." Today the
business amounts to another unfulfilled dream.
          The above woman is "scripted" both racially and sexually to feel
inferior, powerless, not quite good enough, unable to "know" her own
personal power. She would find support and identification for her
struggle from other women in the BWLED Project as she and they
attempted to understand how internal barriers robbed her of her
dreams, energy, and initiative.
          According to Sophia Bracy Harris, the executive director of FOCAL
(Federation of Child Care Centers of Alabama), "Women all over the
country affirm that internal barriers are real and they find the
objectives of the project exciting." Based in Montgomery, FOCAL
provides technical assistance, training, and advocacy for a network of
about ninety 

nunchild-care centers; it is particularly active in
training low-income black women to take leadership roles in their
communities. Sophia got the initial BWLED Project off the ground in
April 1984, after she attended a workshop sponsored by the National
Black Women's Health Network.
          In working to break down the feelings of inferiority and to help
women see themselves as peers with others and each other, the project
adopted FOCAL's guiding set of concepts and principles:
Vision: seeing and defining what we want;Responsibility: taking leadership and responsibility for our
own lives and the realization of our human potential;Proactive thinking, behavior, and planning: getting away from
the powerless position of reacting, petitioning, rebelling, and
protesting in order to get the powerful to fix things, provide for us,
accept us;Risking: choosing to experience fuller measures of our true
reality;Moral and ethical behavior: choosing a morality that is
consistent with our vision and dreams of a world overflowing with
unity, justice, love, and progress.
          The project's main energy centers on having women declare a vision
(what it is they want). Black women are so accustomed to thinking
about why we can't succeed that when it comes to saying what it is we
want (if no barriers exist), nothing comes. Black women stop
dreaming. This project will see black women dream again.
          One core project member, Martha Hawkins of Montgomery, recently
shaped and launched a vision: Martha's Home Cooking, a catering
service. Martha says the Project had everything to do with her getting
the nerve to try catering.
          Martha says she was terrified at first; she was concerned about
what people would say if her business failed. She eventually said,
"I'm gonna give it all I got, full-time." Today, twelve months
later, she is amazed that she is paying other people to work for
her. Martha's Home Cooking primarily caters lunches for industrial
sites. With business booming, she says, "I am now scared and
excited all at the same time, and it feels wonderful."
          Some Project members currently envision offering a tutorial
service, running a baking business, owning a house, changing jobs,
running a cooperative.
          The Black Women's Leadership and Economic Development Project
offers training and seminars in selling, marketing and starting
businesses. Its Technical Assistance Resource Team aids and encourages
women to enter into economic development ventures.
          For more information, write to P.O. Box 214, Montgomery, AL
36101.
          
            Carolyn Caver is coordinator of the Black Women's
Leadership and Economic Development Project. A longer version of this
article originally appeared in Southern
Exposure.
          
        
        
          Supporters Say Jesse Can Win Nomination
          By Wilson, Odies C., IIIOdies C. Wilson III
          Vol. 9, No. 2, 1987, pp. 19-21
          
          Jesse Jackson '88 Exploratory Committees are being formed in over
30 states. The initial success and enthusiasm of these efforts have
received very little coverage in the Arkansas media. This is quite
understandable because it is a rule rather than an exception that the
positive accomplishments or undertakings by blacks are not objectively
and factually reported. Positive portrayals of blacks are not
objectively and factually reported. Positive portrayals of blacks in
the media are usually the products of the efforts of a concerned
individual, usually a black, who makes a special effort to compile and
submit well documented facts for a feature publication. The lack of
sensitivity of local media accurately reporting the positive aspects
of the scope and potential of a Jesse Jackson presidential candidacy
must be supplemented by concerned blacks writing and speaking out on
this issue.
          It is a simple fact that many people of all walks of life feel that
Jesse Jackson is a serious candidate for the Democratic presidential
nomination. Many others feel that he is the best candidate in the
field, announced or unannounced from either political party. Further,
there are many elected officials, political analysts, civic leaders,
ministers, and laypersons who feel that Jesse Jackson has a realistic
and very good chance of capturing the Democratic presidential
nomination or at a minimum he can capture a lion's share of the
Democratic convention delegates in Atlanta and have a strong say as to
who Wl11 or will not be the Democratic presidential nominee.
          A question being asked in political circles across the nation is
"Why should Jesse Jackson run for President in 1988?" It is also a
question most often answered from a negative and usually uninformed
perspective. Far too many people are spending far too much time
reading or listening to what a handful of so called "political
experts" in mass media and the Democratic Party's Democratic
Leadership Council (DLC), or more appropriately "Democrats for the
Leisure Class," have to say about the potential, direction, effect,
dangers and objectives of a Jackson candidacy. For the most, these are
the same experts who wrote Jackson off in 1984.
          "Jackson would be lucky to get one million votes or one hundred
delegates." "He will not make Super Tuesday." "He will not make the
Democratic Convention." Those "political experts" or "dream busters"
were wrong in 1984. If Jesse 

Jackson runs in 1988 he will prove them
wrong again.
          If Jackson runs in 1988 will he do as well as he did in 1984? Block
Jackson strategies have been springing up since 1984. Four years of
negative and ill-conceived plans of little men in big places have
failed. Campaign professionals have analyzed Jackson's 1984 campaign
and his current political strengths. The results of their analyses
have affirmed what Jackson supporters knew all along. Jesse Jackson
can win the Democratic presidential nomination in 1988!
          So the answer to the "Why should Jesse Jackson run for the
Democratic presidential nomination in 1988? is simple, "He can
win."
          Jesse Jackson is the national leader who best expresses the issues
and platform which affect the interests of the Rainbow
Coalition--blacks, workers, farmers, environmentalists, peace
activists, feminists, Hispanics, Asian, Indians, and progressive
whites. He has a long and distinguished history of dedicated work on
behalf of these constituencies.
          Jackson's core constituency is the Democratic Party's base, the
voters who stick with the party no matter what. Blacks voted over 90
percent for Jimmy Carter in 1976 and 1980 and about the same for
Walter Mondale in 1984. But Jackson is much more than an ethnic
politician. "A black candidate does not mean an exclusive black
agenda, but an inclusive agenda that grows out of the black experience
in America." (Jackson, 1983) Jesse Jackson collects the discontent--a
coalition of the rejected--the real silent majority.
          He has emerged as the authentic "favorite son" of the
constituencies in the Rainbow.
          He is doing well in recent polls, and the Roper Poll of twelve
Southern states indicated a growing acceptance of his "economic
justice, invest America" message among whites. The Roper Poll also
showed him with 30 percent of the Hispanic vote.
          Jackson has been broadening his base among (white) farmers,
laborers, high school and college students, peace activists, Jews and
liberals generally. In addition, he has been cultivating an Asian base
(Japanese, Chinese, Filipino and Korean Americans), and others.
          The '88 election will be the first since Humphrey vs. Nixon in 1968
with a non-incumbent running in the general election from both
parties.
          Given the numbers and Jackson's natural base, it is not impossible
that Jackson could win outright on Super Tuesday in Maryland,
Virginia, North Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Louisiana, Arkansas and
Texas. Certainly he will run strong elsewhere, too--especially if he
does well in Iowa.
          There were those who ignored Jesse Jackson in 1984, but his growing
popularity and political activity may make him the Democratic spoiler
during the next campaign.
          His January visit to Iowa showed the depth of attention he
commands. Jackson went head-to-head with the NFL Super Bowl and drew
800 people to a church potluck supper in a small all-white town
(population 2,100). The feast has not gone unnoticed in a state where
Democrat Gary Hart and Republican Bob Dole had to settle for much
smaller audiences. Besides the United Auto Workers, groups helping
Jackson organize his trip included churches, Democratic activists and
the Iowa Farm Unit Coalition.
          Jackson received 3.2 million votes (compared to Mondale's 6.8
million and Hart's 6.2 million votes) in 1984--some 21 percent of the
total.
          There are 20 million eligible black voters--thirteen million
registered and seven million unregistered. It is significant to note
that the Mondale-Ferraro ticket receive. 10.5 million black voters in
the general election--almost [???--page obscured]
million more votes than he
received in the primary process to get the nomination. Clearly any
combination of 10 million votes will win the nomination. The Rainbow
Coalition can win.
          Jackson can "win" without getting the nomination. With a powerful
bloc of delegates to the Democratic National Convention, the Jackson
coalition can determine who will win the nomination, and negotiate the
terms for support. He will go into the convention with an
agenda/contract reflecting the coalition's maximum and minimum
requirements for support of any candidate. The coalition's interests
can be projected and protected. That would constitute a major victory
for the coaliton.
          The Jackson for President Campaign will help empower the coalition
at all levels through massive increases in voter registration and
strong voter turnout through targeted campaigning We can elect more
council persons, city board members, mayors, Justices of the Peace,
commissioners, state legislators, Congresspersons, and affect the
outcome in key Senate races (as we did in 1986). This mobilization for
empowerment will have significant impact on reapportionment in
1992.
          The Jackson for President Campaign will strengthen long-term
political empowerment through enhancing coalition-building, networking
and the development of permanent political organizations and
institutions.
          In 1984 over 20 percent of Jackson's 3.2 million voters were
non-black. This percentage should increase significantly when he runs
in 1988, but the fact remains that the initial base of Rev. Jackson's
support is black. It is time for blacks to put aside their own petty
personal feelings, anxieties, fears, jealousies and examine the facts
of the giant potential of a Jesse Jackson Presidential campaign from a
black perspective. There are enough registered black voters alone to
deliver the Democratic nomination to Jesse Jackson.
          You do not have to absolutely like Jesse Jackson's attitude, ego,
personality, point of view, dress, or deodorant before we can have
solidarity in our struggle for equal justice, jobs, and participation
in the economic and political power in our state and nation. You don't
have to agree with everything Jesse Jackson says or does to support
him. Just like you don't have to agree with everything Dale Bumpers,
David Pryor, Tommy Robinson, or Beryle Anthony, Bill Alexander, Bill
Clinton or any other white politician says or does to support them.
          Every black voter should find more common ground with Jesse Jackson
than any other possible candidate from either political party. Blacks
must give Jesse Jackson a solid base to win our party's nomination. To
accomplish this goal we need to reverse the current trend whereby far
too many blacks are selling out the well-being and vested interests of
their communities for some personal and private idiocyncrasy.
          Let's be bold enough to win with Jesse Jackson in 1988. Jesse
Jackson should run for President in 1988! Jesse Jackson should win the
Democratic nomination in 1988. He is undoubtably the best
candidate.
          
            Odies C. Wilson III is a coordinator for the Jackson
campaign in Arkansas. This article is adapted from the Arkansas
State Press, a black weekly newspaper published in
Little Rock.
          
        
      
    
  
