
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 9, Number 3,
	       1987
        
          Unseen Partners in the Economy
          By Smith, Barbara EllenBarbara Ellen Smith
          Vol. 9, No. 3, 1987, pp. 4-6
          
          Women have long been "unseen partners" in
agricultural production. They have been partners in the sense that
their field labor in direct production and their household labor in
maintaining the farm labor force have been essential components of
U.S. agriculture for centuries. As slaves, black women worked in the
fields and houses of the plantation system-picking cotton, stripping
tobacco, preparing food for others. Low-income white women worked
beside their husbands and children in the fields of family farms, or
as tenants or sharecroppers on land owned by others. Wealthier white
women functioned as managers and supervisors of the domestic economy
of plantations. And yet, all of these women have been
"unseen," invisible, in the sense that their
labor, their productive role, has gone largely unrecognized in popular
images of the "American farmer" and in scholarly
studies of our agricultural system.
          For the last century, women have also contributed essential income
to the farm economy through their off-farm labor. Black women, for
example, long worked as domestic servants in the households of the
more well-to-do. As recently as 1960, forty-five percent of all
employed black women in the South worked as domestics. Their wages
were meager (domestic service is the lowest paying occupation in the
U.S.) but essential to farm families chronically strapped for cash.
          Farm women, both black and white, have also worked for wages in
agricultural processing-whether in canneries, poultry or tobacco
plants. Women and, originally, children, predominated in the labor
force of the South's most important manufacturing industry,
textiles. In all of these activities, farm women have generated cash
income and in occasional cases, health insurance and retirement
benefits, which have been critical to their families' economic
survival.
          Beyond noting the broad trends of impoverishment and unemployment,
it is difficult to gauge the specific effects of the present
agricultural crisis on farm women per se. It is generally true in our
society that the survival skills with which families weather
impoverishment or periods of reduced income are vested primarily in
women. It is women who end up patching or making clothes instead of
buying them, stretching the food supply to make two meals instead of
one, or treating a sick child with home remedies instead of an
expensive trip to the doctor. In other words, women tend to intensify
their domestic labor during periods of economic hardship, substituting
their own hard work for the goods and services that their families can
no longer afford to buy. One may surmise that this is happening in
many farm families today.
          It is also clear that women are increasing their wage-earning labor
by seeking employment off the farm. Today, almost half of all farm
women in the U.S. are in the paid labor force, as compared to only
one-fourth in 1960. Like rural women throughout the South, however,
farm women who are looking for jobs these days find few that pay a
living wage. The economic crisis in agriculture has coincided with a
drastic employment decline in many other traditional Southern
industries.
          For rural women, who have long been the backbone of the labor force
in some of the South's key manufacturing industries, this loss of jobs
has been devastating. Women's unemployment rates in many Southern
states are well above those of men. For black women, unemployment in
the fifteen to twenty-five percent range has become standard. The
unemployment rate for Southern farm women has been double that of
men.
          Women of course have found employment in newer non-

manufacturing
sectors of the economy. In the rural South, as in other areas of the
nation, the service sector is a key source of new jobs and a major
employer of women. In the service industries of the rural South, women
make up over forty percent of the labor force. For those with
professional training in the traditionally female fields of nursing
and teaching, the expansion of educational and health services (which
account for a large portion of this sector) has brought increased job
opportunities.
          Women without professional training, however, tend to end up in the
bottom ranks of the service sector, where wages are low, benefits few,
and opportunities for advancement scarce. Cooks, maids, cashiers,
secretaries, waitresses, nurses aides-these are the occupations of
most women in the rural South today. Women displaced even from those
industries traditionally considered low-wage are hard pressed to find
a service job that matches their former wages. The average wage for
workers in restaurants and bars, for example, is about two dollars per
hour below that in the textile industry.
          
            Crisis on the Farm
          
          This "double whammy"-the farm crisis coupled
with the loss of traditional off-farm jobs affects rural women in ways
beyond unemployment statistics and wage rates.
          Economic hardship also reaches into the heart of family life in the
form of suicide, domestic violence, alcohol abuse, and marital
breakup. It is difficult to document the extent of these problems
among Southern farm families not only because the compilation of data
lags behind the problem, but also because events like the breakdown of
a marriage may lead one or both partners off the farm altogether. For
example, the low percentage of female-headed families in the farm
population may be in part because such women don't remain on the
farm.
          A recent study of homeless people in Charleston, the West Virginia
state capital, is suggestive. Contrary to popular impressions, the
research found that the single largest portion of homeless people were
not the deinstitutionalized mentally ill, petty criminals, or
alcoholics. They were rural people who had been left destitute by
economic decline, and who had migrated to the city on a well-worn path
called "in search of opportunity." As part of the
growing homeless population of Charleston, most had not found it.
          The overall point is that women's labor has been essential to the
rural Southern economy for centuries; as a result, women are deeply
affected by present trends in that economy. This occurs not only
indirectly through their husbands' changing economic fortunes, but
also directly through their own experiences in the labor market and
household. Rural women are intensifying their domestic, household
labor at the same time they are increasing their wage-earning labor
outside the home. Simultaneously, they are struggling to deal with the
destructive effects of economic crisis on their families.
          
            Prospects for the Years Ahead
          
          So, what of the future? What forces are shaping the future for
rural women? Specifically, how is public policy shaping their future?
First, the obvious must be stated because it is so important: the
economic hardship facing rural people, especially women, is being
compounded by drastic cutbacks in programs that once cushioned the
impact of such hardship. This has occurred not only with transfer
payments and income support programs like AFDC and food stamps, but
also with programs that helped people participate more fully and
fruitfully in the wage economy-retraining programs for displaced
workers, job skills development for young people, etc.
          Since 1980, funding for all federal employment and training
programs has declined by sixty-five percent. These cutbacks have
coincided with a policy of actively undercutting affirmative action in
both employment and education. Increasingly, women and minorities are
neither trained for nor granted access to higher paying jobs. These
policies seem so obviously harmful and irrational, given present
unemployment and poverty rates in precisely these groups, that they
require no further comment.
          Other greatly needed programs have never seen the light of day. For
example, the need for high quality, locally controlled day care,
especially in rural areas, is so urgent it 

can scarcely be
overestimated. We are long past the time when rural women, including
farm women, stay home to tend house and children while rural men go
off to the fields or the paid labor force. Indeed, for many rural
families, particularly black families, a non-wage-earning wife and
mother is a luxury they could never afford. And yet, the fact that a
majority of mothers-those in whom primary responsibility for
child-rearing traditionally has been vested-now spend at least eight
hours each day working in the paid labor force simply has not been
absorbed on the social policy agenda. As a result, many lower-income
women face a heartbreaking choice between providing direct care for
their children, or leaving them inadequately tended while they work to
put food on the table.
          The irony in this neglect is that child care represents an
excellent target for local economic development. Low-interest loans
and technical assistance for the development of locally controlled day
care centers, coupled with child care subsidies for low-income working
mothers, could promote long-term development by directly offering
employment to child care workers, providing a service that would
enable women to take advantage of education and training
programs. Development can also be enhanced by offering enrichment
programs to pre-schoolers and after-school programs to older
children.
          
            The Price of Economic Progress
          
          Having catalogued some of the activities that governments are not
undertaking, what are they doing? One of the most important economic
development strategies currently being pursued by state governments
across the South is the promotion of tourism. This is important not
only in the sense that tourism is growing rapidly in certain areas,
but also in the sense that this industry has a deep effect on rural
communities where it takes hold.
          The Southeast Women's Employment Coalition is presently working
with women in four Southern states who face the growth of tourism in
their rural communities. Unfortunately, the stories they tell are not
full of promise and hope, but of anxiety and fear. Along the coast of
South Carolina, for example, women from predominantly black,
low-income island communities are witnessing the destruction of their
traditional means of survival: agriculture and fishing. Their story is
typical.
          Escalating property taxes and land values are forcing indigenous
residents to give up their most important resource. Scarcely a week
goes by without news of another resident having sold his or her land,
often because of inability to pay the rising property taxes. As
"prime waterfront" property increasingly changes
hands, the indigenous residents find their access to traditional
fishing areas closed by new landowners who forbid trespassing. As a
result these trends, the indigenous community is rapidly being
destroyed.
          What is positive about this situation is the fact that people are
organizing to challenge these trends. The low-income rural women with
whom we've been working do not oppose tourism outright, but they
understandably do not want it to destroy their own resources-their
land, their culture, their community. They are attempting to pull
their communities together around a common vision of economic
development that preserves their integrity as a community and protects
their control over valuable resources, especially land.
          If there is hope for the future of the rural South, it lies with
women and men in community organizations like these. The South not
only has the highest poverty rate in the United States, it also has
the most unequal distribution of income. The problem is not simply one
of disparity between the South and the rest of the United States, or
between the rural and urban South, but within the South. It is between
those who have a great deal and those who have almost nothing. It is
unrealistic to expect government at any level to take on this
fundamental inequality in a consistent, long-term fashion. Poverty
will be reduced in the rural South in the same manner that denial of
voting rights was reduced. It will come about when those who are rural
and poor organize and declare "No More." Those who wish to
serve the rural poor would do well to listen to the voices and support
the efforts of those who are attempting to organize their communities
to shape their own future-and particularly to the voices of rural
women, who have been unheard and unseen for too long. 
          
            Barbara Ellen Smith is a researcher with the Southeast
Women's Employment Coalition, Lexington, Kentucky.
            Barbara
Ellen Smith's essay is an edited version of a talk presented to the
1986 Professional Agricultural Workers Conference held at Tuskegee
University. A collection of the papers of the Conference is available
from Dr. Thomas T. Williams, Director, Human Resources Development
Center, P.O. Box 681, Tuskegee, Alabama 36088.
          
        
        
          Toward Economic Democracy
          By Marshall, RayRay Marshall
          Vol. 9, No. 3, 1987, pp. 16-19
          
          The goals of economic development and job creation are terribly
important but we must be clear that job creation means a job for
everybody who is well and able to work and wants to work. We must be
concerned not just with the number of jobs but with the quality of
those jobs.
          In spite of all the talk about the new unemployment, the problem
caused by unemployment is the same as it ever was-serious material
loss. The loss from unemployment this past year is over $1,000 for
every man, woman, and child in America, over $200 billion total. We
could have done a lot with that $200 billion.
          Furthermore, unemployment's human costs go beyond material
loss. Unemployment is still heavily correlated with almost every
social pathology-crime, alcohol and drug abuse, family breakups...even
infant mortality. Unemployment shortens lives and kills people.
          We should have a guaranteed job for people who are willing and able
to work at decent wages and under decent working conditions. Since
that ought to be our policy objective, we must get voters to accept
the goal, and we must establish policies to move toward that goal.
          We're in a different world, though, than in 1946 when the
Employment Act was passed or in the 1930s when a lot of basic full
employment objectives were established. We need to adapt to that new
world, to work within new institutional forms to build economic
development from the grass roots up.
          Democracy has several dimensions. Political democracy, people say
they understand. At one time we had a commitment in this country to
industrial democracy, too. It was an extension of political democracy
and for the same reasons. In fact, if you try to preach democracy in
the political process and deny it on the job you create strong social
tensions. Added to that in recent years, is the realization that
democracy is very efficient. We taught that to the Japanese who
developed a very competitive system based on a simple proposition that
many of our managers refuse to accept-that the people who know the
jobs better than anybody else are the workers on those jobs. If you
can harness the energy and ideas of those workers, you can build a
terribly competitive system. It will be very efficient and it will
improve the conditions for everybody. Now a lot of our managers are
selling that idea but they don't understand the other part of it-that
worker participation without effective worker power is inefficient and
temporary.

          Workplace democracy with a false concept will fail when management
starts making unilateral decisions. Workers won't identify with
something that is authoritarian, undemocratic and elitist, which is
what Taylorism, the basic American management system, is all about. If
you want true democracy on the job, you have to give workers an
independent source of power to protect and promote their
interests. They must have the right to organize and bargain
collectively. Society must protect that right; we're not going to have
a free and democratic political system without a free and democratic
labor system.
          Now the concept of democracy is being extended from political
democracy to industrial democracy to social democracy, which means
that we ought to as a society establish minimum conditions for people
within the society. That's social democracy...we are concerned about
the development of our people so we are concerned about education,
about health insurance, about income maintenance for those who are
unable to participate effectively in the economic process. And then
the final part which is on the horizon now is the extension from
social democracy to economic democracy.
          Economic democracy means greater ownership and control by the
workers themselves of the places where they work. In an
internationalized information world, if you're not where the decisions
are made you cannot protect the interests of workers. You've got to be
on boards of directors, you've got to have part of the ownership of
those enterprises, you've got to pay attention to stock ownership and
stockholders and be a part of the financial system. All of these
things-financial manipulation through leveraged buyouts, the use of
your pension funds against your interests-have a vital effect on
American workers, their jobs, their working conditions, and how well
off they're likely to be in the future.
          To be concerned about workers' interests today is to be an actor in
the deals that get cut, to see to it that the workers' interests are
protected. By working together we can perfect some of those
institutions and therefore do new things to meet the conditions in
which we now live. We must develop employee stock ownership plans and
labor cooperatives. Why should all these labor exchanges make a lot of
money, exploiting workers and denying them benefits, sending them to
work under unsafe. unhealthy conditions? We need labor cooperatives
with workers who control themselves to supply that labor. It doesn't
take a lot of management expertise to run a labor exchange, and you
could in the process protect the conditions for workers. We might fail
with a lot of such efforts and will, but the way to progress is
through failing and starting over and building to what you have
got.
          Such grassroots initiatives are important, but we also have to
recognize the other reality-that policies made a long way from the
South have a direct and immediate bearing on our lives. We therefore
have to be concerned about international and national economic policy
making, and if we don't then what we try to build up can be eliminated
overnight.
          We have many case studies of that if you look at the effects of
U.S. economic policies on workers throughout the South. Take
monetarism, which is one-half of Reaganomics. Stripped of its
niceties, monetarism means we are going to use unemployment to keep
wages down. Therefore, if you don't want that to happen, you've got to
be an actor in the economic policy making process.
          Supply-side economics is based on the assumption that a huge tax
cut in 1981 would so stimulate the economy that in spite of spending
$1.6 trillion on defense, we would balance the budget by 1983. That
didn't happen, but what did happen is what some really had in mind all
along-to so weaken the federal government that it could not do an
effective job of providing human services or protecting the rights of
workers and ordinary people in the country. That was the main agenda
of a lot of people who are involved in this process and they have done
it. The other thing they did was to cause misery for people all over
the world. Because of the huge budget deficit, it means the federal
government has to use most of the net savings in this country just to
pay interest on the national debt--$170 billion this year. Lyndon
Johnson. during the Vietnam War, put in the first $100 billion budget,
and the interest on the national debt now is much larger than Lyndon
Johnson's Vietnam-era budget and it is going to get bigger.
          Now what effect does that have on you?
          First, you and your children and their children are going to pay
it. Second, in the process the federal government as the preferred
borrower, with the Federal Reserve limiting the money supply, drove up
interest rates and put a block on job-creating activities. Who's going
to invest to create a job when all you have to do to make ten, twelve
or even twenty percent is draw interest? Nobody.

          But more important than that, it also costs us jobs because other
countries wanted that high interest so they bought dollars so they
could buy U.S. assets and that drove up the price of a dollar. That is
like subsidizing imports and putting a use tax on exports. The trade
policy of the United States is not only passive, it's perverse. The
trade policy of the United States has encouraged companies to ship
jobs overseas simply because of tax reasons or because by opening the
American market to competition from overseas the companies can then
justify that level of wages and costs.
          The essence of the trade policy is this-if you have a passive
policy and someone else has an active policy, you don't have to have a
lot of imagination to see who's going to call the shots. We tend to be
reactive and that means that other people will decide which jobs we
get to keep in this country. And they do what I would do if I were in
their position. They keep the good jobs and give us the rest.
          Instead, we ought to have an active policy, but we're not going to
get it so long as you are not actively involved in the policy
process. Therefore, we need to pay heavy attention to this policy
process and to recognize a number of realities.
          The main trend occurs with technological change. We need to be
technologically advanced to maintain rasher high wages. Why? Because
if we lose our technological advantage, we compete according to
wages. If we compete according to wages, we'll lose, as wages will
tend to go down.
          The other thing we must worry about is the revolutionary effect
those technological changes will have on our lives. Technology makes
it possible for the international corporations to ship jobs around the
world like they were pieces on a chess set. Technology would let a
one-room company operate all over the United States and all over the
world just as if they were in all of these places-we have a company in
Dallas that has two hundred workers in Beijing, China. Those workers
work every day for that company. They send stuff through
satellite. Those Chinese workers make fifty dollars a month and
they're pretty well-trained and well-educated computer workers.
          Technology can shift jobs. It has also been partly responsible for
the fact that most jobs are now being created by relatively small
enterprises-fifty or fewer workers. There are obvious implications for
organizing and obvious implications for where the jobs are. But the
big question is will this technology create more jobs than it
displaces? That is one very important issue.
          The second important issue related to technology is will those jobs
be worse jobs than the ones we've got now? Technology can make better
jobs and more jobs or it can make worse jobs and fewer jobs. It all
depends on policy, on management and on whether workers participate in
making the decisions for the introduction of machines. If we get
enough growth to absorb the workers who are displaced by the machines,
we can maintain relative employment.
          Historically, technological change has always caused
unemployment. The only reason most technology is introduced is to
displace labor. That is what improved productivity means, that you
produce the same output with less labor and new machinery therefore
always causes unemployment. In the past we've absorbed a lot of
unemployment through shortened hours, longer vacations, starting to
work at later ages, etc. However, future unemployment is likely to be
involuntary and therefore will increase joblessness.
          The second trend we have to watch is the internationalization of
the economy, which changes the whole concept of the labor
movement. The basic idea behind the labor movement historically is to
remove labor from competition, thus improving efficiency and equity
and the human condition. You strengthen management because managers
now have to manage. You strengthen efficiency because you don't let
parasitic employers continue to operate. If you don't subsidize them
and you have the proper policies, you improve efficiency because you
shift people from the inefficient to the efficient, to those who can
uphold good conditions and meet proper standards. Now, of course, we
can no longer take labor out of competition by collective bargaining
or by national regulations. Our rules don't cover China, Korea, Japan
and western Europe. Our contracts don't cover Japanese workers and
it's a fundamental principle of collective bargaining that unless your
contract coincides with the market, you'll have trouble holding the
contract.
          The solution is to extend the rules internationally and that is why
workers' rights must be included in trade legislation. We can't be any
more complacent about Mexican and Korean workers getting cancer than
we can workers in the United States. American companies can exploit
Korean workers and send their goods back to the United States to
compete with us. That doesn't help Korean workers and it doesn't help
ours. The basic principle of international labor standards is the same
principle of removing labor from competition through national
standards.
          The third basic trend is demographics, which is vital to the labor
movement. As has been pointed out, eighty-five percent of all people
who will be working in the year 2000 are already in the work
force. And ninety percent of the increase between now and the end of
the century will be women and minorities. By 2020, when the post-war
babies' generation retires, there will be a minority population of 

ninety-one million in the United States. Minorities will at that point
be thirty-four percent of the population and forty percent of the work
force. They are now seventeen percent of the population. Therefore,
the future of the labor movement as well as the future of the American
work force and therefore the future of the economy depends heavily on
what happens to women and minorities now.
          We know those things because demographics is predictable. See, the
birth rate in most white populations is not even at the level required
to replace themselves. We don't know all the reasons why, but part of
it is that the white population is older, and old folks don't have as
many kids as young folks. The median age of whites in the United
States is 32 years and rising. The median age of hispanics is 22 and
declining. The median age of blacks is 25 and rising.
          Now if you don't get women and minorities organized, educated, and
trained, then you're not going to be competitive in the international
arena. And you're not going to be able to maintain the labor movement
unless you have a strategy to deal with women and minorities because
that is where the future lies.
          Given those trends, what do we do? How do we develop policies to
achieve full employment with relatively decent wages and
conditions?
          First, we need to focus on our main objective, which is to try to
achieve full employment and decent wages.
          Our problem in dealing with international competition and in
achieving this objective is not that we can't do it. Our problem is
that we don't want to do it and that we have policy failures relative
to other countries. Why do we have such bad policies in this
country?
          One basic reason is greed. Some people make out all right with a
laissez-faire, non-government intervention
climate. It's not hard to figure out who those folks are-people who've
got it, who have a lot of resources, are going to make it. I grew up
in a Mississippi Baptist orphanage and had to go to church a lot and
didn't even know people could start a meeting without taking a text
from the Bible and singing some hymns and giving a prayer. So, if I
was going to put together a text for the Reagan administration policy
it would be, "To him that have shall be given, and to him that have
not shall be taken away, even that which he thought he had." If we
don't recognize that is part of what supports this laissez-faire 
world, then we don't understand what is happening.
          The second reason for our bad policy is ideology. We have sold
ourselves the notion that government is bad and the market will solve
all problems, and therefore, we ought not to have government
intervention in the market. That attitude will cause us to continue to
decline.
          It was creative pragmatism that caused us to have the longest
period of sustained prosperity in our history, from World War II to
the early 1970s. We didn't ask ourselves if the G.I. Bill, the
national highway program, our whole education system, that we enlarged
greatly in those days, we didn't ask if this agenda was socialism-we
saw it as the thing to do. We maintained employment reasonably well by
active government intervention. We built our agricultural system and
our space program (the spin-off of which gives us our technological
lead) and people didn't ask themselves if it is right for government
to do that. Only recently have we begun to get this ideological belief
that whatever the government does is negative.
          We've got to get away from that. We can't solve our problems
without a strong federal government actively involved as a
partner. When we recognize that reality, then it is not hard to look
at the components of policy that we need to build the just and humane
society we feel is important.
          To make the policy, we must recognize that at every
level-international, national, in the plant, in state and local
policy-making-if you are not there, people who do not necessarily have
your interests at heart will determine the policies.
          Second, we must recognize the internationalized environment that we
are in.
          Third, we must assemble a decent set of national policies to deal
with our problems. We have to develop our people-a human resource
development strategy. We must have an active trade policy that will
promote our own interests. We need industrial policies. As a part of
that industrial policy, we must pay attention to our financial
institutions. We now have the financial tail wagging the economic
dog. With this, we need to have an international arena-an
international bank that is a lender of last resort, to bring
discipline, to prevent disasters like the third world debt. Our
financial systems tend to have a short-run orientation. They make it
hard for companies to develop the technology that will cause them to
be competitive. We need to change that. We need to concentrate on
research and development. Finally we need to build democratic
institutions. Our political system is too dominated by economic
interests. We need campaign finance reform so that people can't buy
elections and so the democratic processes can work better. We need to
encourage new forms of democratic organizations.
          Above all, we need to re-examine our labor laws, particularly with
respect to collective bargaining. American labor laws were designed to
make it possible for workers to organize and bargain collectively to
represent their own choosing. Today those labor laws do more to
protect the interests of employers than the interests of workers. They
have been perverted. They don't even work as well as they used to and
they never worked as well as they should. That is why we fought so
hard for labor law reform. We need to speed up the NLRB processes and
to strengthen the penalties for violation of those laws. We also need
to convince the country it's in the national interest for workers to
be able to organize and bargain collectively. In the 1960s the United
States and Canada had about the same proportion of the work force
organized, about thirty percent. Today Canada has forty percent and we
have eighteen percent. The main difference, I think, is public policy
with respect to collective bargaining.
          Finally, we should not fear the trying of new things and we ought
not to fear failure. But what we ought to fear is the judgment of
history that we understood what needed to be done and refused to even
try to do it. 
          
            Ray Marshall, who was Secretary of Labor
in the Carter Administration, teaches at the University of
Texas-Austin He is the president of the Southern Labor
Institute.
          
        
        
          Texas Finds Home-Grown Is Best
          By Hightower, JimJim Hightower
          Vol. 9, No. 3, 1987, pp. 9-15
          
          Everybody, of course, is all for economic development, but
traditionally what that has meant is economic development for the few
and the rest of you get in line-the "take that old cold tater and
wait" plan.
          Now I know some will wonder what an agriculture commissioner has to
say to them on economic development-after all most people don't own a
pen of hogs or a field of corn. But as that old bumper sticker reads,
"If you eat, you're involved in agriculture." However, my
message is not about cows and plows, but rather about plowing up
common ground, about planting new seeds of economic growth in our
region, and, if we do it right, throughout this nation.
          My message is simply this: the economic future of the South does
not rest in the continuing pursuit of high-tech, high-cost
pie-in-the-sky deals that are being shopped by national conglomerates
going state-to-state to see what kind of deal they can get. Rather we
ought to be putting our resources, public and private, into
grunt-level, here-and-now economic development programs that invest in
our own people. People who are already here.
          We need to be investing at a grass-roots level in new enterprises
that are based on small- and medium-sized businesses, that are based
on workers in their unions and in cooperatives, that are based on
small farmers and community enterprises, that are based on the
entrepreneurs and on the wildcatters in our society. Not the powers
that be, but the powers that ought to be. And the powers that can be
if we just put a little bit of investment out there and lay some tools
down that people can pick up. This is not trickle-down, but
percolate-up. It is a policy of clearing a broad foundation out of
small- to medium-scale enterprises on which communities can build for
years to come.
          Needless to say, this is not what we have been doing in the country
at a national, state, or even local level. Really what we've got now
is an approach to economic growth that says it's okay to help the rich
get richer. That puts government in the pocket of the big boys and
never holds them accountable for the results that they produce for the
larger public. Basically, we're talking about a perverted public
policy of greed. An attitude of "I got mine, you get yours. Never
give a sucker an even break. Caveat emptor. Adios chump." That's
pretty much what it comes down to.
          For the past six years, of course, at a national level we've called
this policy Reaganomics, with the predictable result that rigor mortis
is spreading throughout our economy. The apologists on the other side
say, "Nonsense, Hightower, look at this, the economy's just
booming. Here's the head-

line from an April Dallas Times-Herald, 'Dow Passes 2400 Mark. Wall Street's
record-breaking bull market zipped past yet another milestone of the
history books Monday as the Dow Jones Industrial average closed above
2400 for the first time.'"
          By their standards, America's standing tall. The economy is
booming. Wall Street's whizzing.
          And it is, it's whizzing on us, because if you look down here right
beneath that headline it says, 'General Motors to lay off 2,000
workers at local plant.' And right over here in the column right
next to it it announces that Safeway is going to be closing 141 stores
in north Texas.
          Reaganomics has created a boom but for whom? Who is profiting?
Stockholders, they say. Those little democrats out there who own
America's great economic fortress. Well, eighty-one percent of all
U.S. households own no stock at all. And if you want to look at it the
other way, eighty-five percent of all stock is in the hands of the
wealthiest ten percent of U.S. families. In fact, forty-three percent
of all stock is in the hands of that one-half of one percent of
families that make $280,000 and more.
          Do you want to know who's really making money out of this whizzing
that Wall Street is doing? In 1981, only four corporate executives
made more than $1 million in salary and other compensation. In 1985 we
had 146 executives making more than $1 million. Those shiny new leaves
at the top of the tree are looking mighty pretty as we continue to
sprinkle and polish them with our governmental policies.
          But you know you can't keep a tree alive by watering it at the
top. Meanwhile down here at the roots our economic tree is dying. Now
I'm not talking just about poverty, not talking just about the
illiterate, the unable, the folks who just gotta have welfare. I'm
talking about our most productive people, the middle class that is
supposed to be the hallmark of our economy. I'm talking about the
workers and the businesses that we've been counting on to make this
economy actually run over the years.
          Of course, as a commissioner of agriculture I work out there with
those dirt farmers, you know, and probably six years ago they voted
for Ronald Reagan. He was promising a seven-course dinner and they
didn't know until later it was a possum and a six-pack.
          In the intervening six years we have lost a half-million
U.S. farmers. In my state alone we've lost 49,000 farmers-17,000 in
the last two years. That's ten percent of all the farmers in our
state, but it is one-third of the full-time, commercial, family-farm
operators who have gone bankrupt, who have had their farms, their
productive assets, their economic potential and that of their families
and their future generations, stolen from them by government policy
that establishes a price on their commodity that is about one-half of
what it actually costs to produce that commodity.
          With those disappearing farmers have gone the local implement
dealers, hardware stores, and government services that are financed by
the taxes of people on the land-when they're able to pay taxes. And we
have had the greatest collapse of banks in the United States since the
1930s.
          Bankers are now beginning to understand their direct tie to those
productive families that are being wiped out as a matter of Washington
economic policy. The farm families are going down. People who six
years ago had a cash flow and considered themselves a full member of
the middle class now find themselves out of business and often off the
farm.
          Working families are involved in the same struggle.
          Ronnie Reagan did promise to get American industry moving again,
and he has-it's moved to Japan, to Brazil, to Korea, everywhere except
within our own country. Since 1978 we have lost 11.5 million
manufacturing jobs. Some of which have been replaced by service
economy jobs that pay only forty-five percent of what the
manufacturing jobs paid. It seems that forty-four percent of the jobs
created under Reaganomics now pay poverty-level wages, $180 dollars a
week or less. And thirty percent are part-time jobs. And two-thirds of
the people filling those part-time jobs are people who want and need
full-time work.
          Well, we have the minimum wage.
          In 1968 a minimum-wage earner could make ninety-four percent of a
poverty-level income. Today a minimum wage earner makes about
sixty-two percent of a poverty-level wage. And that's if you're
working at all. None of us are more than about two paychecks from
poverty. If you do get laid off, you've got only a sixty percent
chance of finding a new job. That's unless you're black. If you're
black you've got a forty-one percent chance. And if you do get a new
job, it's going to pay eighty percent of your old wages.
          Not surprisingly what this adds up to in our society for the first
time in fifty years is a national policy of downward mobility. From
1965 to 1973-a period of rising expectations in our society, a period
during which the bad old government was on our backs, remember-annual
incomes for families with children rose by twenty-three percent. In
1985, the annual income of those families was 6.6 percent less than it
was twelve years ago. And for the poorest twenty-four percent of
Americans, it was one-third less than it was in 1973. From the 1940s
through the 1960s, people at thirty years of age were making a third
more than their parents were making a decade earlier. Now people at
thirty years of age make only ten percent more than their parents made
ten years ago. In 1973 it took twenty-one percent of the gross monthly
wages of a thirty-year-old worker to buy the average home. Today it
takes nearly half of his or her gross wages to buy a home.
          We're talking about downward mobility in our society. The decline of the middle class. We're not talking about 

people
coming up out of poverty but people falling down into poverty in
greater and greater numbers. In Texas from 1981 to 1986 we added
891,000 people to the poverty rolls. That is the population of a city
bigger than Dallas that previously was in the middle class and is now
officially on the poverty rolls.
          What in the world's going on?
          An old singer in Texas years ago wrote a tune that went like this:
"Little bee sucks the blossom but the big bee gets the
honey. Little man picks the cotton but the big man gets the
money."
          What we really have today as a result of Reaganomics is freedom for
the capital to flow into what some are calling a casino economy,
essentially money chasing its own tail rather than being invested in
enterprises that create new growth, new jobs, new products, new
productivity, new competition, new wealth for our people.
          Last year there were 4,022 mergers, leveraged buyouts and takeovers
in the United States of America. More than four thousand companies
bought by larger companies, soaking up $190 billion in capital. In the
last three years, nine thousand companies changed owners at a cost of
nearly $500 billion in capital. For what? They didn't build any new
plants. They didn't create any products. They're not doing new
research. They're certainly not hiring new people. They're not adding
new competition to our society. They're not decentralizing wealth.
          They're paper shuffling, that's all. The lawyers, account brokers
and bankers have achieved hundreds of millions of dollars in income
through non-productive fees associated with these transactions that
build nothing. Shareholders-that ten percent of America that owns
eighty-five percent of the shares, or that one-half of one percent
that owns forty-three percent of the shares-split $20 billion in
profits out of those mergers. Twenty billion dollars in profits for
which they did nothing. They created nothing.
          We have a little case study right now down in Texas with the buyout
of Safeway corporation. There's a company called Kohlberg, Kravis and
Roberts-not exactly a household name. But it is an investment
syndicate that since 1979 has made about two dozen buyouts. In 1986
they bought Beatrice Foods, which at the time was the largest food
conglomerate in the U.S., for $6.1 billion. Beatrice had previously
bought Norton-Simon for $1.1 billion and Esmark Corporation for $2.8
billion. Now those are all one company under Kohlberg, Kravis and
Roberts. Ten billion dollars spent to create nothing except they are
now the largest food conglomerate in America, built on financial
finagling.
          Who pays for this? Well, we're going to pay for it, because as a
means of paying off that leveraged buyout Kohlberg, Kravis and Roberts
is shutting down three thousand Safeway stores and unemploying thirty
thousand people. The United Food and Commercial Workers Local in
Dallas, representing some 8,500 workers in Safeway alone, was told
initially to expect a five dollar average pay cut and then later was
told that those 141 stores were going to be closed and/or sold.
          Those that are going to be sold are going to be sold largely to
non-union or anti-union companies that have no interest in picking up
those workers. If they do get hired they're going to take much less
pay than they were getting under the union contract and two-thirds of
those workers stand to lose their retirement and pension benefits.
          Safeway is hardly alone in this process. In fact, in the pension
playing that's going on there are some ten thousand pension
funds-covering some ten million workers-that have insufficient assets
to fulfill the promises that have been made. And there's just example
after example of that. Here's LTV, Inc., when it declared Chapter
Eleven bankruptcy last year announcing that of course they were going
to have to do away with some of the pension programs and health
benefits of the workers. But they also announced that while they were
doing that they were also going to give performance awards to their
executives to the tune of $829,000. The chief executive, in fact, was
to get a $165,625 bonus for his work in driving the company into
Chapter Eleven and he was going to get a $2 million life insurance
policy and a golden parachute worth 150 percent of his annual
salary.
          Here's the Eddie Chiles corporation, the Western Company of North
America, talking of cutting its employee pension benefits at the same
time it was implementing a plan to give key executives bonuses ranging
from thirty to fifty percent of their annual pay. Texas American
Corporation freezing the pension of their workers. General Motors
announcing that its profits were down 31 percent and that it therefore
could not pay workers the production bonuses that they were entitled
to, but GM would of course be able to give 5,700 top executives some
$169 million in bonuses.
          So, you get the sense of it. At the same time corporations overall
have stripped employee pension funds in this country of nearly $16
billion in assets in the last ten years-and there is another $145
billion in promises on pension plans 

and health benefits that they
have set aside no money to provide for.
          If you did to a 7-Eleven what these folks are doing to our economy,
you'd be doing ten to twenty down at the state penitentiary. But
they're getting away with golden parachutes, more money, buying Jaguar
cars and feeling good about themselves. That's the situation we're
in.
          What are we going to do about this? Well it seems that we have a
couple of things to do.
          First, we can be developing our own enterprises.
          I use agricultural examples because that's where I come from. In
Texas, we've been working with farmers, small business people, poor
people, and local officials to try to do three things.
          One, help farmers sell what they produce. It seems obvious to do
that, but it has not been a focus of agriculture policy in the
past. Instead, we've tried just to produce more-higher yield out of
each seed and out of each acre, never worrying what we're going to do
with the yield once it becomes a surplus and nobody's buying it.
          Now we're trying to help folks sell their yield. Part of this is
localizing our economy again. For example, when we started our first
project in Houston, Kroger Corporation was importing watermelons from
Florida. Meanwhile, Texas melon farmers were losing sixty percent of
their crop because they didn't have a market for it. It was rotting in
the fields. What little they did sell was out of a pickup truck on the
side of the road, getting a penny a pound for it.
          So we persuaded Kroger to try Texas melons and we organized a coop
to handle the distribution. In 1984, the 

first year of that co-op, we
sold Kroger every melon the farmers produced, 500,000 pounds of
watermelon, not at a penny a pound but at seven and a quarter cents a
pound, a negotiated price. Those farmers had a 165 percent increase in
their income as a result.
          The consumer benefited because instead of paying $3.50 for that
Florida melon they got that sweet Walker County melon for $1.98. And
the money they spent stayed right there doing good and rippling though
that local economy. This year those farmers are producing a million
and a half pounds of watermelon and other crops not only for Kroger
but for distribution to other supermarket chains. We've got dozens of
these co-ops in the state of Texas now organized to sell directly into
the market that's already established within our state and now even
going out of it. We've got the Pathmark chain in the Northeast buying
directly from low income Mexican-Americans in the Rio Grande valley,
who are able to get four times what they were getting down at the
packing shed for their squash and peppers by selling it directly to
Pathmark. And Pathmark gets a cheaper price than they were getting and
a quality that meets their specifications. We can do that across the
board. We've got beef co-ops, all kinds of co-ops that are involved in
this business.
          Then another step that we are taking in marketing is going
international. There's no reason the South and individual states can't
form their own foreign relations. You don't have to go through the
State Department for this. We made a formal agreement with Mexico
called the Mexico-Texas Exchange Commission. We are organizing trade
projects, joint ventures, dealing in educational programs with each
other, solving bureaucratic problems, going direct to Mexico. We've
done the same thing with Israel. We're about to do it with
Italy. We're finding markets around the world directly from our
state.
          The federal government's international trade development policy for
agriculture amounts to hoping that the Russian wheat crop fails and
that Cargill and the big conglomerates can make a sale to them, rather
than going out there and finding small purchases that these people
want to make and bring them home. Of course we've got an advantage in
Texas-we've got a high volume of production, diversification, and an
awfully good-looking agriculture commissioner. That may give us a leg
up, but other states can do it, too, and we can begin to do put
together some international trade programs as a region.
          In addition to marketing we can work with people throughout our
economy to diversify what they produce. There's no reason all of our
blueberries have to come from Maine and Michigan. We can produce
blueberries in Texas and now we're doing it. Blueberries are going to
be a $50 million a year crop for us. You can make a living on forty
acres of blueberries in our state. In fact if you diversify your
acreage and set aside maybe four acres for blueberries you'll make
enough on that four to subsidize the cow and wheat operation that
you're running on the other four hundred acres that you might have. We
have west Texas farmers farming two sections of land-that's two square
miles-who have been producing wheat and going broke. Now they are
producing sprouts on an area about the size of a kitchen table and
making a ton of money off that sprout production.
          The point is to find things that you can make money on. We're not
opposing what another state is doing but we are trying to regionalize
and localize our economy in a way that makes sense for little folks
out there.
          The third step that we are taking is building food and fiber
processing facilities. The South has done a poor job of this. We have
grown the raw commodities and shipped them to Chicago and Philadelphia
and Los Angeles where they chop it up, put it in a box, freeze it, and
sell it back to us at a hundred times what we sold it to them. We can
get into that business ourselves. We have wheat farmers on the high
plains of Texas that this year will mill the first flour to be milled
in the panhandle in a generation's time. We were producing wheat which
was selling to Kansas because they're wasn't a flour mill within 150
miles of Amarillo. In Kansas, they were making Texas wheat into plain
old white flour in barrels and selling it back to hotels and bakers in
Amarillo for twenty-eight cents a pound. For every twenty-eight cents
a pound that Amarillo consumers bought they were sending twenty-three
cents to Kansas because the Texas farmers were only getting a nickel a
pound.
          Now those farmers are building their own enterprise in Dawn, Texas,
outside of Amarillo that is going to make 300,000 pounds of flour a
day. That'll make a pretty good biscuit.
          We're not talking about a science fair project; this is a real
enterprise that will put $10 million a year into Dawn and in its first
year of operation will create fourteen jobs right there. Now that
doesn't solve Texas's unemployment problem but it takes care of it in
Dawn pretty well. Instead of worrying about the global situation,
let's worry where our people live. A little bit here and a little bit
there will add up.
          Rice farmers in the Gulf Coast area who have been going broke
producing rice get about four cents a pound have moved into
crawfish. Texas is a crawfish-deficit state, believe it or not, but we
can produce crawfish and get seventy-five cents a pound for them in
the same area where we produce that rice. And all you do is put a
little bad hay out there in that rice paddy and throw some crawfish in
and come back later with some nets. But then we've been sending our
crawfish crop over to Louisiana, which was cutting the heads off the
crawfish and deveining them, putting them in a box, freezing them and
selling them to Houston at wholesale for $7.50 a pound. Now maybe
we're not too bright in Texas, but we can dehead crawfish. We're 

about
to be in the crawfish processing business in Port Arthur.
          My point is, if you have lemons, make lemonade.
          We have a lot of lemons throughout the South on which we can build
enterprises. I work on behalf of agriculture, but opportunities also
exist in all kinds of industries. We can have a decentralized economy
that's environmentally sound, that generates wealth at a local level,
that has not only jobs but good-paying jobs that are upwardly mobile,
that allows a local, diversified, abundant management opportunity for
little people to be involved. It doesn't have to be owned by some
conglomerate. We can do this ourselves and our people can be the
managers and the owners.
          The role of the state is to be a catalyst. First you must recognize
that there is a role for the state and you must stand up and say
that. People understand that. They're ready for it. They want help; if
it's pragmatic help that's going to benefit them and their community,
then they like to see the government working side by side with
them.
          Reagan said a couple of years ago that there was some lag in the
economy but the magic of the marketplace was going to take care of
it. The problem is that the magician performs an illusion. You cannot
eat or pay your bills with an illusion. Magic has nothing to do with
the marketplace, which works because of a lot of hard effort and a lot
of good luck. It is a proper role of government to serve as a
catalyst, working with local folks to create a pool of capital so they
have the financing to do what they are wanting to do in an enterprise
that makes economic sense.
          You aren't putting people in business to fail. You have work on the
market development so what they produce actually has a market,
preferably one that is already established and signed for before you
build a processing facility. The object is not to put money in a few
pockets but to generate for our region a substantial, sound,
diversified economy where real money is made, is in the hands of a lot
of people and stays in the region.
          Some people say, "Now, Hightower, these are cute little projects
but we have big economic problems. We need big industry coming in
here."
          I saw where Kentucky spent $77 million of its economic development
money chasing the Saturn auto plant that located in Tennessee [see Southern Changes, Oct./Nov. 1986]. Most states,
including mine, were in that chase, all competing against each other,
telling General Motors we will build you a railroad spur, we will give
you free utilities, we will get you some water, we will train your
employees, we will knock wages down, we will take your laundry out-
whatever you need. Please come here. What was GM promising? Six
thousand jobs were going to come with this, a great economic boom for
any state. We all cheered and we should. You've got to pursue those
things. But it turns out, of course, that now in Tennessee where that
plant is being built that the economy is such that Saturn doesn't look
like quite the deal that it was. Now they are talking about three
thousand jobs and a lot of those workers are going to be shipped in
from other plants throughout the United States.
          I looked last summer at three little projects in the Rio Grande
valley, an area where real unemployment is between thirty and fifty
percent-a desperately hard-hit economy. Two of the poorest Standard
Statistical Metropolitan Areas in the nation are in that area. One
project was a redfish hatchery and processing facility that is being
built in the little town of San Benito. The second was by low-income
Mexican-American cucumber producers who had been selling cucumbers to
the local packing shed which shipped the cucumbers to Chicago where
pickles were made of them. Now these farmers are building a pickle
factory. The third project was a new enterprise making newsprint out
of a plant called kenaf. Those three projects-the kenaf
facility, a pickle farm, and a redfish farm, will put $157 million in
first-year sales and create 3,800 jobs for the people in that
region.
          This is real economic growth. Texas now does six percent of the
nation's food processing. You have a similar situation in any state in
the South. If we were to do just one percent more it would put $3
billion a year in sales into our economy and create ninety thousand
jobs. The thousands and thousands of jobs and billions of dollars we
have to generate will come from small enterprises, not conglomerates
moving out from other states down to us.
          To do that will require that we alter our national and state
policies.
          One vital area of work is capital formation, to counteract the
capital being siphoned off by the federal deficit or by this 

casino
economy. Congress needs to look at the Federal Reserve in terms of
national policy. Congress needs to mandate some
"greenlining"-guaranteeing that a certain amount
of a bank's assets or loan portfolio has to go to community
enterprises and small business, to new enterprises, to co-ops, to
union efforts in plant buyouts.
          At a state level we can create, as we are doing now in Texas,
small-enterprise growth funds. It's time to generate some public
projects again. We need the jobs. The economy is down. Many things
that need to be done are relatively inexpensive to do and now is the
time to invest in them. All those conservatives talking about the big,
bad government are walking down the river walk in San Antonio
marveling at how beautiful it is, and it was built by the WPA in the
1930s. We need to have those kinds of programs again. They do not have
to come from a national level. We can do them at a state level as
well.
          Finally, we need to look at worker investment. The United States'
greatest economic advantage and most underutilized asset is its
workforce-not based on its cheapness but based on its intelligence,
its adaptability, and its gumption to make things work. The workforce
is there. As much as eighty-five percent of the workforce for the year
2000, a dozen years from now, is already working. These are the people
in whom we must make the investment of basic education programs, not
cutting back on our public schools and higher education and technical
colleges and vocational programs. We should put those loan and grant
programs back out there so a typical family can get the kid into
school again. Then we need training and constant advancement within
the workforce. We need portable pensions that go with the worker, not
with the job. We need child-care at an affordable level that meets the
needs of families who are having to earn two incomes to make ends
meet. We need health care.
          The American public understands that need because they are the ones
who are needy. We need not be afraid of advocating these things at a
state and at a national level. The people are way ahead of the
politicians. You go out there and talk these things and you will be
supported on them.
          Our programs will work if we base the nation's growth not on the
Rockefellers, but on the little fellers. It will work because it taps
genius instead of greed.
          There is a moving company in Austin that has an advertising slogan,
"If we can get it loose, we can move it." That is what we are
talking about. If we can get this economy loose at a grassroots level,
the people will move it themselves. 
          
            Jim Hightower is the Texas Commissioner of
Agriculture.
          
        
        
          Block Bork
          By Ellis, Deborah A.Deborah A. Ellis
          Vol. 9, No. 3, 1987, pp. 1-2
          
          The most appropriate celebration of our Constitution in this
bicentennial year would be the defeat of President Reagan's nomination
of Judge Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court. Defeating Bork would
demonstrate that we, the people, reject the Administration's view of
itself as above the law, and embrace a vision of our liberties and
possibilities that is radically different from that of Judge
Bork's.
          The continuing revelations in the Iran-Contra hearings prove that
this is an administration with little regard for the Constitution's
fundamental separation of powers. High-ranking officials have
acknowledged without shame that they lied to Congress and disregarded
its prohibitions on aid to the Contras. Such an administration should
not be permitted to extend its influence into the next century by
making any appointment to the third co-equal branch of
government, the Supreme Court.
          The nomination of Bork is especially egregious because his
confirmation would fundamentally alter the Supreme Court's stance
toward the protection of individual rights. Perhaps only Reagan would
have the hubris to make such an ideological nomination at a time when
his own Administration is under investigation for lawlessness.
          With Bork's nomination, President Reagan may hope to realize goals
his Administration has otherwise been unable to accomplish, and he
will succeed unless the Senate, in a wise exercise of its
constitutional duty of advice and consent, rejects the nomination;
Bork would replace Justice Lewis Powell, who often provided a swing
vote in important civil rights and civil liberties cases.
          Bork would not come to the Court as an unknown 

entity. As a Yale
Law School professor, as Solicitor General under President Nixon, and
now as a judge on the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia,
Robert Bork has condemned the Supreme Court's efforts in areas
including remedies for racial discrimination such as busing and
affirmative action, voting rights, abortion, contraception, women's
rights, protection for free expression, and constitutional protection
for the accused. In short, Judge Bork believes that the Court's
judicial responsibility to protect individual rights should be
severely restricted. Such a view would relegate the Supreme Court to
the same position that this Administration puts Congress, leaving the
Executive with unfettered discretion.
          Bork's views on civil rights would compromise many of the gains
made in the last thirty years in school desegregation, affirmative
action, and voting rights. In a 1963 article for the New Republic, Bork opposed provisions of the Civil
Rights Acts of 1964, which required business to serve customers
without regard to race, arguing that the act threatened "a loss in
a vital area of personal liberty," i.e., the liberty of those who
practiced racial discrimination. Bork later retracted this position,
but it is significant that he opposed basic civil rights protections
at that pivotal point in history.
          In a 1971 article in the Indiana Law Journal,
Bork rejected the "one man, one vote" formula set
forth in the 1964 case, Reynolds v. Sims, as too
"rigid" and lacking "a single respectable supporting
argument." On several occasions, Bork has stated his opposition to
busing as a remedy for school segregation. For example, in 1972 he was
the only law professor to testify before the Senate in favor of the
Nixon Administration's proposal to curb remedies for school
segregation.
          Most importantly for thousands of American women Bork has
vigorously criticized Roe v. Wade, the 1973
Supreme Court decision which protects a woman's right to abortion, on
the grounds that the Constitution does not protect privacy
rights. Because four other members of the court (Rehnquist, White,
O'Connor and Scalia) have also expressed their disagreement with Roe, the decision might well be overturned or
significantly restricted in the next few years if Bork is
confirmed. Bork's rejection of privacy rights also has implications
for homosexual rights and even the right of married couples to use
contraceptives.
          Judge Bork's general insensitivity to women's issues is highlighted
by two recent opinions. In a sexual harassment case, Vinsen v. Taylor, Bork's suggestion that sexual
harassment should not be recognized as a cause of action under Title
VII was rejected unanimously by the Supreme Court in an opinion
written by Justice Rehnquist. And in a case involving American
Cyanamid's "fetus protection" policy, which requires women workers to
either become sterilized or lose their jobs, Bork ruled that the
Occupational Safety and Health Act did not prohibit the company's
policy.
          Bork describes himself as a believer in "judicial
restraint" and the doctrine of original intent, stating
that the Constitution should be interpreted in accordance with the
intentions of the framers. Thus, for example, Bork is unwilling to
question the death penalty because it is "assumed to be an
available penalty in the Constitution itself." However,
examination of some of Bork's decisions reveals that he uses both
theories selectively. He has practiced judicial restraint more
vigorously when individual rights are at stake than when corporate
interests are at issue. Many of the cases that come before Bork at the
circuit court level question how much deference should be paid to
decisions of administrative and regulatory agencies. Although Bork
advocates deference to agency decisions, in practice he has reserved
this deference to agency decisions supporting corporate interests. For
example, in the American Cyanamid case, he ruled in favor of the
company, even though OSHA argued that the workers involved were
protected by the Occupational Safety and Health Act.
          The Senate should block Bork's nomination. Both the text of the
Constitution and the history of Supreme Court appointments make plain
that the Senate's duty in confirming a nominee is as important as the
President's. To borrow from Bork's own "original intent"
analysis, it is clear that the signers of the Constitution believed it
proper to oppose a Supreme Court nominee on political grounds. In 1795
when George Washington nominated a lawyer with impeccable credentials,
Chief Justice John Rutledge of South Carolina, the Senate rejected the
nomination fourteen to ten for political reasons; three of the
fourteen rejecting Senators were signers of the Constitution. In
total, the Senate has rejected almost twenty percent of Presidential
Supreme Court nominees.
          The Senate should carefully scrutinize not only Bork's actions in
dismissing Watergate special prosecutor Archibald Cox in 1974, but
also his view of the Supreme Court's function, a view that jeopardizes
the Court's role in protecting individual rights against the
majority. 
          
            Deborah Ellis is a lawyer in New York. She previously
practiced in Alabama, where she also clerked for a federal circuit
judge.
          
        
        
          Coalition-Building for a New Labor Climate
          By Johnson, KennyKenny Johnson
          Vol. 9, No. 3, 1987, pp. 8-9
          
          The release last fall of the Southern Labor Institute's report,
The Climate For Workers in the United States, marked
the first comprehensive look at our national economy from the
perspective of those who produce the goods and services that fuel the
economic engine. The document, sharply different from the usual
business climate report, revealed that despite numerical gains in job
growth that lead the nation, and despite recent improvements in state
funding of education, the South has failed to keep up with the rest of
the nation in almost every other way:
          For example, the South has recorded the smallest gains in wages and
per capita income, is home to the largest proportion of working poor,
and maintains the highest incidences of poverty.
          This report was followed in the spring by a conference focusing on
the profound impact the South's changing workplace is having on the
region's working people. Central to both the report and the conference
was an attempt to sharpen the questions and stimulate answers about
economic development in the South and the nation. The framing of such
questions has traditionally been the province of government, chambers
of commerce, and narrow business interests, and the resulting analysis
has typically been slanted toward measurements of a climate pleasing
to the managements of major companies. In the low-wage, low-tax South,
that climate has usually been given good ratings.
          However, it is ever more clear that what is good for big business
is not always good for the South, and the considerable economic growth
that has come to the region has hardly resulted in a comparable
improvement in the lives of most Southern workers. To quote from the
Labor Climate Report "The challenge and the task
that face the South today and in the future is to create jobs with the
income and benefits needed to bring the region's workers above the
poverty level--not just new jobs as in the past, but jobs that will
significantly improve the standard of living for people who work
full-time, year-round."
          With the Report as a starting point, the challenge
of the recent conference was to develop strategies that could help
improve the standard of living in the region. To accomplish this, the
conference brought together leaders from the ranks of organized labor,
local governments, religious organizations, and civil rights
groups. The members of this broad-based and potentially powerful
coalition were asked to re-examine state policies and practices on
economic development.
          In the articles that follow, several of the speakers from the
conference share some of the insight and discussion from the valuable
weekend of strategizing in Atlanta. As the Labor Climate
Report had done, the conference challenged the basic notion
that economic development depends on cheap land, unreasonable tax
concessions to industry, and an unorganized, untrained, and
undereducated labor force willing to work for less than elsewhere.
          The Report attracted widespread publicity both to the concepts it
addressed and to the Southern Labor Institute which produced it. The
conference was an effort to build upon this attention while expanding
participation in the examination of the national economy's current
transformation, and what world economic trends mean to most
citizens.
          One omission of the Report was a lack of specific policy
recommendations--geared to the realities of the 1980's and the
1990's--of what the states should be doing to improve the standard of
living. The conference helped in this respect by bringing together
leaders who may only rarely concern themselves with long-term
development policy and who, for the most part, may not readily see the
links between their interests in economic development and the
interests of others. Labor unions, religious denominations, civil
rights organizations, and local governments tend to see only their own
interests, occasionally becoming involved with state economic
development policies that may affect them. They may never recognize
the need to combine forces. This spring's conference was a chance to
unify a large number of organizations and agencies in the South whose
common interests have not yet been combined for common activities.
          One of the first steps of the conference was to provide a common
knowledge base about problems, issues, past practices, and the status
of the South today.
          Then, discussion was sought. While unemployment, for example, was a
major issue for labor unions and for black community leaders,
representatives of the two groups approached the issue differently. A
local leader from the Alabama Black Belt talked about the desperate
need for jobs for his community. He was interested in job creation--
whether those jobs were low-wage, unionized or not. But labor unions
saw a shrinking job market that they felt a need to protect. The
conference goal was to get the partici-

pants to understand these
differences and to focus on common needs rather than accenting
differences.
          An important aspect of developing this mutual understanding rests
in the ability to get community leaders to understand that at the
minimum wage full-time workers can still be stuck at the poverty
level, unable to afford those things one usually thinks of as the
rewards of working for a living--such things as decent housing,
educating one's children, and providing the family with adequate
medical care. These things labor unions, too, viewed as important. In
short, the conference brought to the same table people who do not
ordinarily meet to discuss economic issues and policies.
          The need now is to bring that same kind of regional discussion to
the state and local level. As an example, the Southern Labor Institute
is now working in Birmingham to bring unions together with the black
community. The unions are interested in organizing health care
workers, and, for the first time, prior to taking that kind of action,
these labor leaders are sitting down with black leaders. The message
of labor in Birmingham is that the service industry, and health care
in particular, remains one of the fastest growing sectors in the city,
increasingly becoming a larger percentage of the total job base. Black
workers make up a disproportionate share of the orderlies, nursing
assistants, maintenance workers, and other service workers who are
finding full-time employment in this industry. However, the wage scale
on these jobs is doing very little to improve their overall standard
of living.
          The low wages of service industries are especially significant to
female heads of households, who, with their children, are the fastest
growing poverty group in the country. On a purely economic basis, a
single female with two children often cannot afford to take a
minimum-wage job. The cost of transportation, day care, and housing
costs exceeds what she can earn.
          Cities like Birmingham have to do better in attracting jobs that
pay better wages, and their workforces in the existing service jobs
must be organized to increase wages and deal with other issues related
to the workplace--issues like health care and job security. It is in
the interest of black community leaders to begin forming coalitions
with unions who are organizing the workplace.
          The mission of the Southern Labor Institute and the Southern
Regional Council is to sustain and accelerate this unification. The
Council is currently studying the temporary workforce issue, which is
probably the most serious threat to the workplace that has come along
in a long while. Employers are moving away from permanent workers to
whom they have to pay not only some sensible salaries but also
benefits, and they are moving instead to a temporary workforce with
lower pay and no job benefits. At one time, these temporary workers
were basically day laborers, but temporary workers are now moving into
skilled job categories.
          These are some of the issues of the 1990's that were on the minds
of the participants at the recent SLI conference, of which
excepts are offered in the following articles.
          
            Kenny Johnson is director of the Southern Labor
institute. Copies of The Climate for Workers in the United
States are available for $20 each from the SRC, 60 Walton St.,
N.W., Atlanta, GA 30303-2199. An abridged version of the Labor Climate
Report is contained in Southern Changes,
Octember/November 1986, which is available for
$5.
          
        
        
          Of Movements and a Man.
          By Chalmers, DavidDavid Chalmers
          Vol. 9, No. 3, 1987, pp. 20-22
          
          Bearing the Cross: Martin Luther
King, Jr., and the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference. By David J. Garrow. (New York: William Morrow and
Company, Inc., 1986. $800 pp. 19.96)
          Society castrates its saints and turns them into idealized
plaster-cast statuary. In order to live with them, we trivialize their
lives and dilute their message to the point that they no longer make
us uncomfortable. St. Francis, whose radical poverty challenged the
wealth and power of the Church, became the kindly friend of the birds
and animals, and the Martin Luther King of memorial orations and
student papers offers an unthreatening message of love and
non-violence. In the Epilogue to his Pulitzer-prize winning account of
King and the civil rights struggle, David Garrow approvingly quotes
Vincent Harding's complaint that King is being turned into a "rather
smoothed-off respectable national hero." However, if anything
threatens to crack the plaster of that respectability, it is not
King's radicalism, but his humanity. As the recent struggles of
presidential candidates, TV evangelists, the United States Marines,
and the Roman Catholic Church remind us, there are no easy answers to
coming to terms with human sexuality, and there is always the danger
of discrediting information falling into unfriendly hands, in King's
case, the FBI which set out to destroy him.
          At the core of western Christianity is the Jesus who is both
suffering human and son of God, and a deep religious conviction was
the mainstay of King's thirteen-year public ministry. King was
twenty-six in 1955 when he was called to lead the bus boycott in
Montgomery; when he was killed in Memphis, he was thirty-nine. It was
in Montgomery, sitting alone in prayer at his kitchen table, that he
found himself in the voice of Jesus which told him to fight on and
promised "never to leave me, never to leave me alone. No never alone."
From that vision, which echoed through the rest of his life, he came
to accept the role from which he realized he could never escape and
that he foresaw would lead to his death. This acceptance is central to
his life and the account of that ministry which David Garrow
appropriately entitles, Bearing the Cross. Martin Luther King,
Jr., and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.
          It is a monumental piece of research, based on more than seven
hundred interviews (over two hundred conducted by Garrow himself),
tens of thousands of pages of material obtained from the government
under the Freedom of Information Act (including hundreds of King's
tapped phone conversations), and the careful search of archival and
secondary sources. For years, David Garrow, an associate professor of
political science at the City University of New York, has been the
best-informed and most thoughtful historian of the Southern civil
rights movement, freely sharing his work with other interested
students. His previous studies on Protest at Selma
(1978) and The FBl and Martin Luther King, Jr. (1981)
also helped prepare the ground for Bearing the
Cross.
          Although the Pulitzer award was for biography rather than in the
history category, a shift made by the governing board, Garrow is
basically interested only in King's life in the civil rights
movement. Until his death, first the Montgomery Improvement
Association (MIA) and then the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference (SCLC) were his life, and his, theirs. What was going on in
Washington, Mississippi, Chicago, in the King family, and elsewhere,
are presented only from the angle of his participation; the rest
simply lies outside of the scope of Garrow's book.
          From this "movement book," much can be learned about movements for
social change. Overshadowing everything else is how difficult it was
to keep going. Unlike a corporation, political party, or government,
it did not sell a product candidate, or the exercise of public
power. There was no 

firmly institutionalized structure and
source of income. The SCLC was essentially one man; King was its
policy, image, and, often, funding. He had to make the decisions, give
the word on the strategy of the campaigns and the tactics in the
streets, reconcile the conflicts within SCLC and between it and SNCC,
the NAACP, and the power structures of Birmingham, Chicago, and
Washington. Often the fees for his speeches were SCLC's major source
of income. As a result, he was continuously in motion, not just in the
South but across the country, speaking, preaching, fund raising,
planning, conferring, negotiating, persuading. Mixed in with these
were marches, court appearances, jail time, and violence. He was the
recipient of blows, missiles, and a stab wound close to the heart,
death threats, and pressure from the FBI. The combination of all of
these repeatedly brought him to the point of physical and emotional
exhaustion.
          The civil rights movement was threatening not only to white
supremacy, but to black arrangements as well. This meant the hostility
of the NAACPs Roy Wilkins as well as the National Baptist Convention's
Joseph Jackson. Cooperation often proved difficult for black ministers
more accustomed to domination over their own congregations. The
jealousy of Ralph Abernathy, the prickly independence of Fred
Shuttlesworth, the imperiousness of Wyatt Walker, the uncertainty
about Jesse Jackson's motives, the alienation of E.D. Nixon and Rosa
Parks, and the hostility of Ella Baker produced problems, and there
was always conflict between top staffers to be addressed. In his
emotionally demanding world, King was closest to his old Montgomery
friend Abernathy and particularly came to depend on Andrew Young and
Stanley Levison.
          Levison's recent ties with the Communist Party were the occasion
for FBI surveillance that wrapped itself around and sought to destroy
King's life. Despite warnings from the Justice Department and the
White House, King maintained his relationship with Levison. By
Garrow's account, Levison served King well as editor, advisor, and
friend, showing no signs of a separate agenda.

          After Selma, Levison summed up for King the limitations that the
civil rights movement faced. The American people were "not ready for a
radical restructuring of the economic order." While they would react
strongly against "shocking violence and gross injustice," they were
not prepared to make deep changes in order to free the Negro, and the
movement had to act within this limit. It was King who was becoming
more radical than Levison, but the question was always how to
proceed. He never deviated from his commitment to non-violence, but he
came to realize that it had to be a political strategy as well as
moral persuasion. By the mid-sixties, no one any longer talked about
"redeeming the soul" of the South or of America. The concern was with
the power to make changes.
          The failure of the Albany campaign in 1962 had been a particularly
instructive experience. The key to change was "federal commitment" and
provoking violence was the essential way to force its hand. A "Bull"
Connor or a Sheriff Jim Clark was necessary to dramatize the
situation, bring tensions to the surface, reach a national government
that placed "order" above social justice. Action had to be
focused. Specific targets were necessary. Attacking segregation in
general was too broad. Where voting strength was lacking, it was a
mistake to go after the politicians. The economic power structure was
more crucial and the local business community could be frightened by
the threat of black disorder. Not only were school children used as
demonstrators in Birmingham, but crowds of black spectators were
liable to erupt into brick and bottle throwing when the police used
dogs and firehoses on demonstrators. This and masses of unrestrained
black teenagers downtown had more of an impact on businessmen than
peaceful picketing and sit-ins.
          Coming off of the failure in Albany, the lessons of Birmingham were
those of better planning and preparation, the importance of selecting
specific goals, and the power of economic boycott, youthful protest,
and spontaneous participants. Both King and the Kennedys became
convinced that legislation was necessary. The murder of Medgar Evers,
on the night of the President's television address against
segregation, surely underlined that persuasion alone was not
enough. Protest tactics alone were not enough. Political action and
coalitions were necessary for change.
          Although the crucial audience had become national, the battle for
that attention had to be fought locally. This meant local people,
local organizations, and local goals. Despite appearances, local unity
was often fragile or lacking; middle-class black people and college
students were often hesitant to take part. One of the real
achievements in Selma was the participation of the school
teachers. Local campaigns could not be sustained for very long
periods. There had to be a way to convince local people that it had
all been worthwhile. Focus on two or three points could produce a
sense of victory, so the campaign could wind up and move on
elsewhere. It was sometimes difficult for local people to understand
the broader symbolic consequences of small, tangible gains. The
irresolvable conflict between King and SNCC was that SCLC was using
local turf to fight national battles within the system, while SNCC's
young activists sought to develop grassroots organization and
power. SCLC's strength was the person of Martin Luther King, Jr., not
participatory democracy, and King's jail time was a strategic
resource, not an everyday tactic.
          Like everything else, the role of the press was ambiguous. Its
coverage was the essential gateway to the national scene, but it fed
on conflict, praised Albany Police Chief Laurie Prichett for
"remarkable restraint" when he didn't produce any, and undercut civil
rights strategy by sharing their inside information with him. The
agendas of the press were not always favorable; when King committed
himself against the Vietnam War, it was not only Life
Magazine but also the New York Times and the
Washington Post that denounced him.
          For King and SCLC, the problem was always "What next?" As he went
north to Chicago to agitate about jobs, housing, and education, he was
increasingly concerned about the problems of wealth and class in
American society. By failing to speak out against the Vietnam War, he
believed that he was shirking his responsibility. Racism, militarism,
and economic exploitation were all tied in together. His radicalism
and his pessimism grew together. The civil rights movement was too
middle class and America as a nation had never committed itself to
economic justice. The leaders who preached non-violence through the
democratic system were "not given enough victories," but still within
its context he searched for a new strategy. Although no one was really
enthusiastic over it, he decided on a "poor people's campaign." Waves
of the "poor and disinherited" would descend on Washington, practice
civil disobedience in the streets, and lobby and pressure
Congress. Tired, drained, increasingly melancholy, he more and more
referred back to his kitchen vision in Montgomery, and talked of his
own death. A march in support of striking garbagemen in Memphis broke
down into a riot, so King went back again to Memphis, to Golgotha, to
show that it could be carried off nonviolently.
          
            David Chalmers is Distinguished Alumni Professor at the University
of Florida and is author of Hooded Americanism, The History of
the Ku Klux Klan. He is at work on a history of social change
in the 1960s.
          
        
        
          Preacher's Parable.
          By Egerton, JohnJohn Egerton
          Vol. 9, No. 3, 1987, p. 23
          
          Forty Acres and A Goat. By
Will D. Campbell. (Atlanta: Peachtree Publishers, Ltd., 1986. 336
pp. $14.95.)
          An unusual combination of life experiences has shaped Will
Campbell's career as a preacher, farmer, social activist, and
writer.
          He was born and raised in a hardscrabble farm family in south
Mississippi during the lean years between the two world wars. He was
ordained in a country Baptist church when he was 17 years old. He was
a medic in the Pacific in World War II. He graduated from Wake Forest
University and the divinity school of Yale University. For six years
in the 1950s, he was a race relations troubleshooter in the South for
the National Council of Churches. And for the past 25 years, he has
headed a Nashville-based "rag-tag bunch of bootleg preachers and
drop-out parishioners" known as the Committee of Southern
Churchmen.
          Nine years ago, in a book called Brother to a
Dragonfly, Campbell told the story of two boys become men--he
and his brother Joe--in those years of poverty and turmoil that marked
the South in the middle decades of this century. It was a remarkable
book, lavishly praised by such literary giants as Walker Percy and
Robert Penn Warren, and it was a finalist in the National Book Awards
competition and a winner of several other non-fiction honors.
          Before and after Brother to a Dragonfly, Campbell
wrote a half-dozen other volumes on religion, race, and the human
tragedy, including a novel, The Glad River,
that linked 16th-century Anabaptists in the Netherlands and
20th-century Southern Baptists in Louisiana.
          He is an unconventional man, an uncommon preacher and writer with a
common touch that is incisive, inclusive, and often eloquent. His new
book, Forty Acres and a Goat, is more in the style of
Brother to a Dragonfly than his other works, and it is,
like the man himself, hard to classify. His publisher calls it a
memoir, but it is more nearly a parable or an allegory. Its characters
include historical figures, ordinary people, multiple souls in
singular bodies, animals that behave like humans (and vice versa), and
several members of the Campbell clan.
          The forty acres in question make up a rocky patch of hillsides and
creeksides where Will and Brenda Campbell have lived for more than
twenty years. The goat was a family pet named--like so many people and
things in middle Tennessee--for Andrew Jackson, who once lived in the
neighborhood. The story, in its most basic dimension, is about the
little farm and its menagerie of animals and the people who have come
and gone there.
          But there is much more to it than that. It is about land and time,
ancestry and kinship, civil rights and human wrongs, manifest destiny
and original sin. The two protagonists, Will Campbell and a more
symbolic but no less real character named T. J. Eaves, grapple
throughout with the crucible of race, a white man and a black man
striving to understand the single most complex and enduring test ever
to face this country of immigrants and captives.
          "Say good-bye to Jackson," Eaves tells Campbell as the two
men part company near the end of the story, and when his friend and
brother is out of sight, Campbell hears his own voice saying,
"Well, we almost made it."
          In real life--and in good books--things are never quite finished,
never wrapped up in pretty little bundles that won't come undone. So
it is in Will Campbell's parable. And so it is with Campbell himself,
and with the people about whom he writes so compellingly, and with us
all.
          
            John Egerton's most recent book is Southern
Food. He lives and works in Nashville.
          
        
        
          The Organization Behind the Man.
          
            
              Chalmers, DavidDavid Chalmers
            
          
          Vol. 9, No. 3, 1987, p. 21
          
          To Redeem the Soul of
America: The Southern Christian Leadership Conference and Martin
Luther King, Jr.  By Adam Fairclough.  (Athens: University of
Georgia Press, 1987.  505 pp. Paper, $17.95. Cloth, $35.)
	       
          Arriving coincidentally with David Garrow's overwhelming work on
the same topic, this thoroughly researched, thoughtful, and
well-written study by a British historian is likely to life under the
shadow of being "the other book," yet there is much that can be
learned from it.  Fairclough uses Garrow's earlier writing, expresses
appreciation for personal sharing, and does not basically disagree
with his interpretation of King and what happened in and to the
movement.  The difference in emphasis is indicated by the ordering of
the sub-titles.  Garrow names King first, and Fairclough, the SCLC.
Both authors are in agreement on King's achievements, on the
centrality of religion and non-violence in King's life and King's
centrality in the SCLC, the collapse of the civil rights movement
after the Voting Rights Act, and King's growing radicalism, but
Fairclough is writing organizational history, not biography.
          Although recognizing housing as the "bedrock" of school and job
segregation, neither author has much favorable to say about King's
1966 campaign in Chicago, which may underline how difficult the basic
problem was.  In the face of white backlash, a hostile coalition in
Congress, black nationalism, urban rioting, the Vietnam war, and the
loss of presidential backing, there was little hope for new gains.
Fairclough seems to suggest that King and the SCLC might have fared
better by concentrating on voter registration and political
organization, but the "movement phase" of change was probably over.
Movements are hard to organize and difficult to maintain.  It is not
easy to repeatedly face possible injury, arrest and job loss,
particularly when one has a family to support.  People have other
personal priorities and lives to live.  Problems beyond the defeat of
legal segregation were too deep to be touched by non-violent
demonstration in the streets.  Coalitions were fragile, and
maintaining unity was difficult.  Even during the "great days" in
Birmingham, only about ten percent of the city's black ministers
actively supported the campaign.
          Fairclough gives less importance to Birmingham than Garrow does and
offers a more favorable picture of Birmingham minister Fred
Shuttlesworth.  He particularly admires the political sophistication
of the older left activists Bayard Rustin, Ella Baker, and Stanley
Levison, but even they had no real path to offer after the middle
sixties.
          Because of his focus on the organization, rather than King,
Fairclough often gives a much broader picture of what was going on.
He begins with a brief description of the bus boycotts in Baton Rouge
and Tallahassee which set the scene for Montgomery and explains what
went on during the fatal Memphis garbage strike in 1968.  He offers
useful thumbnail biographical sketches of James Bevel, Wyatt Walker,
Harry Wachtel, James Lawson, Andrew Young, Hosea Williams, C.T. Vivian
and other movement leaders, and he carries the story through the
Abernathy years after King's death.  In summing up, Fairclough comes
back to King again.  Desegregation and the ballot did not end
discrimination and poverty, but it did knock away major props of
institutionalized white supremacy and helped black people achieve
dignity.  With idealism, dedication, and courage, Martin Luther King,
Jr., understood the history and culture, and expressed the aspirations
of black Southerners.  "SCLC itself was far more than King,"
Fairclough concludes, "but his death revealed how completely he
dominated it through intellect, personality, moral example, and
organizational skill."
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 9, No. 3, 1987, p. 24
          
          Mine enemies are legion and I can barely remember when that was not
the case. In a somewhat perverse manner, I find that comforting and
suffer no reason to embrace popular, superficial mainstream
conclusions I know to be wrong and misleading.
          There are no American heroes in our relations to South and Central
America, now or ever. The Iran/Contra mess is a foul, dangerous
scandal and international disgrace.
          For centuries, America, for rank, selfish economic reasons, helped
to sustain oppression and misery throughout South and Central
America. The CIA toppled an entire government on behalf of United
Fruit Incorporated. Rich multi-national corporations owning thousands
of acres have opposed every effort at land reform. The result of
systematic exploitation blankets the pitiful people of South and
Central America like a suffocating cloud.
          Unspeakable conditions were maintained by a line of dictatorial
despots as bad as any the world has known. They were kept in power for
almost 150 years primarily by American military might and power. In
turn, powerful American economic interests enjoyed a virtual license
to plunder and exploit.
          As a rule, neither people nor nations turn from true friends to
embrace an unknown--much less to welcome the bloodsucking Russian
Bear; communists are in South and Central America because we created a
perfect opportunity for them.
          A desperate father in South America struggles daily to feed his
hungry children and he has little or no education, health care or
land. His very existence has been ruled by governments so
opressive they are difficult to describe. That father
really doesn't give a damn about Ronald Reagan or Mikhail
Gorbachev. Would you?
          The current administration in Washington invaded one Latin American
neighbor, whose population is smaller than the City of Birmingham, and
unlawfully mined the harbor and fomented civil war against
another. All to halt the spread of communism and bring Jeffersonian
democracy to that desperate land.
          Hogwash!
          Latin American is a place where the rich always got richer and the
poor systematically poorer until the bottom fell out. Hard-disciplined
work might forestall starvation, but little else. A handful of super
rich owned the continent. American power was always there to back them
up.
          Communism, as distinguished from the governmental mechanisms
through which it is promoted, is an ideology. Guns, tanks, marines and
missiles, by definition are virtually useless in halting the spread of
an idea. One would assume official minds in Washington would
eventually come to recognize that obvious and fundamental
truth. Fortunately, communism consistently proves to be its own worse
enemy. It is a wholly unrealistic and impractical concept weighted
down with enormous bureaucratic burdens and a myriad of imperialist
manipulations in behalf of Mother Russia. Those considerations, more
than anything else, have impeded the spread of communism.
          Every nation in the world seems to understand except America and
possibly England. Not a single Latin nation, including Mexico, favors
the U.S. clandestine-military activity in South and Central
America. Indeed, the U.S. had to ignore the Organization of American
States and the vital mutual security pact to wrangle a bogus
invitation to invade Granada and engage in the "no-win" resurrection
of the Contras in Nicaragua. If we are to stop the spread of communism
we had better get busy with genuine and innovative efforts to stop the
spread of poverty, ignorance and racism. Fidel Castro was intimately
acquainted with all three before he took to the mountains.
          The self-righteous crap we hear in the Iran/Contra hearing about
fighting for freedom and halting communism is in reality a catalogue
of inappropriate, off-base policies which violate international law
and are singularly ineffective. We have even undermined the
Constitutional basis of our own government.
          To date, our efforts in South and Central America are unworthy of a
great nation and a good people.
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and writer.
          
        
      
    
  