
          Toward Economic Democracy
          By Marshall, RayRay Marshall
          Vol. 9, No. 3, 1987, pp. 16-19
          
          The goals of economic development and job creation are terribly
important but we must be clear that job creation means a job for
everybody who is well and able to work and wants to work. We must be
concerned not just with the number of jobs but with the quality of
those jobs.
          In spite of all the talk about the new unemployment, the problem
caused by unemployment is the same as it ever was-serious material
loss. The loss from unemployment this past year is over $1,000 for
every man, woman, and child in America, over $200 billion total. We
could have done a lot with that $200 billion.
          Furthermore, unemployment's human costs go beyond material
loss. Unemployment is still heavily correlated with almost every
social pathology-crime, alcohol and drug abuse, family breakups...even
infant mortality. Unemployment shortens lives and kills people.
          We should have a guaranteed job for people who are willing and able
to work at decent wages and under decent working conditions. Since
that ought to be our policy objective, we must get voters to accept
the goal, and we must establish policies to move toward that goal.
          We're in a different world, though, than in 1946 when the
Employment Act was passed or in the 1930s when a lot of basic full
employment objectives were established. We need to adapt to that new
world, to work within new institutional forms to build economic
development from the grass roots up.
          Democracy has several dimensions. Political democracy, people say
they understand. At one time we had a commitment in this country to
industrial democracy, too. It was an extension of political democracy
and for the same reasons. In fact, if you try to preach democracy in
the political process and deny it on the job you create strong social
tensions. Added to that in recent years, is the realization that
democracy is very efficient. We taught that to the Japanese who
developed a very competitive system based on a simple proposition that
many of our managers refuse to accept-that the people who know the
jobs better than anybody else are the workers on those jobs. If you
can harness the energy and ideas of those workers, you can build a
terribly competitive system. It will be very efficient and it will
improve the conditions for everybody. Now a lot of our managers are
selling that idea but they don't understand the other part of it-that
worker participation without effective worker power is inefficient and
temporary.

          Workplace democracy with a false concept will fail when management
starts making unilateral decisions. Workers won't identify with
something that is authoritarian, undemocratic and elitist, which is
what Taylorism, the basic American management system, is all about. If
you want true democracy on the job, you have to give workers an
independent source of power to protect and promote their
interests. They must have the right to organize and bargain
collectively. Society must protect that right; we're not going to have
a free and democratic political system without a free and democratic
labor system.
          Now the concept of democracy is being extended from political
democracy to industrial democracy to social democracy, which means
that we ought to as a society establish minimum conditions for people
within the society. That's social democracy...we are concerned about
the development of our people so we are concerned about education,
about health insurance, about income maintenance for those who are
unable to participate effectively in the economic process. And then
the final part which is on the horizon now is the extension from
social democracy to economic democracy.
          Economic democracy means greater ownership and control by the
workers themselves of the places where they work. In an
internationalized information world, if you're not where the decisions
are made you cannot protect the interests of workers. You've got to be
on boards of directors, you've got to have part of the ownership of
those enterprises, you've got to pay attention to stock ownership and
stockholders and be a part of the financial system. All of these
things-financial manipulation through leveraged buyouts, the use of
your pension funds against your interests-have a vital effect on
American workers, their jobs, their working conditions, and how well
off they're likely to be in the future.
          To be concerned about workers' interests today is to be an actor in
the deals that get cut, to see to it that the workers' interests are
protected. By working together we can perfect some of those
institutions and therefore do new things to meet the conditions in
which we now live. We must develop employee stock ownership plans and
labor cooperatives. Why should all these labor exchanges make a lot of
money, exploiting workers and denying them benefits, sending them to
work under unsafe. unhealthy conditions? We need labor cooperatives
with workers who control themselves to supply that labor. It doesn't
take a lot of management expertise to run a labor exchange, and you
could in the process protect the conditions for workers. We might fail
with a lot of such efforts and will, but the way to progress is
through failing and starting over and building to what you have
got.
          Such grassroots initiatives are important, but we also have to
recognize the other reality-that policies made a long way from the
South have a direct and immediate bearing on our lives. We therefore
have to be concerned about international and national economic policy
making, and if we don't then what we try to build up can be eliminated
overnight.
          We have many case studies of that if you look at the effects of
U.S. economic policies on workers throughout the South. Take
monetarism, which is one-half of Reaganomics. Stripped of its
niceties, monetarism means we are going to use unemployment to keep
wages down. Therefore, if you don't want that to happen, you've got to
be an actor in the economic policy making process.
          Supply-side economics is based on the assumption that a huge tax
cut in 1981 would so stimulate the economy that in spite of spending
$1.6 trillion on defense, we would balance the budget by 1983. That
didn't happen, but what did happen is what some really had in mind all
along-to so weaken the federal government that it could not do an
effective job of providing human services or protecting the rights of
workers and ordinary people in the country. That was the main agenda
of a lot of people who are involved in this process and they have done
it. The other thing they did was to cause misery for people all over
the world. Because of the huge budget deficit, it means the federal
government has to use most of the net savings in this country just to
pay interest on the national debt--$170 billion this year. Lyndon
Johnson. during the Vietnam War, put in the first $100 billion budget,
and the interest on the national debt now is much larger than Lyndon
Johnson's Vietnam-era budget and it is going to get bigger.
          Now what effect does that have on you?
          First, you and your children and their children are going to pay
it. Second, in the process the federal government as the preferred
borrower, with the Federal Reserve limiting the money supply, drove up
interest rates and put a block on job-creating activities. Who's going
to invest to create a job when all you have to do to make ten, twelve
or even twenty percent is draw interest? Nobody.

          But more important than that, it also costs us jobs because other
countries wanted that high interest so they bought dollars so they
could buy U.S. assets and that drove up the price of a dollar. That is
like subsidizing imports and putting a use tax on exports. The trade
policy of the United States is not only passive, it's perverse. The
trade policy of the United States has encouraged companies to ship
jobs overseas simply because of tax reasons or because by opening the
American market to competition from overseas the companies can then
justify that level of wages and costs.
          The essence of the trade policy is this-if you have a passive
policy and someone else has an active policy, you don't have to have a
lot of imagination to see who's going to call the shots. We tend to be
reactive and that means that other people will decide which jobs we
get to keep in this country. And they do what I would do if I were in
their position. They keep the good jobs and give us the rest.
          Instead, we ought to have an active policy, but we're not going to
get it so long as you are not actively involved in the policy
process. Therefore, we need to pay heavy attention to this policy
process and to recognize a number of realities.
          The main trend occurs with technological change. We need to be
technologically advanced to maintain rasher high wages. Why? Because
if we lose our technological advantage, we compete according to
wages. If we compete according to wages, we'll lose, as wages will
tend to go down.
          The other thing we must worry about is the revolutionary effect
those technological changes will have on our lives. Technology makes
it possible for the international corporations to ship jobs around the
world like they were pieces on a chess set. Technology would let a
one-room company operate all over the United States and all over the
world just as if they were in all of these places-we have a company in
Dallas that has two hundred workers in Beijing, China. Those workers
work every day for that company. They send stuff through
satellite. Those Chinese workers make fifty dollars a month and
they're pretty well-trained and well-educated computer workers.
          Technology can shift jobs. It has also been partly responsible for
the fact that most jobs are now being created by relatively small
enterprises-fifty or fewer workers. There are obvious implications for
organizing and obvious implications for where the jobs are. But the
big question is will this technology create more jobs than it
displaces? That is one very important issue.
          The second important issue related to technology is will those jobs
be worse jobs than the ones we've got now? Technology can make better
jobs and more jobs or it can make worse jobs and fewer jobs. It all
depends on policy, on management and on whether workers participate in
making the decisions for the introduction of machines. If we get
enough growth to absorb the workers who are displaced by the machines,
we can maintain relative employment.
          Historically, technological change has always caused
unemployment. The only reason most technology is introduced is to
displace labor. That is what improved productivity means, that you
produce the same output with less labor and new machinery therefore
always causes unemployment. In the past we've absorbed a lot of
unemployment through shortened hours, longer vacations, starting to
work at later ages, etc. However, future unemployment is likely to be
involuntary and therefore will increase joblessness.
          The second trend we have to watch is the internationalization of
the economy, which changes the whole concept of the labor
movement. The basic idea behind the labor movement historically is to
remove labor from competition, thus improving efficiency and equity
and the human condition. You strengthen management because managers
now have to manage. You strengthen efficiency because you don't let
parasitic employers continue to operate. If you don't subsidize them
and you have the proper policies, you improve efficiency because you
shift people from the inefficient to the efficient, to those who can
uphold good conditions and meet proper standards. Now, of course, we
can no longer take labor out of competition by collective bargaining
or by national regulations. Our rules don't cover China, Korea, Japan
and western Europe. Our contracts don't cover Japanese workers and
it's a fundamental principle of collective bargaining that unless your
contract coincides with the market, you'll have trouble holding the
contract.
          The solution is to extend the rules internationally and that is why
workers' rights must be included in trade legislation. We can't be any
more complacent about Mexican and Korean workers getting cancer than
we can workers in the United States. American companies can exploit
Korean workers and send their goods back to the United States to
compete with us. That doesn't help Korean workers and it doesn't help
ours. The basic principle of international labor standards is the same
principle of removing labor from competition through national
standards.
          The third basic trend is demographics, which is vital to the labor
movement. As has been pointed out, eighty-five percent of all people
who will be working in the year 2000 are already in the work
force. And ninety percent of the increase between now and the end of
the century will be women and minorities. By 2020, when the post-war
babies' generation retires, there will be a minority population of 

ninety-one million in the United States. Minorities will at that point
be thirty-four percent of the population and forty percent of the work
force. They are now seventeen percent of the population. Therefore,
the future of the labor movement as well as the future of the American
work force and therefore the future of the economy depends heavily on
what happens to women and minorities now.
          We know those things because demographics is predictable. See, the
birth rate in most white populations is not even at the level required
to replace themselves. We don't know all the reasons why, but part of
it is that the white population is older, and old folks don't have as
many kids as young folks. The median age of whites in the United
States is 32 years and rising. The median age of hispanics is 22 and
declining. The median age of blacks is 25 and rising.
          Now if you don't get women and minorities organized, educated, and
trained, then you're not going to be competitive in the international
arena. And you're not going to be able to maintain the labor movement
unless you have a strategy to deal with women and minorities because
that is where the future lies.
          Given those trends, what do we do? How do we develop policies to
achieve full employment with relatively decent wages and
conditions?
          First, we need to focus on our main objective, which is to try to
achieve full employment and decent wages.
          Our problem in dealing with international competition and in
achieving this objective is not that we can't do it. Our problem is
that we don't want to do it and that we have policy failures relative
to other countries. Why do we have such bad policies in this
country?
          One basic reason is greed. Some people make out all right with a
laissez-faire, non-government intervention
climate. It's not hard to figure out who those folks are-people who've
got it, who have a lot of resources, are going to make it. I grew up
in a Mississippi Baptist orphanage and had to go to church a lot and
didn't even know people could start a meeting without taking a text
from the Bible and singing some hymns and giving a prayer. So, if I
was going to put together a text for the Reagan administration policy
it would be, "To him that have shall be given, and to him that have
not shall be taken away, even that which he thought he had." If we
don't recognize that is part of what supports this laissez-faire 
world, then we don't understand what is happening.
          The second reason for our bad policy is ideology. We have sold
ourselves the notion that government is bad and the market will solve
all problems, and therefore, we ought not to have government
intervention in the market. That attitude will cause us to continue to
decline.
          It was creative pragmatism that caused us to have the longest
period of sustained prosperity in our history, from World War II to
the early 1970s. We didn't ask ourselves if the G.I. Bill, the
national highway program, our whole education system, that we enlarged
greatly in those days, we didn't ask if this agenda was socialism-we
saw it as the thing to do. We maintained employment reasonably well by
active government intervention. We built our agricultural system and
our space program (the spin-off of which gives us our technological
lead) and people didn't ask themselves if it is right for government
to do that. Only recently have we begun to get this ideological belief
that whatever the government does is negative.
          We've got to get away from that. We can't solve our problems
without a strong federal government actively involved as a
partner. When we recognize that reality, then it is not hard to look
at the components of policy that we need to build the just and humane
society we feel is important.
          To make the policy, we must recognize that at every
level-international, national, in the plant, in state and local
policy-making-if you are not there, people who do not necessarily have
your interests at heart will determine the policies.
          Second, we must recognize the internationalized environment that we
are in.
          Third, we must assemble a decent set of national policies to deal
with our problems. We have to develop our people-a human resource
development strategy. We must have an active trade policy that will
promote our own interests. We need industrial policies. As a part of
that industrial policy, we must pay attention to our financial
institutions. We now have the financial tail wagging the economic
dog. With this, we need to have an international arena-an
international bank that is a lender of last resort, to bring
discipline, to prevent disasters like the third world debt. Our
financial systems tend to have a short-run orientation. They make it
hard for companies to develop the technology that will cause them to
be competitive. We need to change that. We need to concentrate on
research and development. Finally we need to build democratic
institutions. Our political system is too dominated by economic
interests. We need campaign finance reform so that people can't buy
elections and so the democratic processes can work better. We need to
encourage new forms of democratic organizations.
          Above all, we need to re-examine our labor laws, particularly with
respect to collective bargaining. American labor laws were designed to
make it possible for workers to organize and bargain collectively to
represent their own choosing. Today those labor laws do more to
protect the interests of employers than the interests of workers. They
have been perverted. They don't even work as well as they used to and
they never worked as well as they should. That is why we fought so
hard for labor law reform. We need to speed up the NLRB processes and
to strengthen the penalties for violation of those laws. We also need
to convince the country it's in the national interest for workers to
be able to organize and bargain collectively. In the 1960s the United
States and Canada had about the same proportion of the work force
organized, about thirty percent. Today Canada has forty percent and we
have eighteen percent. The main difference, I think, is public policy
with respect to collective bargaining.
          Finally, we should not fear the trying of new things and we ought
not to fear failure. But what we ought to fear is the judgment of
history that we understood what needed to be done and refused to even
try to do it. 
          
            Ray Marshall, who was Secretary of Labor
in the Carter Administration, teaches at the University of
Texas-Austin He is the president of the Southern Labor
Institute.
          
        