
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 9, Number 4,
	       1987
        
          The South Revisited
          By Kennedy, StetsonStetson Kennedy
          Vol. 9, No. 4, 1987, pp. 4-7
          
          "One difference between you and most of the Southerners who
pioneered in the reform movement of the Thirties and Forties is that
you are still alive," one of the editors of Southern
Changes said to me. "That is why we would like to get from
you, against the background of your experiences then, your view of
what is happening in the South today, and its prospects for the
future."
          So, across the span of the 40 years which have elapsed since my
book Southern Exposure, here goes. My intent- I suppose
I should warn at the outset-is not to harp upon "great
progress made," out rather to suggest that there is urgent
need now for someone (else) to write a Southern Exposure II, calling
for yet a Third Reconstruction.
          With a view to getting our hearings, let's start with a backward
look at the South that was.
          No matter how you looked at it, the 1930 Census was a revolutionary
document. Not only the statistics, but the bowlegs of pellagra
attested that the American South was one of the major hunger areas of
the world. And the Great Depression was making an already-horrendous
situation infinitely worse.
          The honest observer had no choice but to characterize the South as
a feudalistic, colonial, undeveloped, largely illiterate,
disease-ridden Jim Crow apartheid society ruled by a racist one-party
white oligarchy. (And so I did.)
          Anyone interested in getting a quick fix on the way it was (if not
satisfied by my Southern Exposure) need only turn to
the collection of oral histories gathered by the WPA Writers Project
and published by W. T. Couch as These Are Our Lives at
Chapel Hill, and to the mirror held up by Erskine Caldwell and
photographer Margaret Bourke-White in You Have Seen Their
Faces. Beyond that, for an in-depth focus, the literature is
copious.
          The feudalism which had replaced chattel slavery was characterized
by the commissary system, peonage, share cropping, and tenant
farming. Family "dirt farmers" were being
"tractored off the land." The specter of a mechanical
cottonpicker loomed over the horizon, threatening to make rural blacks
"surplus people." (Georgia Governor Eugene Talmadge's solution
was to plant cotton along Peachtree Street "so city folks could see
what it looked like.")
          Industry remained largely extractive, with discriminatory freight
rates conspiring to keep the South a colony of the industrial
North. The last of the South's timber fell to the "cut out
and get out" lumber barons, and naval stores (turpentine)
shifted from the Carolinas to Georgia and Florida and back again, as
slash pines were bled to death and then given time to replenish. When
in rare instances an FBI agent would venture into a camp in search of
peonage, he was jailed for trespass.
          Malaria, dengue ("breakbone fever), and
hookworm were endemic, the incidence of the latter being one hundred
percent among rural Southerners at some point in life (principally
acquired by going barefoot to the outhouse). Secretary of Labor
Frances Perkins observed that "A social revolution would take place
if shoes were put on the people of the South," to which Senator
Duncan Fletcher of Florida rejoined, "There is a considerable
colored population in the South who would regard it as a distinct
punishment to be required to wear shoes."
          In the early Thirties most of the South's roads were still made of
clay, and everybody waved whenever an automobile went by in a cloud of
dust. "Rural electrification" was still largely a
New Deal promise, and rural housing com- 

monly lacked running water and
window screens. FDR was putting it mildly when he said that one-third
of the nation was ill-fed, ill-clothed, and ill-housed. One of my
black neighbors put it even more eloquently when he described his
shanty as having "so many cracks in the walls you could see as much
of the outside from the inside as you could if you went out the
door." He went on to state that once a week the company commissary
offered "all kinds" of fresh meat-"pig feet,
pig tail, pig ears, neckbone, sowbelly, hog maw, and all such as
that."
          Black children who were in school at all were typically to be
found-all ages-in one-room structures, presided over if they were
lucky by a teacher paid by the Rosenwald Foundation.
          The Jim Crow system of compulsory racial segregation-our American
prototype of apartheid-was all-pervasive, unchallenged by any but a
few random black martyrs. The Klan said that Jim Crow was here to
stay, and just about everyone, no matter how they might feel, was
obliged to agree that it looked that way. Through the centuries, the
institution had taken on the aura of the sacrosanct, and those of us
who were so inclined, and took to heart Sandburg's admonition to level
"old walls and crumbling foundations," were hard put to find
any fissures.
          In housing, transportation, accommodations, recreation, education,
religion, employment, government, and the armed services, segregation
was de rigeur. Not just the South but the
USA was no less an integrally racist society than is the U of SA
today. And if anyone thinks Botha is being intransigent, he should
have been around (in 1935) when Oklahoma Gov. "Alfalfa
Bill" Murray swore to circumvent a Supreme Court ruling
against racial zoning by invoking martial law in perpetuity if need
be.
          I mean, those were the days when the Florida Times
Union reported, "Marion* sang well last night," and ran
classifieds reading:
          Neat colored girl wanted for maid. No Yankee talker need
apply.
          Just what this sort of thing meant to the black domestic was fully
explained by one, who told interviewers from Fisk, "I feeds white
folks with a long spoon." With my own eyes I saw blacks refrain
from getting in line to buy a postage stamp, until all white folks had
gotten theirs. Myrdal notwithstanding, a black old-timer said it all:
"When you in Rome, Georgia, you got to act like it."
          As for the halls of government throughout the South, they were
"lily-white." White rule-even in the 191 counties
where (counted) blacks were in the majority-was made easy by a
combination of state - and vigilante-terrorism, and such institutions
as the white Democratic primary and a poll tax as a prerequisite for
voting. With the electorate in these "free
elections" thus reduced to a minimum, the same old rabid
racists were resumed to Congress time after time. What with the
committee chairmanships they garnered by virtue of seniority, the
"South" was firmly in the saddle.
          Up against a system so entrenched and seemingly formidable, we of
Uncle Sam's Loyal Opposition could not help but feel like Li'l David
sallying forth to meet Goliath. There was never any shortage of
individual blacks, of both sexes, to defy the system at the risk of
life or limb. They paid the price, but results were not immediately
apparent. As for whites, one could become an instant agitator merely
by shaking hands with a black. Breach of the interracial etiquette was
quite enough to get one driven into internal exile.
          In my own case, I was still in attendance at Robert E. Lee High
School when my classmates began to ask each other, "What got into
Stet?" They were simply at a loss to understand why I did not want
to take part in their favorite sport, sideswiping black
grocery-delivery boys on their loaded bikes.
          Not many years later, one of my sisters remarked at table, "I do
believe you would rather be with n-s than with us," whereupon I
rose and said, "As a matter of fact, I would." It was on those
terms that my family and I parted company, and the separation has
continued by mutual consent through all the decades since, with no
other communication than an occasional poison-pen letter addressed to
"Mr. BLACKsheep."
          Such cases are not uncommon in Southern history. They had their
prototypes during Reconstruction, when the press exhorted "Southern
womanhood" not to "bestow any favors" upon any man,
Southern or Northern, who allied himself politically with blacks. A
more recent example was that of Federal Judge J. Waites Waring of
South Carolina, who in 1947 handed down a major decision against the
white primary. He was obliged to take his family out of the South, at
least for a time.
          All thought of somehow changing the system was up against the fact
that there was no organizational channel through which to do it. A few
people, taking a fundamentalist view of Marxist texts, tried to sell
the notion that the only hope for black liberation was through
proletarian revolution. But blacks refused to listen, much less
buy.
          The only mass black organization around was the church, but it was
no longer the church-militant of Reconstruction, when the AME had led
its flock out onto the railroad tracks in a forlorn effort to halt the
first Jim Crow coaches.
          Although Thurgood Marshall, as chief counsel of the NAACP, was
waging his perennial fight in the Supreme Court against that
cornerstone of American apartheid, the spurious
"separate-but-equal" doctrine, leadership of the
Southern NAACP branches was largely in the hands of
"hanky-head" churchmen-with some notable
exceptions, such as the Evers brothers in Mississippi, and Robert
Saunders and Harry Moore in Florida. As for the Urban 

League, it was
locked into its traditional preoccupation with the problems of the
rural blacks who were flocking to the cities.
          And as for the widespread economic and social problems besetting
white and black Southerners alike, the worldwide Depression had
stirred critical faculties to a degree seldom equaled before or
since. There was general apprehension that such crises would prove to
be cyclical, and therefore the system itself must be at fault, and in
need of integral revision. Under the heading "Never again!" it
was not only legitimate but fashionable to probe for roots of the
problem.
          My father, an agrarian turned merchant, avowed that all of man's
problems began when he began to take his food from a paper bag instead
of the good earth. "Back to the land" subsistence
farming movements proliferated, but to little avail. Town or country,
those were "root-hog-or-die" days.
          The New Deal came by way of response. By surrounding himself with
guys and gals of goodwill (as contradistinguished from gimlet-eyed
corporation lawyers), FDR came up with a broad array of redemptive
measures: Social Security, unemployment compensation, a twenty-five
cent minimum wage, the right to organize and bargain, WPA and CCC jobs
on public works, farm loans, public housing, and regional development
projects like TVA and Grand Coulee. Except for subsidies of their own
operations, the "economic royalists" denounced
the entire package as "inspired by Moscow."
          Roosevelt also appointed a Commission of prominent Southerners, who
in 1938 produced a Report on the Economic Condition of the
South, labeling the region "the Nation's economic problem
no. 1." This document was destined to prove even more of a
turning-point in Southern history than the compromise peace sealed by
Booker T. Washington or the New South speech of Henry Woodfin
Grady.
          Indeed, the Report was to become the Magna Carta of
all of us who were interested in regional reform, and it was pursuant
to it that the Southern Conference for Human Welfare (SCHW) was
launched later that year. Compelled by police to segregate at its
first meeting in Birmingham, the SCHW pledged never again to meet
where it would be required to segregate, and it did not.
          We inveighed, resolved, educated, exposed, petitioned, and
protested with all our might, but it was mostly indoor activity, and a
far cry from the sit-ins, freedom marches and confrontations that were
yet to come. Even so, it was the victories won then, the exercise of
the rights to organize and vote, and the campaigns to curb lynching
and Klan terror, which paved the way for the Big Push of subsequent
decades.
          It was in the mid-Thirties that the CIO announced it was coming
South "to organize the unorganized, white and black in the same
union." To this the KKK responded, "We shall fight horror with
horror": What the Klan had in mind was exemplified shortly
afterward, when five men picked up CIO organizer Frank Norman at his
home in Lakeland, Fla., and drove off with him-forever.
          It so happened that while the Klan et
al. were going about the business of perpetuating apartheid
and white rule in America, a man named Hitler set out to impose
"Master Race" dominion over Europe.
          The coming of WW II was seized upon by employers all across the
country as an opportunity to tell workers that it was their patriotic
duty not to strike, and for white supremacists to tell blacks it was
their patriotic duty not to protest. Happily, blacks refused to listen
to such nonsense. My fellow Floridian, A. Philip Randolph, put it
neatly on the 

letterhead of his March on Washington Movement:
"Winning Democracy for the Negro is Winning the War for
Democracy."
          As wars sometimes will, WW II gave rise to speculation as to what
it was we were fighting for. At the outset, the Army put out a
four-page indoctrination pamphlet on "Fascism,"
but it was speedily withdrawn, and no one in official U.S. circles has
used the word since. FDR eventually came up with his "Four
Freedoms" (who can name them now?), and the CIO waxed eloquent
about "jobs for all" and a voice in management. From Britain
came the Beveridge Report, with its vision of the "Garden Cities of
Tomorrow." Seemingly out of nowhere came the war song:
          There'll be bluebirds over the white cliffs of Dover Tomorrow
when the world is free...
          In short, all over the world, everybody who was anybody (or thought
they were) was inspired to expound upon "The World We Fight
For." I saved every bit that came to hand, and, a scant 20 years
later, sent a file drawer full to the New York Public Library. From
Acquisitions came the tart reply: "In future kindly query us before
sending such stuff, as we have no room for it." Sic semper casus belli.
          After the manner of Lincoln, who sugar-coated the Emancipation
Proclamation by billing it as a war measure to weaken the Confederacy,
Roosevelt promulgated by executive order a Fair Employment Practices
Commission (FEPC), billing it as a win-the-war necessity for employers
to make the most of manpower reserves. The foot leading to black
liberation was in the door. The Klan's contribution to the war effort
was to try to slam the door shut by running want-ads "Are You on
the Job? The KKK Is Watching You!"-the intent being to keep blacks
picking crops at pennies-per-pound instead of seeking more lucrative
defense jobs. FDR in effect countered by having the IRS tack a
$670,000 jeopardy tax lien on the KKK's Imperial Palace in Atlanta,
effectively shuttling it down for the duration, the Wizard simply
boarding it up and retiring to Miami.
          It had been a very long time indeed since blacks had issued any
ultimatums, but in the Durham Statement, adopted in 1942, they served
notice that Jim Crow would have to go. By way of response, the
Southern Regional Council was formed later that year, absorbing the
old Commission on Interracial Cooperation. At birth, the SRC was
engulfed in controversy as to whether it should stand four-square with
the Durham Statement against segregation per se, or-as a
matter of conviction or strategy-delimit its programme to seeking
amelioration of discrimination. The fear was that if
"Mr. Charlie" were told up front that the end
goal was desegregation, he would stonewall every attempt at
movement.
          The magazine Common Ground, edited by Margaret
Anderson, became a focal point for airing the controversy. Lillian
Smith got in the first words:
"Not much is going to be done to bring about racial democracy by
this group until its leaders accept and acknowledge publicly the basic
truth that segregation is injuring us on every level of our life and
is so intolerable to the human spirit that we, all of us, black and
white, must bend every effort to rid our minds, hearts, and culture of
it."
          In a subsequent issue, SRC director Guy Johnnson was given the
opportunity to respond:
          "Our goal is democracy and equality of opportunity. We are
striving to improve the social, civic, and economic life of our region
in spite of a deep-seated and undemocratic pattern of
segregation...Personally, I should rather capture the foothills...than
merely to point out the distant peak..."
          Then, "to kick the controversy another step forward,"
Anderson published a chapter, "Total Equality, and How to Get
it," from my forthcoming Southern Exposure. The
strategy I proposed was for blacks to arm themselves with ballots in
one hand and union cards in the other, and then, arm-in-arm in
solidarity with their white union brothers, launch an all-out frontal
assault upon all barriers.
          Sad to say, wartime America was not all that keen on white/black
solidarity. Although some GI Joe was being quoted as saying, "up
front, you're damned glad to see somebody in the right color uniform,
regardless of what color his skin is," on the home-front what were
virtually anti-black pogroms took place in Texas, Detroit, and
elsewhere.
          There was talk in some circles, not only of war against the Reds
when the war against the Axis was over, but war against blacks as
well. When in 1944 the Supreme Court dealt a death-blow to the white
primary, a portent of the struggles to come could be heard in the
typical reaction of South Carolina state senator John D. Long:
"As for the Negro voting in my primary, we'll fight him at the
precinct meeting, we'll fight him at the county convention, we'll
fight him at the enrollment books, and, by God, we'll fight him at the
polls if I have to bite the dust as did my ancestors!" 
          
            Stetson Kennedy wrote extensively for the labor and black
press, was Southeastern editorial director of CIO-PAC, and is the
author of Southern Exposure, Palmetto
Country, and I Rode With the Klan. He lives
near Jacksonville, Fla.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth: Wishing Justice for Bork
          By Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut. Jr.
          Vol. 9, No. 4, 1987, pp. 15-16
          
          WASHINGTON-This unstable, political, kooky town is in an absolute
frenzy, even if measured by its own unreal standards. My favorite
Washington cab driver and political philosopher, Jack Curtis, who also
happens to be black, was so busy denouncing "Tint? White Washington
Establishment" he drove off with my luggage and left me standing on
the airport curb. He had to turn around and come back.
          Consistent with Jack's extremely low opinion of lawyers, he angrily
assumed my two recent visits are somehow connected with helping
extricate "that black skunk" (the black mayor of Washington) from his
legal problems. I don't represent the mayor and barely know the
man.
          But, Jack's immediate concern is the nomination of the man he
viciously described as "Watergate Bork and his fascist sponsors." I
share Jack's apprehensions not quite his intemperate language.
          Bork, as a private individual, is as far right and racist as his
chief sponsors-President Reagan, Edwin Meese and Brad Reynolds.
          In a 1963 article in his favorite magazine, New
Republic, Bork was outrageously wrong about the proposed
public accommodations bill that would require hotels, restaurants and
other publicly accessible establishments to serve blacks.
          Such a law, Bork wrote, would cause "a loss in a vital area of
personal liberty" because it would interfere with the freedom of
individuals "to deal and associate with whom they pleased for
whatever reasons appeal to them." Apparently, Bork would deny that
same freedom to black and white Americans who sought to associate
together in these establishments.
          In a 1968 article entitled "Why I Am For Nixon," in his favorite
magazine, Bork wrote that Nixon represented "classical
liberalism" and the Democratic Party was "an encroachment"
on that liberalism. The man has a unique facility for prostituting
words and truth.
          In 1971, Bork wrote in the Indiana Law Journal:
"constitutional protection should be accorded only to speech that
is explicitly political. There is no basis for judicial intervention
to protect any form of expression, be it scientific, literary or that
variety of expression we call obscene or pornographic."
          Such foolishness makes a mockery of the Constitution in general and
the First Amendment in particular.
          As expected, in a confirmation hearing as a District of Columbia
appellate judge, Bork backtracked and explained his 1971 article was
an "academic exercise...theoretical argument" written as a Yale
law professor.
          "As a judge," he added, "what is relevant is what the
Supreme Court has said, and not my theoretical writings in. 1971."
In a narrow sense, he was somewhat truthful in that assertion and I
will look at a few of his rulings as a judge.
          But first, a word or two on Bork. Nixon and Watergate.
          In 1973, as U.S. Solicitor General, Bork bowed to Nixon and the ill
fated criminal conspiracy commonly known as Watergate by firing
Special Prosecutor Archibald Cox after Attorney General Elliott
Richardson and his deputy, William D. Ruckelshaus, refused to do
so.
          Nine years later, Bork claimed he knew the Watergate investigation
would continue without Cox. Bork also said Cox would have been fired
in any event. That self-serving speculation diminishes in no way the
fact that Bork fired Cox to please a criminally conspiring Nixon and
to further Bork's professional career.
          Bork, however, deserves some credit, as Richardson said recently,
for standing up to Nixon and telling him to appoint another special
prosecutor-Leon Jaworski. We will never know what Bork actually told
Nixon but you can be sure it was less than the whole truth.
          On the other hand, Bork, as a District of Columbia appellate judge,
has on occasion submerged his far right opinions, followed legal
precedent and written with passion on subjects in a manner which
surprised the left and startled the right. However, it must be also
noted he was 

writing with the Supreme Court looking over his
shoulder. That is different than sitting on that Court and writing
precedents. Especially for one who would embrace Watergate to further
his career.
          On the District of Columbia appellate court, Bork ruled against
conservative students who wanted to picket outside the embassies of
Nicaragua and the Soviet Union. He decided in favor of an artist who
sought to put a poster mocking Reagan in the Washington subways.
          In backing the right of a free press, he went further than his
liberal colleagues. Libel suits that would stifle vigorous journalism,
he suggested, should be dismissed almost summarily. That is a world
apart from what he wrote in the New Republic as a law
professor.
          In dismissing a lawsuit filed by a homosexual kicked out of the
Navy for that reason, Bork curiously reasoned that the implied
constitutional right to privacy does not cover homosexuality but
somehow "is broad enough to encompass a woman's decision whether or
not to terminate her-pregnancy." What hokum!
          Incidentally, the Supreme Court last year adopted that same hokum
in dismissing a challenge to a Georgia anti-sodomy law.
          I do not wish Bork well in his bid to become an Associate Justice
of the Supreme Court.
          I wish him hell.
          How about that, Mr. Jack Curtis?
          Peace. 
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer
and writer.
          
        
        
          The Making of A Judge
          By Callahan, NancyNancy Callahan
          Vol. 9, No. 4, 1987, pp. 9-13, 16
          
          In 1816, North Carolina planter Joseph Gee bought a massive tract
of land in a bend in the Alabama River, in Wilcox County. On his death
in 1824, his plantation-Gee's Bend-fell to his nephews, Sterling and
Charles Gee. Charles managed the behemoth holdings; Sterling returned
to North Carolina to run another family inheritance. And it is thought
by some that in the ensuing years they used Gee's Bend to run a
slave-trading network between Alabama and North Carolina.
          By 1845, the two were in debt to their nephew, Mark H. Pettway, for
$29,000. Pettway's payoff was Gee's Bend, thousands of acres of dark,
fertile soil, an agricultural dream illustrating why that region of
Alabama came to be called the "Black Belt."
          Pettway and his family rode to Alabama in a caravan in
1846. Traveling with them were more than one hundred slaves who,
except for a cook, walked every step of the way. The episode set in
motion one of the most powerful black histories in all the South.
          Mark Pettway changed the names of all his slaves to "Pettway."
After Emancipation, they became tenants or 

sharecroppers--on that same,
white-owned Pettway land. In 1895, ownership of Mark Pettway's
original four thousand acres left the family, but his name remained
with his former slaves and their children, who continued to work the
soil . In 1900, the VandeGraaff family of Tuscaloosa bought the
Pettway land plus three thousand adjacent acres. Still, the black
Pettways stayed.
          Leaving would have been hard, if not impossible. As the crow flies,
Gees Bend is only seven miles from Camden the county seat. But a ferry
across the Alabama River was unreliable, and by land the trip was
forty miles each way. Staying where they were, in a totally black
culture save for  the few white landowners and their families, was the
practical thing for the Pettways to do. Practical, but isolated.
          The Great Depression had a shattering impact on the black farmers
of Gee's Bend. Cotton prices were too low to sell, and when a Camden
merchant who had given credit died, his widow liquidated sixty Gee's
Bend families, her agents collected everything from hogs and chickens
to still standing sugar cane. With a diet of plums and nuts during the
winter of 1932-33, Gee's Bend residents would have starved had it not
been for staples shipped in by the Red Cross.
          In 1935, isolated, poverty-stricken, all-black Gee's Bend became a
focal point of Franklin D. Roosevelt's Resettlement Administration,
which became the Farm Security Administration (FSA). In came the
federal government with its blueprints and money to fashion an ideal
community, the archetype for future projects nationwide.
          In 1937, the VandeGraaffs sold Gee's Bend to Farm Security's state
branch, the Alabama Rural Rehabilitation Corporation. With the bend in
government ownership, Roosevelt's people put together a cooperative,
Gee's Bend Farms, Inc. The result was a hundred new farms of sixty to
one hundred acres, each with a new house, barn and modern
trimmings--such as pressure cookers. It was a life like that outside
the bend. Co-op members acquired the homesteads through low interest
government loans, and rented crop land from the government and farmed
it cooperatively.
          From the government drawing boards also came a school, health
clinic, canning center and blacksmith shop; fresh-faced experts
appeared with knowledge about medicine, home economy and
agriculture.
          However, in 1945, Congress ended the FSA, which in turn had to get
rid of the Gee's Bend government-owned farms. The land passed to a new
agency, Farmers Home Administration (FmHA), which by 1947 enabled
Franklin Roosevelt's friends, the Pettways, to buy that government
land-the land their ancestors had begun to work after walking from
North Carolina a hundred years earlier.
          The government still wasn't through. In 1949, a post office was
erected, and by mandate the community's name was changed to "Boykin"
as tribute to its congressman, Frank Boykin of Mobile, whom none of
the Gee's Benders had ever seen. In 1962, Congress authorized a lock
and dam at nearby Miller's Ferry, and in 1968, when that expensive
facility opened, a third of "Boykin" was turned into a lake. Then in
1974, federal courts closed the high school in this all-black
enclave-because the school was segregated. Thus, Gee's Bend students
began daily one-hundred mile bus rides to another school which, due to
white flight, was by then also all-black.
          Despite its isolation, Gee's Bend citizens participated in the
civil rights movement. Even Martin Luther King came one rainy day to
preach at a local church. Through his urgings, people joined the civil
rights movement centered in Selma, and were on hand for the
lesser-publicized protests in Camden. They marched, went to jail, and
finally registered to vote.
          Perhaps the most momentous political event came in the summer of
1984, when one of their own was sworn in as district judge of Wilcox
County. Jo Celeste Pettway, an honors law graduate of the University
of Alabama, was appointed by then-Gov. George C. Wallace, who
twenty-one summers earlier had attempted to block a black from
enrolling at his alma mater.
          Judge Pettway, now thirty-five years old, is the first black woman
judge ever in Alabama. To those of her name, she is history's way of
correcting itself. She is the final granddaughter who has given
meaning to those hundred slaves who in 1846 would never have even
dreamed of her possibilities. She is the ultimate Pettway.
          Dressed in a solid, bold-pink dress behind her office desk at the
courthouse annex in Camden, Judge Pettway is sensitive to her family
heritage.
          What does it mean to be a Pettway?, she is asked.
          "It means being a member of perhaps the best family in the
world," she replies, "because there is a great history in that
name that goes with this region of the country. When 

I go places and
people ask me, 'Where are you from?,' I say, 'My folks are
from Gee's Bend, a small town in Alabama.' Then they say, 'I
know a Pettway from such-end-such,' and I always say, 'If
they're a Pettway, they had to come from Gee's Bend because it's where
all the Pettways come from.'
          "When you go to that place and you see it, you say,'Well,
it's not the best place in the world because they don't have a lot of
facilities and luxuries, but it's where my father was taught by
his grandmother who raised him that you're supposed to work and strive
and earn a living and do good. It's something that community instilled
in its children and they in theirs. I wasn't raised in Gee's Bend but
having a father and a great-grandmother who were, those traits are
instilled in me and hopefully will be passed down to the children I
have."
          Pettway also links herself with a heritage beyond Gee's Bend or
mid-19th century North Carolina-to the "Middle Passage," when slaves
were brought to the United States from Africa.
          "You always hear about how many who voyaged across the Atlantic
Ocean did not survive, and you always think that those who actually
survived the Middle Passage and landed on this continent had to have
been the strongest and the best.
          "That would mean those hundred who came from North Carolina
would have to have been stronger and better. So we're talking about a
good stock of people; they survived the Middle Passage. Whether they
were actually the ones who came from Africa or descendants of those
who Came, that strength and that blood enabled them to
survive."
          Still other survival stories note the strength of Judge Pettway's
ancestry. She says her maternal great-great-grandmother, also a slave
from North Carolina, was the mother of six children. When she was sold
to Alabama bringing all her children with her was not part of the
deal. Four had to stay behind. And of the two who accompanied their
mother on the journey to Mobile, one died.
          "Just one survived, but that one child had 16 children who, in
turn, had so many more."
          Likewise, Judge Pettway's great-grandmother had 10 children. She
and her husband divorced. She was a sharecropper and raised the
children by herself.
          "And she was a successful woman. So on both sides of the family
there are horrible stories where people blossomed and multiplied out
of adverse circumstances. Just knowing that you come from people who
are strong and did well compared to circumstances makes you feel good
about yourself and makes you believe you can do things when other
people think you can't."
          Judge Pettway's parents are Joseph and Menda Gamble Pettway, who
have long lived in the community of Alberta, 24 miles north of
Camden. Her mother had wanted to be a nurse, but in her day, there
were no Alabama nursing schools for blacks, so she graduated from
Alabama State Teachers College in Montgomery, with tuition paid by her
mother's egg and chicken money, and became a teacher. On the birth of
her daughter, she left the classroom and ran the family store,
Pettway's Place. Joseph Pettway started as a laborer in 1940 with
Southern Railway and had worked his way up to foreman when he retired
in 1968.
          Celeste herself attended Alberta Elementary School, then Catholic
schools in Selma and Birmingham, and finally Alabama Lutheran Academy
in Selma, where she graduated. Much of her growing up took place on
weekdays in the homes of various Selma relatives, followed by weekends
with her parents, then return trips to school in Selma on Monday
mornings.
          When Judge Pettway was a child in the late Fifties and early
Sixties, the Dallas/Wilcox region, as it had for a century, had a
black-majority population but white-dominated politics.
          "I don't know as a child that you thought so much about things
like that. The schools I attended were black schools, but they were
never talked about as being inferior. The attitude always was: We are
not getting the money that we need, but we're doing well with what we
have; and I always thought that if we had gotten a very proportionate
amount of money, our schools would probably have been excellent
because I started off in a one-room school with a partition that
separated the one room into two rooms. There were eight grades in
those two rooms. One teacher taught four grades and did a wonderful
job, I think."
          The word "discrimination" was not in her childhood vocabulary,
largely because her parents never taught it to her.
          "My parents never said, 'You can't go to this place.' We
would go shopping in Selma. The water fountains said 'white' and
'colored.' As a child you don't know there's a difference, and a lot
of times I would head over to the fountain marked 'white.' Mother
would let me drink out of it. She would say, 'She's a child; she
doesn't know.' And my folks never said, 'You're different,'
or 'You're inferior.'"

          The first time she remembers being hit in the face with segregation
was in 1962 on a thirty-mile Greyhound bus trip by herself from Selma
to Alberta.
          "When I got on, there was one seat open and it was a front
seat. I sat there and when the bus driver came on, he made me get up
and move to the back. I had to stand up for 30 miles. All the way home
I looked at the faces of the people on the bus and wondered why he
made me get up, why those people allowed him to do that, why wouldn't
they stand up and say, 'Let this child sit down.'"
          As Celeste grew older, she asked questions.
          "My folks would say, 'This is what the law says. That doesn't
mean it's right, but you abide by the law.' I felt the law was
wrong because my folks said it was wrong and I knew my folks wouldn't
lie to me. It was a feeling that somebody for probably selfish
economic reasons made those laws to discriminate against us. We had to
endure them but it didn't mean we were inferior. It just meant we
would probably have to work harder and do better.
          "What kept us going was our faith that God wouldn't let us stay
like that always. You know, people deserve to be free and
deserve an opportunity to do as much as they can. All our parents knew
that sooner or later, things were going to change."
          Prior to Martin Luther King's campaign to achieve voting rights for
blacks, Menda Pettway had become a registered voter in Dallas County,
but Joseph Pettway had been denied that right. So they joined
Dr. King's movement. It became common practice for Celeste's father to
go to Selma on days when the voter registration office was open and
take the test. She said he had been determined to achieve his right to
vote since the 1952 presidential election, because at noon on that
election day, the whites with whom he had been working left to vote,
while the blacks had to stay behind.
          "Daddy said it just incensed him that he was an American, living
and working here, but could not participate as a first-class
citizen."
          Consequently, every time the voter office was open, Joseph Pettway
would be there to take the test. His daughter estimates that he was
refused registration at least 75 times, the letters always saying he
had flunked the literacy exam, when, in fact, he could read. And for
his efforts, his grocery store was boycotted one summer by white
wholesalers.
          When the Selma campaign peaked in 1965, Celeste, age 13, was a
student at St. Elizabeth's in Selma. The family plan was for her
mother and brother, eight years her junior, to be in the marches, for
her father to march when he did not have to work, and for Celeste to
stay in school and attend only the night-time rallies.
          "My folks said,'We'll do the marching. You go to
school.'"
          At Brown's Chapel and First Baptist Church, she saw and heard the
stars of civil rights: Dr. C. T. Vivian, Rev. Fred Shuttlesworth,
Rev. Hosea Williams-and Dr. King.
          "There's nothing to compare with hearing those great orators and
then seeing Dr. King enter the church. The crowd became as one. It was
as though this was the anointed one who was going to lead us from
slavery to freedom, like with Moses. But Moses probably did not
command the respect, attention and obedience that Dr. King did,
because the children of Israel constantly battled against Moses and
disobeyed. With Dr. King, everybody knew, 'Now this is the man
who's gonna do it.' His presence was something I have never
experienced before or since."
          Judge Pettway says from the time she was six years old she knew she
wanted to be a lawyer even if she didn't know exactly what it
meant. Her early role models were Orzelle Billingsley and Peter Hall,
black Birmingham attorneys who handled civil rights cases in the
1950s, and Constance Motley, the first black woman appointed to the
federal bench in New York. Billingsley and Hall would associate with
local white lawyers and try cases in courtrooms filled with blacks,
including the Pettways, who learned, if nothing else, that it was
possible for a black person to become an attorney
          "Sometimes my folks would go sit in courtrooms and listen to
them. They would come back home and talk about how they sounded and
how the crowds reacted to them. To my folks, the law was seen as the
way things were going to change. It was going to be the instrument by
which things were going to change. And it was seen as a way of helping
people to make things happen. So I always wanted to be a lawyer,
always, my entire life. And it didn't change. I got
side-tracked but it never changed."
          Her first side-track was Auburn University, where she enrolled as a
freshman in 1969. Of fifteen thousand students, Celeste was one of ten
black women and about fifty-five black males.
          "I had some bad experiences at Auburn," she relates with
great sadness. "I had a professor in my major, political science,
who said, 'I use nigger, negro and black interchangeably. Whichever
word I choose on this particular day, it all means the same
thing.' I had to sit in that class with that man saying nigger and
negra for a quarter. I talked to the chairman of the department and
said, 'I can't sit in here with this man saying that. It doesn't
make any sense. Why is he still using these words this day and
time?' He said, 'Well, he's tenured. There's nothing I can do
about it.' I had a girlfriend who graduated from Auburn in
1979. She said he was still doing the same thing then.
          "And I remember sitting through a history class and the
instructor trying to tell me that my ancestors enjoyed slavery, it was
a wonderful state and purely economical. Nobody was ever branded. No
one was ever beaten. Children were never taken away from their
parents. It has always been in somebody's imagination. Having to sit
through that crap for a quarter leaves a bit to be desired, but I got
through it. I wouldn't go through it again, I don't think. It was a
balancing act. There were good people and bad people, but you live and
learn, you grow and go on."
          The future judge received her B.A. from Auburn in 1973, and, unable
to find a job with her political science major, 

went back to Auburn
for a teacher's certificate. When she still could not obtain
employment she enrolled at the University of Alabama, where she earned
a bachelor's degree in social work, then joined the staff of the
Children's Aid Society, in Birmingham, an adoption agency; she later
worked for the Alabama Department of Pensions and Security.
          By 1977, she was back in school working toward a master's degree in
social work from the University of Alabama. She got her diploma in
1978, and spent 1978-79 teaching social work at Miles College in
Birmingham. Finally, in 1979, she entered law school at the University
of Alabama, where she received her degree in 1982.
          Of some 550 law students during Pettway's three-year stay, possibly
thirty-five were black. But her experiences as a black were totally
different from the ones she encountered at Auburn. She does not recall
even the first racial incident during her study of law.
          ~What helped in law school was anonymous grading. Each semester
we were assigned a different number. When we took our exams at the end
of the semester, the only thing on there was our number. Supposedly,
no one knew who's paper they were grading. I had heard some professors
there did not like women or blacks. I think that is the reason they
started using that system."
          In 1982, Celeste Pettway, 30, entered law practice with the black
Tuscaloosa firm of John England and John Bivens. Two years later she
set up a solo practice in the same city, not making much money but
doing lots of juvenile case work, traditionally thrown by judges there
to the lawyers with fresh careers.
          But events were transpiring in Wilcox County that would change her
life and Alabama history.
          Circuit Judge Edgar P. Russell Jr., who had presided over the five
county judicial circuit that includes Wilcox County, announced his
impending retirement. A few months later, Gov. Wallace elevated Wilcox
County District Judge Anne Farrell McKelvey to the circuit judgeship
and named Jo Celeste Pettway to fill the district judgeship vacated by
McKelvey.
          Pettway did not campaign for the job, but many others did on her
behalf, including a Wilcox delegation that met with the governor's
office and argued that the time was ripe for such an
appointment. Supporting that mission was the Rev. Thomas Threadgill, a
black Presbyterian minister from Camden, who had brought Dr. King into
Wilcox to lead voter registration after the Selma-to-Montgomery
March.
          "We let it be known to the governor that we wanted her
appointed," says Threadgill. "In fact, I just insisted through
Hollis Curl (publisher of the weekly Wilcox
Progressive Era) and everybody I thought who had any pull in
any way. I just insisted that she was the person for this
position.
          "I had heard of her ability and of the decency of the
person. Her parents are very strong, sound people, always making
contributions to the church and the community. That was one of the
reasons I just knew even before I knew her well that she would be the
person."
          On August 9,1984, Jo Celeste Pettway, who remembers standing for a
thirty-mile bus ride because her skin is black, was sworn into
office. Holding the Bible for the ceremony was her father, Joseph
Pettway, who in 1952 had watched his white co-workers leave work to
vote for president while black workers stayed on the job.
          The courtroom where she now presides was packed with people of both
races. Giving the invocation was Rev. Dennis Nolen, a white
Presbyterian minister in Camden. "That was unusual," says
Threadgill. "The white ministers here get so much pressure from their
congregations and their peers, they can't do a lot of things they want
to do."
          In 1986, Judge Pettway ran for election to a full term; she had no
opposition, but campaigned anyway.
          "Some people said they might run," she said of her lack of
opposition, "and I just told 'em if they wanted a good kicking to
come on, 'cause I was in the kicking business. It didn't matter with
me who came out 'cause I enjoyed what I was doing and I was gonna try
to keep doing it."
          Although black lawyers practice in Wilcox County, the handful of
those who live and work in Camden are white. One is Donald M. McLeod,
the assistant district attorney, who grew up in the town. He is before
Judge Pettway's bench at least weekly and often daily.
          "She has a good legal mind," he says, "and she's prepared
when she sits on the bench. In a number of cases that I've handled
before her, she's been appointed as an acting circuit judge. At that
level the cases are more difficult, but I've found that she's done her
homework before she gets there. In one case in particular, I could
tell she had researched the law because she had the same cases and
citations that I did. A lot of judges don't do that. I guess I deal
with her more than any lawyer here and I've never considered race to
be a factor. It's a non-issue."
          Nor has Judge Pettway seen any racial problems stemming from her
being black in this county of seventeen thousand (83 percent
black).
          "I think there's a respect for the judicial system," she
offers. "I had a white attorney say something to the effect, 'I
don't particularly respect YOU . but I respect the position ' And
I don't have any problems with that. I'm not here for people to like
me or love me. I'm here to do a job, and as long as I think I'm doing
a good job, I want to stay. As long as they follow the rules of the
court, they can hate me; I don't care."
          "I realize," says she, "that being the first black woman
district judge in Alabama is historically significant, but my attitude
is that it could have been anybody. I know a lot of black women
lawyers who could have been the first and they 

would have done a good
job. I really feel blessed that I'm a district judge.
          "Sometimes people look at me skeptically when I say this but I
think it's all part of God's plan for what I'm supposed to be doing. I
feel like I have a real purpose and a special opportunity to help
children. I've been a social worker. I've always loved children, and
being a district judge, I get to work with juvenile court and try to
help change lives while they're young."
          Part of her motivation, too, is in being a member of her family.
          "My parents always told us about the sacrifices made by
grandparents and great-grandparents to give us a strong idea of where
we've come from and a hope for where we could go. My maternal
grandmother never let her children go hungry because she would work
the entire summer to get 'em through the winter: canning plums,
putting up muscadines and pears. And she would make quilts from old
clothes. When those quilts wore out she would use them to start making
other quilts, so everything was recycled. And inside their home they
would look up at night and see the stars, look down and see the
animals through the cracks in the floor. Lots of times they had
nothing to show for it because my maternal grandfather was a
sharecropper who never owned property. They moved from one place to
another. But my grandmother always wanted the children to have an
education. She would sell things to get a little money to help.
          "And when Mother went on to college, she said she had two pairs of
socks. She knew she had to wear one and wash the other so she would
always have a clean pair. And she had one dime a day to spend for
lunch.
          "Knowing that gives you a sense of purpose. To me, it says you
can't let your ancestors down. When I think about my maternal
grandmother and my paternal great-grandmother, the kind of women they
were, the kind of man my Daddy is and the kind of woman my Mother is,
you don't let people like that down. You don't get to a point and
say,'I can't do it.' You look back at them and you say,
'Whatever I want to do, I can do it, because look what they
did.' And you just go on, and it's good. Yeah, it's good." 
          
            Nancy Callahan is a freelance writer from
Montgomery. Her book, The Freedom Quilting Bee, will be
published this fall by the University of Alabama Press.
          
        
        
          The Poverty of Reaganomics
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 9, No. 4, 1987, pp. 1-2
          
          In its twilight years the Reagan Administration is returning to its
extravagant rhetoric about having created the "opportunity society."
According to Administration officials--proud of low inflation and a
proposed treaty with the Russians--President Reagan will leave office
with the world safer and the American people richer than ever
before.
          Braggadocio, of course, is nothing new among politicians of both
parties nowadays, but these claims go beyond
self-congratulations. They are reckless and alarming misstatements
that invite the American people to ignore dangerous trends within this
country. They call cruel realities "opportunities" and enlarged
poverty "riches."
          A recent report from the Children's Defense Fund in Washington
amply illustrates the unreality of these claims. Its report on the
declining status of young men tells vividly that no societal group in
this country is assured of a future that is safe or enriched. The key
findings are summarized below:
          
            Young Men's Earnings
          
           Between 1973 and 1984, the average real annual earnings among
males ages twenty through twenty-four fell by nearly thirty percent
(from $11,572 to $8,072 in 1984 dollars). This sharp drop affected
virtually all groups of young adult males, athough young
black men suffered the most severe losses (nearly fifty percent).
          Nearly sixty percent of all males ages twenty to twenty-four were
able to earn enough to lift a family of three out of poverty in
1973. During the 1980s, however, the ability of young men to support a
family plummeted, leaving only forty-two percent with earnings above
the three-person federal poverty line by 1984.
          
            Earnings, Education and Basic Skills
          
           Young men between the ages of twenty and twenty-four who had
not completed high school suffered the largest percentage drop in
their real annual earnings during the 1973-1984 period--forty-two
percent.
           The percentage of all male dropouts ages twenty 

through
twenty-four with earnings above the three-person poverty line dropped
by nearly half, from fifty-nine percent in 1973 to thirty-two percent
in 1984. Only four in ten white male dropouts, fewer than three in ten
Hispanic dropouts, and a shockingly low one in nine black dropouts
earned enough in 1984 to support a family of three.
           The level of basic academic skills makes a difference even
among young adults with the same amount of schooling. High school
dropouts with strong basic skills have average earnings more than
twice as great as dropouts with weak basic skills. Similarly, high
school graduates with basic skills ranking in the top fifth among
their peers have earnings nearly double those of graduates falling in
the lowest fifth.
           In 1973 young male college graduates earned twenty-five
percent more than dropouts; by 1984 their average earnings were nearly
twice those of dropouts.
           Because they are disproportionately poor and frequently reside
in communities with inferior schools, minority teenagers are
particularly likely to leave school without the basic academic skills
they need. Despite substantial gains that have narrowed the
black/white achievement gap over the past decade, the average black
seventeen-year-old now reads at the same level as the average white
thirteen-year-old.
           Youths who by age eighteen have the weakest reading and math
skills (in the bottom fifth when compared to those with above-average
basic skills) are nine times more likely to drop out of school before
graduation; and five times more likely to be both out of work and out
of school.
          Young black male dropouts experienced a stunning sixty-one percent
drop in real annual earnings between 1973 and 1984. Young black high
school graduates fared only slightly better, suffering a fifty-two
percent loss in real earnings. In contrast, young black college
graduates actually increased their earnings.
           The percentage of young black men working year-round has
fallen by one-third, from forty-eight percent in 1973 to thirty-two
percent in 1984. Only twelve percent of black male high school
dropouts ages twenty through twenty-four had no earnings in 1973. By
1985 nearly half--forty-three percent--of all black male dropouts ages
twenty through twenty-four failed to obtain any employment
whatsoever.
           Among young black men who had dropped out of school, the
proportion with earnings above the three-person poverty line fell from
forty-four percent in 1973 to twelve percent in 1984. The percentage
of young black male high school graduates with such earnings also
plunged from sixty-eight percent to thirty percent during this
period.
          
            Earnings and Marriage Rates
          
           As recently as 1974, roughly two in five young men ages twenty
through twenty-four were married. Over the next decade, however, the
rate for such young men fell by half.
           Regardless of their race or level of educational attainment,
young men ages twenty through twenty-four with earnings above the
poverty threshold for a family of three remain three to four times
more likely to marry than young adult males with below-poverty
earnings.
           The decline in real earnings and resulting drop in marriage
rates have been most severe among high school dropouts and graduates
not going on to college--those young people who have tended in the
past to marry and bear children earliest.
           As a result of declining marriage rates, a larger percentage
of children now are born out-of-wedlock. In 1984, fifty-six percent of
all births to teens and twenty-five percent of all births to women
ages twenty through twenty-four were to unmarried women--a dramatic
increase from 1970's thirty percent and nine percent respectively.
           Youths ages eighteen through twenty-three who have the weakest
reading and math skills (in the bottom fifth when compared to those
with above-average basic skills) are eight times more likely to have
children out-of-wedlock.
          
            Poverty Rates
          
           The poverty rate for families headed by a person younger than
twenty-five has nearly doubled since 1973, reaching thirty percent by
1985. Poverty rates among young white families more than doubled, from
twelve percent in 1973 to twenty-five percent in 1985. Poverty rates
among young black families were higher to begin with but still
increased by nearly half, from forty-three percent in 1973 to
sixty-two percent in 1985.
           Nearly one-half (forty-eight percent) of all children living
in young families in 1985 were poor--nearly double the twenty-six
percent rate in 1973.
        
        
          Tuscaloosa's Solid-Waste Turkey
          By United Citizens Against Toxic ChemicalsUnited Citizens Against Toxic Chemicals
          Vol. 9, No. 4, 1987, 8-9
          
          Your city is actively considering buying an incinerator. Should you
have one? Tuscaloosa, Ala., thought it should, but it now knows
better. We are a citizens group from Tuscaloosa and we don't want you
to make the same mistakes we did. Here's our story, as told by the
newspapers.
          First, you will be told how wonderful incinerators are:
          
            Unlike the landfill it replaced, the facility is not just a
place to d ump garbage and trash, but is a place that produces revenue
and has the power to operate three times what it is doing now. I've
seen a great number of recovery plants across the country, and I, for
one, am glad to know we had the foresight to invest in such a
project.--John T. Lancaster, director, Tuscaloosa County Solid
Waste, quoted in the Tuscaloosa News.
          
          You will be told that your incinerator is new, state-of-the-art,
not like other incinerators in other cities or made by other
companies. This is not true. All incinerators are basically the same
and they all have problems. At first, the problems are kept
quiet. Some stories never appeared in our local paper, but only in a
paper published in Birmingham, 60 miles away:
          
            The Alabama Department of Environmental Management is
investigating complaints that Tuscaloosa's new $9 million trash
burning steam plant is creating strong odors and pollutants that are
making some residents ill.--The Birmingham News,
October 19, 1984.
          
          
            Officials from the Alabama Department of Environmental
Management met with concerned residents of Tuscaloosa County here in a
tense, three-hour meeting Tuesday night over Tuscaloosa's often
malfunctioning garbage incinerator.--The Birmingham
News, Nov. 21, 1984.
          
          Finally, in 1985, the local newspapers started to cover the story
and the local citizens became aware of some of the problems. The plant
was well beyond its "shake-down" period and was still breaking
down. We knew, of course, that other incinerators broke down a lot,
but we had been told new state-of-the-art incinerators would not:
          
            A coolant system breakdown at the Tuscaloosa garbage incinerator
forced the plant to close for three days while repairs were made, a
state officials said Friday.--The Tuscaloosa News
          
          And then, at last, a front page article about the "bottom line":
          
            The City of Tuscaloosa has given full backing to a$256,000 bank
loan to prevent the Tuscaloosa Solid Waste Disposal Authority from
technically defaulting on a bond payment of almost $800,000... The
governments are under contract to help meet any deficits in operating
expenses of the authority... Though the Authority needed $406,000 to
make bond payments due Thursday, the governments were asked only to
back $256,000 of the shortfall because the authority received the
remaining $150,000 through another loan from First Alabama Bank backed
by a stockholder of Consumat Systems, Inc.--The Tuscaloosa
News
          
          This "revenue-producing" incinerator was, in fact, eating up more
money than this small community can afford. A very clear contract
meant that local taxpayers' pockets were being emptied to keep the
expensive incinerator running. By the summer of 1986, when the waste
authority finally figured out that they had been bamboozled, they
sued:
          
            The Tuscaloosa Solid Waste Disposal Authority was expected to
file a $20 million federal lawsuit today against Consumat Systems,
Inc., charging the company with fraud, breach of contract, and
negligence in the design, construction, and operation of the
Tuscaloosa garbage incinerator.--The Tuscaloosa
News, May 16,1986
          
          A couple of months later, the waste authority board decided they
didn't want to take the heat, the responsibility, or the counter-suit,
and the headlines read:
          
            "Tuscaloosa's Solid Waste Authority Resigns." The resignations
followed months of disagreement among the governing bodies of the
city, Tuscaloosa County and Northport concerning the proportionate
share each should pay to cover operating shortfalls at the
deficit-ridden garbage incinerator.--The Tuscaloosa
News, August 8,1986
          
          These were not the first resignations, nor would they be the
last. But by spring 1987, everyone was trying to pretend that the
problems were solved and everybody was happy:
          
            "Better days may be ahead for the incinerator..." Local
government officials said Friday they hoped a new agreement this week
will lead to a fresh start for the city's financially troubled solid
waste incinerator.--The Tuscaloasa News
          
          Of course, there was one little detail:
          
            "Incinerator tipping fees will double... "New rates for the
incinerator's commercial users will be increased from $9 per ton to
$18 per ton...the new rate will not affect INDEC, a private,
for-profit garbage pickup service, or the local governing bodies of
Northport, Tuscaloosa, or Tuscaloosa County...whether the tipping fees
for INDEC and the three governing bodies would be lower, higher or
even with the $18 tipping fee... "I 'm not prepared to say what [the
negotiated fees] will be," said Rutherford, executive director of
TSWDA.--The Tuscaloosa News, February 22, 1987
          
          What's this negotiated settlement?" For now, it means much higher
fees. And, as soon as more problems crop up, it means more fees and
more lawsuits.
          Finally, after three years, the state admitted what we had known
all along:
          
            Jack Honeycutt, chief of the solid waste section of the Alabama
Department of Environmental Management, said earlier this week that
preliminary tests of incinerator fly ash conducted in mid-February
showed the presence of high levels of cadmium and lead, created when
garbage is burned at the 

incinerator...fly ash was found to have
contained dangerous levels of cadmium and lead. The Tuscaloosa
incinerator produces. . . approximately 100 tons of fly ash collected
daily.--The Tuscaloosa News, March 19, 1987
          
          But you will be told that you're running out of landfill space and
that an incinerator will reduce ninety percent of the garbage, and
that it's the only solution.
          That ninety percent figure is nonsense. The best plants can do is
about seventy percent. Ours does about fifty percent. The rest of the
garbage still needs to get dumped.
          Consider that fifty percent of garbage is paper. All you have to do
is recycle the paper and you've got a fifty percent reduction of
garbage--the same as our expensive "Turkey." You're still healthy and
you can sell the recycled paper. You can also recycle aluminum, steel,
glass...
          But you will be told that recycling isn't practical. Oh? How come
all Japanese cities and towns separate out their paper, aluminum,
etc., and recycle. How come the state of New Jersey has mandated at
least minimal recycling for all five hundred plus of its
muncipalities.
          Why the big push for incinerators? Because combustion chamber
manufacturers have run out of markets one is building new power
plants, heating plants, or large ships--so they want to build
incinerators. One of the biggest names in the game is Babcock and
Wilcox, the firm that gave us Three Mile Island.
          If you would like to know more about the Tuscaloosa Turkey, write
United Citizens Against Toxic Chemicals, Box 7953, University, AL
35486. Our saga continues. If you're smart, you won't let yours
start.
          United Citizens Against Toxic Waste is an affiliate of Citizen's
Clearinghouse for Hazardous Wastes, Inc., P.O.  Box 926, Arlington, VA
22216 (703-276-7070). This article is reprinted with permission from
Everyone's Back Yard, a newsletter published by CCHW. Three full-time
CCHW field organizers help grasroots groups in the South fight a broad
range of environmental hazards. The field organizers are: Linda King,
P.O. Box 1608, Harvey, LA 70058 f 504-340 2321), Clay Carter,
P. O. Box 31329, Birmingham, AL 35222 (205-322-4762), and Linda Meade,
P.O. Box 11077, Charleston, WV 25339 (304-343-7650).
        
      
    
  