
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 10, Number 4,
	       1988
        
          Robeson County's 'Third World Ills'
          By Segrest, MabMab Segrest
          Vol. 10, No. 4, 1988, pp. 14-16
          
          Julian Pierce, a Lumbee Indian candidate for superior court judge
in Robeson County, North Carolina, went to his door in the early
morning hours of March 26, apparently responding to noise. A waiting
assailant shot Pierce as he approached the door--first in the chest,
then in the side as he fell, and finally in the back of the
head. Pierce lay dead on his kitchen floor, the latest in the body
count of this county which has, in the words of one local organizer,
"Third World ills." These include a potent combination of drugs,
government corruption and racism.
          Pierce's death brought his home county into the national spotlight
for the second time this winter. In early February Eddie Hatcher and
Timothy Jacobs, two Tuscarora men, walked into the offices of the
Robesonian, the newspaper in the county seat of
Lumberton, and took nineteen people hostage, demanding an
investigation of drugs, corruption and the county's unsolved
murders. They surrendered ten hours later--amid much sympathy not only
from local residents, but even from some of their hostages--after
Governor James Martin agreed to form a special task force to
investigate their complaints. "Their requests were very
reasonable," said Martin.
          Hatcher and Jacobs are to be tried in August or September on
federal hostage-taking and illegal weapons charges. Their lawyers from
the Center for Constitutional Rights and the Christic Institute South
plan to put the county on trial as well, with a "necessity defense"
that the two acted in imminent danger of their lives after having
exhausted legal remedies.
          Robeson County is distinctly tri-racial, with 40 percent white, 35
percent Native American and 25 percent black citizens. One-fourth live
below the poverty level, the unemployment rate is consistently one of
the highest in the state, and the per-capita income is one of the
lowest. Fifty-five percent of adults over twenty-five have not
completed high school. Whites remain in most positions of power
because the county's minority residents have historically remained
divided.
          
            Poverty, Drugs and Violence
          
          Not only poverty, but drugs and violence plague the county, which
is on Interstate 95 about midway between New York and Miami. According
to Assistant U.S. Attorney William Webb, four or five major drug
organizations operate in the county. U.S. Attorney Sam Currin said
that last year he got weekly calls from Robeson citizens that
"drugs are being bought and sold openly on the streets." Currin
said that "cocaine people are just flooding the market" and
that drug dealers believe they can operate at will, with local law
enforcement incapable of stopping them. "Incapable--or bought off,"
say many local residents.
          The violence plaguing Robeson County is the South's familiar
violence bred by racism and poverty, and also a fearful new violence
spawned by the drug trade. Since 1975 there have been eighteen
unsolved murders, including execution-style killings said to be drug
related. For example, on Oct. 9, 1985, three Lumbee men died when
their vehicle was sprayed with bullets and crashed into an
embankment. Other victims have been shot in the head and their bodies
dumped on the interstate, in their backyards or in the Lumber
River. Since the hostage-taking, according to a report on WRAL-TV in
Raleigh, there have been fourteen more killings in the county.
          Other deaths have raised the specter of racial violence. On
Oct. 31, 1985, Joyce Sinclair, a black woman who had just been
promoted to a supervisory position at a textile mill, was kidnaped
from her home by a "white man wearing v site," (said her daughter) and
found raped and brutally murdered. Her murder is unsolved. Other black
families have lost loved ones--for example, Halbert Patterson, a black
resident of Maxton, who was shot down in the street by a white
merchant because, according to the merchant, 

Patterson had closed a
car hood on his head. In January of 1988, Billy McKellar, a young
black man, died of bronchial asthma in the Robeson County jail where,
his family feels, he was denied his asthma medication. The McKellar
case was one of the issues raised by Hatcher and Jacobs during their
ten-hour siege. Commented John McKellar, Billy's father: "When I
heard about the hostage taking, it seemed like a weight lifted off
me. Maybe this will help some of what's going on in Robeson
County. The people in Robeson County are the ones being held hostage
by Robeson County law officials. Eddie and Tim are the only two people
who stood up to be free."
          
            Killing Ignited Citizens
          
          The killing that most ignited local citizens, however, was the
November 1986 shooting of Jimmy Earl Cummings, an unarmed Lumbee man,
by Kevin Stone, county narcotics agent and son of Robeson County
Sheriff Hubert Stone, on what should have been a routine drug
search. Two weeks after the shooting, a hastily called inquest cleared
Kevin Stone of any wrongdoing in Cummings death. The Cummings family
was notified of the inquest only hours before and was not able to
obtain legal counsel. District Attorney Joe Freeman Britt, in a highly
unusual move, was present to question witnesses. He did not call Stone
to testify, although other law enforcement officials presented
conflicting accounts of the death. The coroner's jury came back with a
highly unusual verdict: "either an accident or self-defense."
          Kevin Stone was one of two deputies with keys to a locker from
which $50,000 in stolen drugs and evidence in fifty drug cases had
been illegally removed in August 1986. Members of Cumming's family
told state media that Jimmy Earl said he was buying drugs from the
locker cache. In December 1986, Mitchell Stevens, a former sheriff's
deputy, and two other men were indicted for the locker theft. At their
trial a State Bureau of Investigation agent testified that he had
information suggesting another deputy might have helped in obtaining
the cocaine stolen from the locker, and named Kevin Stone as one of
two officers he suspected.
          Cummings's death, the possible whitewash from the legal
establishment, and growing suggestions of law enforcement complicity
ignited county residents. Soon up to 800 people--Native American,
black and white--were attending mass meetings, They came together in a
coalition, Concerned Citizens for Better Government, and began to
rally the three races around a variety of concerns. These ranged from
protests against violence and corruption to support for the merger of
the county's five school systems into one system that would more
equitably educate the county's minority children. On Easter Monday
1987, a march sponsored by the coalition brought 1,500 of the county's
residents into the streets in an unprecedented show of unity and
opposition to what they perceived as a morally bankrupt power
structure.
          On Super Tuesday this year, the coalition brought people together
in the ballot box as well, and blacks and Native Americans together
voted for school merger, signaling a historic shift of power. Julian
Pierce's campaign for the position of Superior Court judge against
District Attorney Joe Freeman Britt--by then regarded as a hated
symbol of the white establishment--took on added energy, and
supporters predicted Pierce's victory.
          Then Pierce was murdered. The law enforcement officer leading the
investigation was Sheriff Hubert Stone (accompanied by state and
federal agents), and the DA in charge 

of the prosecution was Pierce's
rival, Joe Freeman Britt. Within four days, Stone announced that the
case was solved--and that the main suspect was dead of "apparent
suicide." Pierce had been killed by two Indians over a "domestic
dispute," he said.
          According to Stone, John Anderson Goins, 24, was the boyfriend of
Pierce's fiancee's daughter, and the young Lumbee had killed Pierce
because he and her mother had sworn out a warrant on Goins to keep him
away from the girl. Stone charged Sandy Chavis, whom he described as
Goin's companion, with Pierce's murder, although Chavis denied
participating in the killing, saying that he had driven Goins to
Pierce's house without knowing his friend intended to kill Pierce. A
deputy and an SBI agent found Goins dead in a closet in his father's
unoccupied home after law enforcement had pursued him, the sheriff
said.
          
            Accusations of a Coverup
          
          "My first reaction is that it's a cover-up--or that they picked
a scapegoat," said Dail Chavis, one of Pierce's
sisters." Julian Pierce wanted to clean things up," a young
black man who refused to give his name told a reporter. "So now
Pierce is shot dead, and the sheriff right away says these two guys
did it, and one of the guys just happens to kill himself. What would
you think about that, if you was me?"
          Governor Martin, responding to citizen demands, apparently
pressured Britt into requesting a special prosecutor from the attorney
general's office. Maneuvering also occurred between Martin and the
legislature. Part of Martin's compromise in the wake of the
hostage-taking was that Martin would ask the legislature to add a
second judgeship for the county and that he would appoint a Native
American to that position (rather than postponing the election to find
someone to run against Britt as Pierce's supporters originally
requested). According to press coverage of the dealing between Martin
and the legislature, the governor did push the legislature to create
the second judgeship, but the legislature then declared that Britt
would be senior judge, thus getting power to appoint magistrates and
set the court calendar. The legislature also demanded a guarantee that
the district attorney appointed to fill Britt's unexpired term would
be white. The legislature agreed, however, to the appointment of a
black public defender, for which the coalition of Concerned Citizens
and the Rural Advancement Fund had been steadily working in the county
for some time. When all was said and done, however, the positions of
real authority remained in the hands of Britt and the local white
establishment.
          The Hatcher-Jacobs trial will show evidence of drug trafficking and
"how things happen when a system is controlled by drug
cartels," said Bob Warren, attorney for Christic Institute
South. "The murder of Julian Pierce is a major example of what
happens in such a system." Warren says that the lawyers hope by
the trial date to have the Pierce murder solved. "Our evidence now
points to an assassination, not to a domestic dispute," Warren
commented.
          On April 20, five blocks from the courthouse in downtown Lumberton,
a bullet shattered the windshield of the car Bob Warren was driving. A
later call explained it had been a warning shot. Warren says that he
has heard from four different sources that there is a contract on his
life.
          The media are filled with stories of constant violence, corruption
and drug-related problems in such countries as El Salvador, Colombia,
and Panama. Yet we in the South do not have to look that far for
examples of failed democracy. Robeson County lies halfway between New
York and Miami; but what its people are suffering may be going on now
or soon in other communities across the South.
          
            Mab Segrest is director of North Carolinians Against
Racial and Religious Violence. Her article is adapted from a
copyrighted article in Christian Century, and appears
here with permission.
          
        
        
          The Rights to Life
          By McAnelly, LynneLynne McAnelly
          Vol. 10, No. 4, 1988, pp. 1-4
          
          
            Agriculture is on the edge of a revolution that could bring changes
as profound as the industrial revolution. From soybean growers in
Georgia to cattle producers in Arkansas, few Southern farmers will be
able to escape its implications.
            The engine of this new evolution is biotechnology-our ability to
control and manipulate DNA, the genetic blueprint of all living
organisms. With this power, it will be possible to use microbes,
plants, and animals as living chemical factories, to endow living
organisms with new traits, and even to create new kinds of living
beings.
            These advances in biology have the potential to expand our options
for dealing with environmental and agricultural problems and for
improving economic opportunities in agriculture. At the same time,
however, there are concerns that some new developments may actually
limit options for farmers and ranchers. Of concern to many farm
organizations and livestock producers is a decision from the
U.S. Patent Office in April 1987 that animals can be patented. This
was one in a series of administrative and judicial rulings that pave
the way for a corporation or individual to own the blueprints which
specify living organisms.
            The legal and economic consequences of these decisions have raised
a number of concerns that have only been heightened by the recent
Patent Office issuance of its first animal patent-for a mouse that is
especially susceptible to cancer and can be used with great
effectiveness in laboratory research. However, the patent for this
creature is broader than it seems at first glance. The patent refers
to any cancer-causing gene imported into any mammal. The implications
are staggering.
          
          
            Living Organisms and Patent Law
            A patent grants monopoly rights to an invention for a specified
period of time (seventeen years or longer). However, there are limits
on what can be patented. The invention must be novel relative to
information available at the time of the patent application. Even if
it qualifies as 
"new," the invention cannot be
patented if it is obvious to a "person with ordinary skill in the
art."
            Until 1980, living organisms were not considered patentable. Two
separate laws, the Plant Protection Act of 1930 and the Plant Variety
Protection Act of 1970, gave limited patent protection to plant
varieties, implying to many, including the Patent Office, that
Congress did not intend the Patent Act to generally cover living
organisms. But in 1980, the Supreme Court ruled that the U.S. Patent
Act applied to genetically engineered microorganisms. In 1985 the
Patent and Trademark Office extended this ruling to all plants, and,
on April 3, 1987, to all animals, excluding humans "for the time
being."
            It is not clear how patent law will be interpreted with regard to
genetically engineered organisms. For example, although things
existing at the time of the patent application are not generally
considered patentable, things that exist in nature such as hormones,
vitamins and proteins have been patented.
            Even as seemingly obvious an "invention" as a
naturally occurring microorganism isolated and grown in pure culture
has been patented. This raises the possibility that existing genes
could be patented and leads to questions that cannot be answered about
the right of an individual or corporation to own the very genes that
make up living organisms. If individual genes can be patented, then
important naturally occurring traits that control food production
could become private property.
            For example, will a patent on a given trait preclude others from
pursuing alternate ways of achieving the trait? There also are
concerns that broad patents on fundamental traits such as oil
production in seeds or milk production in mammals may then apply to
all crop plants or animals developed with the trait. For example, a
patent on a gene controlling milk secretion in mice might also be
applied to cows, goats and horses. It remains for the Patent Office or
Congress to decide on the scope of patent protection on living
organisms, and the first patent granted is, as already noted, quite
broad.
          
          
            The Economic Power of Patents
            The corporation or individual who holds a patent has exclusive
rights to the patented object. The patent holder can collect whatever
royalties the market will bear and impose restrictions on the use and
the reproduction of the item.
            The extension of these monopoly rights to the raw materials of
agriculture-plants and animals-creates a whole new category of
property ownership. And it is a kind of ownership which essentially
will be closed to many people now in agriculture, from farmers and
ranchers to livestock breeders, and many seed companies.
            Due to the relatively high cost of genetically engineered
livestock, it would be difficult for patent holders to try to get all
their financial return from the initial purchase price. Therefore,
according to William Lesser, an agricultural economist at Cornell,
"it is highly likely that animal patent 

holders will attempt to
enforce patent rights over subsequent generations." According to
the Patent Office, royalties would be paid on the sales of patented
animals and on all the generations of their offspring produced over
the seventeen-year lifespan of the patent. Such an agreement would be
binding on the original purchaser and on subsequent purchasers of
progeny. Lesser predicts that enforcing patent holders' rights will be
feasible in the livestock industry, especially in sectors where good
breeding records are already kept.
            A difficult issue to be resolved is how to determine the extent and
value of expression of the patented characteristics in succeeding
generations. A patent does not guarantee that the trait will show up
in the offspring. Multigenic traits (most agriculturally important
traits such as weight and yield are controlled by many genes) are
quite likely to be "diluted" by recombination in
subsequent generations.
            In addition, patented animals are likely to be more expensive
initially than conventionally bred animals. Farmers and ranchers, even
those with large operations, will usually not be able to obtain animal
patents or to take advantage of the benefits of patented livestock
produced through biotechnology.
            Another concern of farmers and ranchers is that animal patents will
accelerate vertical integration and consolidation in the livestock
industry as happened in the seed industry after the 1970 Plant Variety
Protection Act. Large pharmaceutical and petrochemical companies have
bought out scores of independent seed companies. Predictions are that
ten to twenty major corporations will dominate the worldwide seed
trade by the year 2000.
            Referring to the concentration in the poultry industry, Cy
Carpenter of the National Farmers' Union testified to Congress in July
1987, "The almost total control of an industry by so few is a fear
that haunts all segments of agriculture, and granting animal patents
could turn those fears into a reality."
            In order to maintain control over the patent, the holder may decide
to sell his animals only to a few select operations. Or the patent
holder may decide to buy the means of production. The beef industry,
for example, may be ripe for such a consolidation; Iowa Beef Packers,
one of the "big three" meat packing companies in
the United States, is already considering raising its own cattle. If
the livestock industry responds to patent protection as did the seed
industry, it would not be surprising to see Iowa Beef Packers acquire
the means of production and then in turn be acquired by a major
chemical/ biotech corporation such as Monsanto or Mitsubishi.
            Farmers will have to cope with extensive paperwork to keep track of
progeny from all patented animals for seventeen years through multiple
middlemen. As complicated as the situation is with a single patented
trait it becomes truly Gordian when an animal has more than one
patented trait, each with separate ownership. As a number of livestock
producers commented, the prospect of patents on farm animals presents
a paperwork nightmare.
            And who will be policing the biotechnology companies and the Patent
Office? Challenges to Patent Office decisions can be initiated only by
someone with a competing patent claim. Such legal means can be long
and expensive-beyond the means of many smaller companies and
individuals.
            The justification for patents is that they are necessary to
stimulate research and to provide the necessary incentive to undertake
research projects that may or may not pan out. The biotechnology
industry warns that without patent protection we risk losing the
fruits of our research to foreign competition.
            However, despite the absence of patent protection, research in crop
and livestock improvement at land grant universities, at USDA labs and
on private ranches generated numerous new plant varieties, livestock
breeds and champion race horses over the last hundred years. Results
from research at public institutions has usually been freely
available, in the public domain. Furthermore, market mechanisms exist
to protect new breeds developed by livestock producers and to ensure
significant financial returns.
          
          
            Patents and Research
            The assumption that patents encourage corporations to engage in
novel research directions has been challenged by various authors. For
example, research may be channeled to already patented products. Even
the new biotechnology research programs in some companies are being
driven by patents the company already holds. Many agrichemical
companies are developing genetically engineered crop plants that will
require the use of herbicides or pesticides that the
company already sells. In addition many fear that life sciences
research at public institutions may become increasingly directed into
production of patentable products with resulting decline in public
domain research.
            But most worrisome to many in the seed and livestock industries is
a growing reluctance on the part of researchers to share information
and germ plasm with other labs. This would be devastating to plant
breeding research and, in some cases, could endanger the nation's food
supply, according to the American Seed Trade Association.
            The issue of a foreign edge in patented animals is misleading. Only
the U.S. and a handful of Soviet satellite nations currently allow
animals to be patented. The European Economic Community specifically
excludes animals 

from patent protection. This would not prevent
foreign companies from obtaining animal patents in the U.S.,
however. Thus, as one farm organization pointed out, American farmers
could be in the unfavorable situation of paying royalties to foreign
biotech companies.
            It is worth noting that although humans were excluded from the
April 1987 ruling, Charles Van Hom of the Patent Office told the New York Times: "The decision says higher life
forms will be considered and it could be extrapolated to human
beings. But for the time being, we are not going to consider
applications involving human life."
            This clearly implies that even human beings may eventually be
considered patentable material.
            Human genes are already components of biotech products that have
been patented. These applications involve using human genes to produce
pharmaceuticals such as human insulin and human growth hormone,
substances of tremendous benefit. But eventually society may ask, at
what point do we cross a barrier in manipulations with human genes?
          
          
            Response and Remedies
            A number of farm organizations including the National Farmers
Union, the League of Rural Voters, and the National Farm Organization
have expressed concern about the economic impact of animal patents on
agriculture. Recently, almost 500 Texas livestock producers told the
Texas Department of Agriculture that they are opposed to patents on
farm animals.
            The decisions granting full patent coverage to plants and animals
were judicial and administrative rulings. However, in its 1980
decision the Supreme Court clearly left the door open for
congressional action, stating that it is up to Congress to define the
limits of patentability by amending the patent law. Many feel that it
is time for public debate and congressional action on this issue.
            Congressman Charlie Rose of North Carolina has introduced a bill,
H.R. 3119, that would impose a two-year moratorium on animal
patents. A two-year moratorium would allow time for investigation of
the economic impact of animal patents and for discussion of the
various issues involved in patenting living organisms. For many years,
public dollars have supported the basic research that gave birth to
the biotechnology revolution. Farmers and the consuming public deserve
consideration of their concerns regarding patents on living
organisms. 
          
        
        
          Cameras on the Prize: Hollywood Finds the Movement
          By HRWHRW
          Vol. 10, No. 4, 1988, p. 20
          
          Maybe Philadelphia, Miss., wasn't quite ready to host a movie
fictionalizing its painful history, but elsewhere in the South,
cameras have been rolling recently as the civil rights movement begins
to join the peace movement and the Vietnam war on the silver
screen.
          The little town of LaFayett, Ala., rolled out the red dirt this
summer for the filming of "Mississippi Burning," in which Gene Hackman
and Willem Dafoe portray FBI agents investigating the murders of three
unnamed civil rights activists, obviously based on the 1964
Philadelphia murders of Michael Schwerner, James Chaney and Andrew
Goodman.
          LaFayette allowed its streets to be covered with dirt and its
storefronts, some of which had not changed anyway, to be returned to a
1960s look.  Many of its citizens, black and white, lined up for roles
as extras in the film.  If they were uncomfortable with the subject
matter, it was usually not obvious.
          "Heart of Dixie," based on a novel by Anne Rivers Siddon, is about
conflicts over integration of Southern colleges and is being filmed at
the University of Mississippi, where federal troops had to be called
in to quell riots in 1962.  "Everybody's All-American" is being
produced in Louisiana and depicts the adventures of a black man who
becomes a civil rights activist in the 1950s, battles through the
'60s, and by 1980 has entered mainstream politics.  Still another
film, "Mississippi Summer," directly depicts Schwerner, Chaney and
Goodman, though if focuses on the friendship between Schwerner and
Chaney whereas "Mississippi Burning" tells the story through the eyes
of the FBI agents.  And Jessica Lange is set to portray-in "The Stick
Wife," based on a play by Darrah Cloud-the wife of a KKK member who
took part in the 1963 bombing of Birmingham's Sixteenth Street Baptist
Church. 
          All of these Hollywood productions follow the success of the
extraordinary documentary, "Eyes on the Prize," which has been seen by
millions on public television and on videocassettes.  Producers say
enough time has passed that people now want to re-examine the events
of the 1950s and 1960s.  Others say they sense a revival of the spirit
of protest and rebellion.
        
        
          A Letter from Lillian Smith
          Edited by Gladney, RoseRose Gladney
          Vol. 10, No. 4, 1988, pp. 17, 19
          
          Lillian Smith's friendship with Carson McCullers and her husband
Reeves may be dated to the late 1940s. After the Broad way production
of Strange Fruit closed in 1946, Lillian kept an
apartment in Brooklyn Heights, dividing her time between New York and
Clayton, Georgia, and maintained a number of friendships in New York's
literary circles until the spring of 1953 when she discovered she had
breast cancer and returned permanently to her mountain home. Still
recuperating from a radical mastectomy, she had just completed her
second work of nonfiction, The Journey, when Carson
came to visit her November 17, 1953. Having recently left Reeves in
Paris because of his alcoholism, Carson was working on an article
about Georgia for Holiday magazine. Her visit with
Lillian ended tragically only hours after it had begun when Carson's
sister called to say that Reeves had killed himself.
          The following letter differs in tone from some of the more public
letters selected for this series of Lillian Smith's
correspondence. Yet, it is equally important to our understanding of
Smith's life and work. Her attention to physical detail and personal
feeling reveals what is most powerful about her writing. Furthermore,
Smith makes the mundane occasion of writing a thank-you note the
opportunity to express not only solace for a friend's grief but also
profound wisdom for living.
          Her advice to Carson about heeding her inner knowledge concerning
the reality of her relationship with Reeves, letting go what had ended
in order to create something new, reflects the spirit and style of
The Journey. Because of her fight with cancer, from
1953 until 1966 Lillian Smith would write very consciously under a
death sentence. At her best, she would do so by using her past to
speak and write about the future--the future of the South, of the
world, of humanity itself.
          Undated {January 1954)
          A new year has begun. I hope it will be good, very good for you.
          Dear Carson:
          It is cold and bright like glass, today. Winds have stripped the
trees clean and pale winy smoke color is drifting down on the
mountain.
          The kind of day when my tongue says "beautiful" and my heart
mourns. Always those winds blow harder on my memory than on the
mountain and I am driven back to an empty house and empty rooms that
greedily spread over my whole life, sometimes; refusing to budge. Just
taking over as if they have a right to stay. What happened on windy
days long ago, I have no faint idea; but when such a day comes, I have
to go back, like a ghost, to my childhood and wander it. Without map;
without destination.
          So, I write you from Clayton but really from a lonely corner
somewhere in the past, to say hello and thank yow and wish you
well. It would be nice to talk. I have never talked to you. Always we
begin and there are--interruptions. Small ones, most of them; and the
one big one which I pray you have somehow made your peace with. A hard
six weeks you have had. I know this. I know there have been terrors
and regrets, and sudden revelations, and grief, and a sadness that has
no name. Always, if we could name the sadness, if we could find the
word, we feel the sadness would lift. It is like stumbling across an
old grave stone with no name and no date. Sorrow is like that. One
cannot name it. If one only could...name it and find a little date in
time for it. Then we could drop a small flower, a tear, and compose
our life around it.
          All of this you have felt, I know. And more. And I have been glad
that you were compelled to work hard; to write "about Georgia"; to
meet a deadline; to "make a little money." It is harsh and right, this
having to do the practical things when the deep breaks come. It glues
us together; it drives us and pinches us back into some kind of
shape. And while we are hardening ourselves, finding order in the
chaos, we are at the same time growing within us new possibilities for
life.
          But it has been very hard. And I know this. I have thought of you,
often. Paula has. We have talked about it with a profound dense of the
pity of it, the sadness but, also, knowing a time comes when a
relationship has ended. Death did not end it. You told me that, before
you knew. It had ended before Reeves' death. You felt this; saw it
with a clarity; felt it in the honest regions of your self; and I hope
that you have not forgotten. For no circumstance, even so hard a one
as the event that occurred, can break what was already broken. To
forgive another and one's self; to accept all in another that one can
and hold on to that. I feel you have done this; will do it; will
cherish the bright moments; the gay, absurd, ridiculous and warm days;
the tragic, too; and out of it all you will weave a new pattern,
something real and Reeves will be a pert of your words; and all this
will hold that common past close and make you glad of those years. I
feel that you are wise enough to be grateful for those years; and not
to regret them.
          The flowers were lovely. And there is a funny quirk to it which
will amuse you, I hope. The florist called from Toccoa, misery loading
down her voice. She had an order from New York for an old fashioned
bouquet for me. But she did not really have the right flowers for an
old fashioned bouquet, she said. And how on earth could she get an old
fashioned bouquet to me in Clayton! Could I perhaps come over for it?
The voice was troubled. Was I going to wear it Christmas day? No, I
said. There was no special occasion. Then, she sighed in relief, would
it be all right to send me simply cut flowers? Yes, I assured her. But
how could she get them to Clayton? She thought over long distance, too
miserable to count her dimes. Finally she said while I held the silent
phone, Oh yes; the paper truck came through Toccoa and went from there
to Clayton. She'd just put those flowers on 

the paper truck and he
would leave them at the drugstore. Would that do? Yes, of course, I
assured her. So the flowers came bouncing in on the paper truck
Saturday; the drugstore call e d to say "Miss Lil, we have some
flowers for you;" Paula went to town for them and that night beautiful
red carnations and blue irises were all over my dining room and looked
very gay and very Christmasy too. Thank you for thinking of me in such
a very nice way.
          Please give my love to your dear mother, to that very nice sister
Rita, and my warm affectionate wishes for the New Year.
          My love, dear, Lillian
          
            NOTE: This letter was copied from the original in
the Carson McCullers collection, Harry Ransom Humanities Research
Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
          
          
            Rose Gladney is an assistant professor of American
Studies at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa.
          
        
        
          An Alabama Potter Stays with Tradition
          By Gates, DarrylDarryl Gates
          Vol. 10, No. 4, 1988, pp. 18-19
          
          Jerry Brown has the thick, strong arms of a lumberjack. His large
hands, broad shoulders and barrel chest complete the image. But it's
Brown's gentle, slightly impish smile you notice first. This is a man,
you think, who truly likes what he does.
          Brown is a ninth-generation potter, perhaps the most traditional of
the half-dozen or so traditional potters left in the United States,
according to folklorists. He has devoted his life to digging north
Alabama clay from a hardwood forest and turning it into churns, jugs
and jars that were once a necessity in every rural kitchen. Brown's
pottery may no longer be needed in country kitchens, yet each piece
now documents a cultural past.
          "Jerry is pretty much traditional in every sense--from digging
his own clay, to a mule-driven pug mill, to a wood-filled modified
groundhog kiln," says Henry Willett, regional representative for
the National Endowment for the Arts.
          Gradually, Brown's old-fashioned practice of his craft have made
him well-known. In 1984, he was one of a handful of traditional
potters invited to show his skill et the Smithsonian's annual summer
folklife demonstrations. He and his work have been featured in books
on Southern pottery and a documentary film is in progress.
          Despite his growing fame, Brown lives a simple life. If his pottery
shop resembles a hay barn, it's because it was one; if his arms
resemble those of a logger, it's because he cut sawmill timber for
twenty years.
          As a child, Brown and his brother watched their father, Horace
V. "Jug" Brown, turn out preserving jars and butter churns by the
hundreds. "My brother and I were making small pieces back before we
started first grade," he recalls.
          When Brown was twenty-two, his father retired from making pottery
and turned the business over to his two sons. Then tragedy struck
twice. Brown's brother was killed in an automobile accident. Soon
after that, the family's pottery equipment was stolen. Brown gave up
pottery for two decades.
          But the logging business is seasonal and during the wet winter
months, Brown and his family suffered financially. One rainy night he
told his wife he was going to make a pottery shop out of the old hay
barn. He sold the hay and bought an electric kiln; his cousin made him
a foot-powered pottery wheel. Two weeks after selling his hay, Brown
fired his first pot, but he admits it took him about six months "to
get the feel."
          That was nearly seven years ago. Today his pottery shop in the
Marion County foothills of northwest Alabama hasn't changed much--it
still looks like a hay barn with a wide brick chimney at one end. Nor
have his tools changed much: an old sponge, a smaller sponge on a
stick, a table fork, a paint brush and a metal "rib" used to smooth
and shape the soft clay.
          The electric kiln is gone, however. Brown couldn't get the results
he wanted so he built a wood-fired "modified groundhog kiln."
Old-timers built their groundhog kilns into the side of a hill for
added insulation. Brown made his own hill from more than a thousand
pounds of clay, now melted into a granite-hard dome.
          He combines oak slabs and smaller pieces of dry pine in the kiln to
produce temperatures up to 3,000 degrees. Pine resin released during
the twelve to fifteen hours of firing 

puts a slicker finish on the glaze, he says.
          Gone too is the foot-powered pottery wheel that forces a potter to
stand on one leg and pump a foot pedal with the other. "I was glad
to see those kick wheels go out of style," Brown says with a
smile. Two years ago he was able to recover the wheel his father and
uncle used, the one made from a fifty-year-old automobile differential
and powered by electricity.
          In a typical working day, Brown makes one three-gallon churn after
another. His clay-coated arms move effortlessly, pulling a perfectly
formed churn from a lifeless lump of clay the color of a winter
sky. When each churn is finished he picks up a worn piece of wood
about the size of a tongue depresser to measure its opening, but he
doesn't need to. Each piece is exactly the same size. Perfect.
          Brown's pottery is formed from clay mined from a nearby pit, about
a five-mile trip down dirt roads and a jeep trail that winds through
thick woods. For a hundred years potters in the Hamilton area have
been digging clay from that pit. Brown picks the clay himself and
loads his pickup (during wet weather he often needs two mules to pull
out the mired truck).
          Back at his shop, Brown cuts up the hard lumps and dumps up to
1,500 pounds of clay into the only known mule-driven "pug" mill in the
United States. The clay is mixed for a couple of hours with up to
thirty gallons of water to reach a uniform consistency. Then the clay
is fed into a strainer where a hydraulic piston pushes it through a
screen, separating clay from small rocks and other trash. Pure
clay--like strands of spaghetti--oozes out the other side. It's now
ready for Brown's wheel.
          When a lump of clay hits the wheel it looks like a lopsided cake
waiting for frosting. And it's heavy--a six-gallon churn starts out
weighing thirty-two pounds. The largest Brown has made, a
twelve-gallon churn, weighed sixty pounds resting on the wheel.
          Brown's strong arms literally pull the clay into shape on the
rotating wheel. First, he makes the bottom round, then creates a "ball
opening" by using his hands and a piece of wood to form a thick, short
bowl. He closes the bowl inward, then, squeezing and pulling, raises
the piece from the wheel until it looks like a squatty flower pot
about eight inches high. With one arm inside pushing, he uses his
knuckles of his other hand to pull the vessel another foot or so to
its proper height in what's known as a "knuckle pull."
          His next step is to take a thin piece of metal--the rib--in his
right hand, place his left hand inside the vessel, and use the rib to
smooth the outside. With his final pull, he gives the vessel its
shape. He makes a rim for a lid and then sponges the vessel to smooth
the rough spots.
          About an hour after he makes a piece, Brown turns it over so it
will dry without warping the rim. He makes a lid if the piece needs
one, adds handles if he chooses, and dips the piece in one of his
glazing solutions. Then it's ready to be fired.
          Brown dips his arms into a plastic bucket and washes off the
crusted clay, then heads out to stoke his roaring kiln. Flames shoot
about ten feet from the top of the kiln's brick chimney and the sky
above his shop fills with thick, black smoke.
          Another reason I got back into this," he says, "is
because I didn't want the tradition to die with me. I'm the ninth
generation, you know. I'm the only one that makes and sells churns
above three gallons, I reckon, in the United States. I'd like to see
my family carry it on, you know."
          He has two sons in their twenties. So far they've shown interest in
continuing the tradition, even turning out some pretty good-looking
pieces Brown proudly displays in his shop.
          "It's a dying art," he says, shaking his head. "It'a been
a tradition in the South for years and years. It would be a shame to
see it die out. I'm going to do my best to see it stay."
          Willett and Joey Brackner, folk arts program manager for the
Alabama State Council on the Arts in Montgomery, have been working
with a Kentucky film company, AppalShop, to produce a documentary on
Jerry and his work. The film is expected to be ready by the fall,
Brackner said, and will probably be shown on Alabama Public
Television. The film excites Brown and he hopes it will help boost
business.
          "I've known all kinds of potters," he says, abut I've never
known one that was rich. We ain't got a lot, but I know what we have,
we came by it honestly.
          
            Darryl Gates is the editor of AREA
Magazine. Signed pieces of Jerry Brown's pottery are available
through his shop in Hamilton, Ala., (205) 921-9483.
          
        
        
          The Avenue, Clayton City by C. Eric Lincoln. (New
York: William Morrow, 1988. 288 pages. $17.95.)
          By Gaillard, FryeFrye Gaillard
          Vol. 10, No. 4, 1988, pp. 20-22
          
          Blind Bates began to caress the strings of his battered old
guitar. This time he was playing for love. Love for a woman he had
never seen, but whose love he had known not only through the meals she
had fixed for him, or the shirts she had patched, but through the
sharing of her time, her wisdom and her compassion.
          Tears flowed from beneath the dark glasses covering his sightless
eyes as he riffed the steel strings with the glass bottleneck on his
little finger and launched into a song he had written in his mind for
Mama Lucy. It was a sad, lonesome song.
          
            Train done gone
          
          
            Train done gone
          
          The funeral scene stays with you for a while. The prose itself is
haunting in its rhythms--as C. Eric Lincoln describes the little
church, hot and crowded and overflowing with grief.
          A leading black citizen has died, a matriarch of tenderness and
strength, and her funeral was, as Lincoln writes, "an occasion
licensed by the whole community to break down--to scream and to shout,
to moan and to weep, to engage in the delirium of temporary relief
from sadness, from fear, from hatred and frustration....All in the
name and the presence of God."
          Lincoln is a scholar by trade, a professor of religion at Duke
University, author of nineteen works of nonfiction, but never a novel
until this year. Now, with the publication of The Avenue, Clayton
City, he seems destined for a place in the front ranks of black
writers.
          The book is an alternate selection of the Literary Guild, with a
large first printing of about 25,000. Paperback and movie rights are
already sold, and critics are using such words as "masterpiece."
          Lincoln says he worked on the novel for more than thirty years,
writing a chapter here and there and then putting it aside, and for
much longer than that he has carried the stories and the characters in
his head--the prototypes of life in the black rural South.
          He knows the story firsthand. He was born in Alabama in 1924,
coming of age in the little town of Athens, in the cotton country near
the Tennessee line. He found bits and pieces of heroism there, traces
of nobility during a time of segregation. But mostly what he saw--the
enduring image that takes shape in his novel--was the crazy futility
of life in those times, the lost and squandered dignity among his
neighbors, black and white.
          Lincoln was raised by his grandparents. His mother went away when
he was four. She married a preacher and moved off to Pittsburgh,
leaving her son in the care of Less and Mattie Lincoln.
          Mattie worked for white families as a cook and a maid, and in many
ways ruled her own family with a kind of ferocious generosity--quick
to punish a misbehaving child, 

but ready to go to war if they were ever abused.
          Less Lincoln, meanwhile, was a farmer. He did odd jobs for white
people on the side, but his passion--his calling--was tilling his own
field behind his wood frame house.
          He was a gentle man, his grandson remembers, dignified, with iron
gray hair that was tight and springy to young Eric's touch, and the
two of them were great friends. They would sit around the fire on a
Sunday evening, roasting sweet potatoes on the hearth while Mattie was
off at church.
          For Lincoln, such memories are mingled with those of
deprivation--the six-room house so cold some nights that ice formed on
the floor--and also of cruelty, an ever-present possibility in time of
white supremacy.
          "My experiences with white people were varied," he
says. "I played with white kids and loved some of them. It was not
unusual for poor whites and blacks to eat together, to hunt and fish
together....Yet there was supposed to have been a hatred. I didn't see
much of that, but then, I wasn't looking. I do remember one time that
I was cheated and kicked, for the reason that I unwittingly challenged
a white man.
          "I was 13 or 14. My grandfather was on his deathbed, There was
no food in the house, no fire in the house, no money in the house, My
grandmother and I went out to the fields where the cotton had already
been picked, not only our fields but those nearby, and we pulled the
only bolls that were left."
          That night, he says, they picked the cotton from the bolls and the
next morning, Eric put in in a wheelbarrow and took it to
the gin. It was 7 a.m. when he arrived, and the owner, Mr. Beasley,
was sitting on the porch.
          "Whatchoo got there, boy?" he said.
          "Cotton, sir."
          "Well, dump it out."
          So they put it on the scales, and the weight came to forty pounds,
and young Eric made a quick calculation: At nine cents a pound, that
would mean $3.60 for food, firewood and other family necessities. He
was startled, therefore, when the white man casually flipped him a
quarter. "Mr. Beasley," he said, after a long hesitation, "I
think you made a mistake." Beasley's face turned red, and he got
up abruptly and bolted the door. At first, the boy merely puzzled. But
then he found himself gasping, his lungs suddenly empty from a blow to
the midsection, as the white man began to kick him and stomp at his
head.
          "He was in a frenzy," Lincoln remembers, "and I'll never
forget his words: 'Nigger, as long as you live, don't you never try to
count behind no white man again!'"
          There are times, for Lincoln, when that story comes hard--when he
tells it with such emotion that he has to stop for a moment and wipe
the tears from his large, expressive eyes.
          But there are other stories, too, he says--other experiences with
white people of a very different kind. One man, for example, a high
school principal named J.T. Wright, praised and encouraged Lincoln's
gift as a writer, and lent him $50 so he could go off to college.
          "I was 14," Lincoln remembers. "I had just graduated from
high school in May of 1939, and I had an uncle in Rockford, Ill., who
worked at what he called 'an auto laundry'--a car wash, we would call
it today. I was going to go there and take a job, and the principal,
Mr. Wright, loaned me some money and said, 'C. Eric, while you're up
that way, stop on by the University of Chicago.'"
          Lincoln did and eventually emerged with a divinity degree. But
there were some stops in between his enrollment and graduation--a
couple of years in the Navy, several more at a black college in
Memphis, and a singular job opportunity one summer that caused him to
travel extensively across the South.
          He became secretary-road manager to a Negro League baseball team,
the Birmingham Black Barons. It was an outstanding collection of
talent, he remembers (among its players was an Alabama teenager by the
name of Willie Mays), and as Lincoln handled the team's financial
affairs, he got to know the South in a way that stayed with him.
          Every town, it seemed was remarkably the same. Despite some
colorful differences in detail, each had a similar cast of characters:
a wise man, a fool, a chief bootlegger, a white patriarch.
          They were prototypes, and they provided, for Lincoln, the images
and building blocks of a novel about the South.
          Not right away, however, for his major energies were soon channeled
into scholarship. He taught over the next thirty years at Clark
College in Atlanta and Fisk University in Nashville, at Columbia
University and Union Theological Seminary in New York, before finally
coming to Duke in 1976. His best-known books during that time were
The Black Muslims in America and The Negro
Pilgrimage in America, which together sold more than a million
copies.
          But he also worked now and then on his novel, and last 

year sent
the manuscript to his friend Alex Haley, seeking a critique. The
response was encouraging.
          Despite such encouragement and despite the strong prose and passion
which make it easy to read, Lincoln was braced for mixed reviews.
          The structure, for one thing, is unorthodox. Each of the ten
chapters is a self-contained story, and, though some characters appear
more than once, the chapters are connected more by theme than
plot. They read almost like a collection of short stories that
together produce a powerful portrait of a place.
          In addition to that departure from the standard form, the novel may
offend. It is as unflinching in its portrayal of blacks as it is of
whites, for the people of the Avenue in Lincoln's Clayton City are not
always admirable, or even sympathetic.
          There are some heroes--Mama Lucy, based loosely on Lincoln's
grandmother, or Roger McClain, a white educator who resembles the
real-life principal at Lincoln's high school. But there are also petty
criminals and assorted other hustlers whose choices are self-centered
and sometimes disastrous, and who only add to the debasement that
white supremacy has produced.
          Most of the characters, meanwhile, are somewhere in between,
well-intentioned sometimes, but fundamentally bewildered, trying to
survive the vagaries of the South as it was. And then there are one or
two who decide to fight back, to take their own fateful stands against
the order of the day.
          One is Dr. Walter Pinkney Tait, an enigmatic black physician who
had a profitable practice, a position of prominence among Clayton
City's blacks, and who had even grown accustomed to a certain respect
among whites. Still, he hated segregation and the slow death of the
spirit it inevitably produced, and he decided one day that he had had
enough.
          His decision took the form of a simple act of defiance, the refusal
to obey the desperate order of a white man--a prominent citizen who
was addicted to drugs and who wanted the black doctor to give him a
shot. Tait refused, not because what was being asked would violate his
principles, but because he was simply tired of the way things were,
including his own life.
          
            "If the canvas is rotten to begin with," he
thought to himself, "no matter what you paint on it, the colors
will run and the texture will blister."
          
          
            Tait knew his decision, at the least, would cost
him his practice and may beget him killed. But he also knew that the
time had come.
          
          
            All his life he had tried to walk the thin,
wavering line between what it took to live in the white man's world
and what it took to hold on to some semblance of self-respect, but he
had never been so bl unt with a ny white ma n be fore. Often, when his
dignity was cornered, he had resorted to professional jargon to say
what he would never say in plain speech, but never before had he had
the temerity to look a white man--not just some poor cracker, but The
Man himself--squarely in the eye and tell him precisely what he wanted
him to know. It was a good feeling a liberating feeling--and he felt
no fear except for the fear of not being afraid...
          
          
            He sat motionless in his swivel chair and watched
the evening shadows blot the dying sunlight from the room.
          
          
            Frye Gaillard is an editor at the Charlotte
Observer, where this article previously
appeared.
          
        
        
          The Freedom Quilting Bee
          By Ellis, DeborahDeborah Ellis
          Vol. 10, No. 4, 1988, pp. 22-24
          
          Both are stories of American business, but The
Freedom Quilting Bee is as different from the current bestseller
Trump: The Art of the Deal, as New York City is
from Gees Bend, Alabama. While Trump's book celebrates the triumph of
individual success, Callahan's story of a rural sewing cooperative
emphasizes collective spirit. Success at the Freedom Quilting Bee is
not in making millions, but in creating minimum-wage jobs for black
women quilters. Callahan's absorbing account, which relies primarily
on extensive interviews with the quilters and outside supporters of
the cooperative venture, shows how the Bee cooperative has formed and
has been formed by those whose lives it has touched since it was
established in 1966.
          The Freedom Quilting Bee grew out of both the civil rights movement
and the culture of the tiny, isolated Wilcox County, Alabama,
communities of Gees Bend and Alberta. It was the civil rights movement
that brought the Rev. Francis X. Walter, a white Episcopal priest and
an Alabama native, down from New Jersey to head an interfaith civil
rights project in west Alabama. Walter had left Alabama in 1961 after
being refused work by the Bishop of Alabama because of Walter's
"interpretation of the gospel with regard to racism." He came
back to Alabama determined to help in a movement he realized was
overdue and necessary.

In December 1965, a few days after his arrival, he was lost on a
country road in Wilcox County and came across three handmade quilts
airing on a clothesline. He soon learned that many women in Wilcox
County quilted, and that their quilts were worked in a particularly
vivid and distinctive style. Walter's wife, a painter, observed that
"what distinguished Gees Bend quilts from all other American quilts
I had ever seen was their bold patterns. They had
self-confidence....These were extroverted quilts....They had so little
influence from outside that their quilting tradition was unique to
that isolated bend of the Alabama River."
          Gees Bend is an all-black rural community known for its isolation,
poverty, and unique cultural history. While the town lies just across
the river from Camden, the county seat, on a peninsula formed by a
curve in the Alabama River, there is neither bridge nor ferry
service. Consequently, it is over forty miles to Camden or Selma. This
remote area was settled in 1816 by Joseph Gee, a North Carolina
planter, who bought most of the Bend and named it after himself. After
Gee's death the property passed to a relative, Mark Pettway. The
current inhabitants are descendants of the slaves owned by Gee and
Pettway and many Gee Benders still are named Pettway. Gees Bend's
isolation has "prevented insiders from leaving, and kept outsiders
from coming in," keeping the community all-black and culturally
homogenous. In 1937 a writer noted that "Gees Bend is an Alabama
Africa. There is no more concentrated and racially exclusive Negro
population in any rural community in the South than in Gee's
Bend."
          For the past 140 years the same group of people have cultivated the
land; only the land owners changed. In Callahan's words, some say the
black inhabitants "bought the land, then bought it again, then
again, and again: first as slaves, than as tenants, next as test-tube
members of a co-op (part of Roosevelt's Farm Security Administration),
and finally as qualified individuals fulfilling a bargain with one
more government group."
          People in Wilcox County were understandably suspicious of
outsiders. Walter succeeded in getting local women to join his
enterprise by offering them $10 per quilt-double what they previously
earned. At first, the quilters worked in their own homes, and the
quilts were sold at auctions in New York held by friends of
Walter. The first sale, held in a New York photography studio on March
27, 1966, drew only forty people but they bought forty-two quilts at
an average price of $27, and the Bee was on its way. Although the
original idea had been to donate any profit to the Wilcox County SCLC,
there was so much enthusiasm that it was decided instead to form a
quilting cooperative; in March 1966 more than sixty quilters attended
the first meeting of the new group. At the same time, Estelle
Witherspoon, a Gees Bend woman who had heard about the "preacher
going around buying quilts," wrote Walter to volunteer her help
"organizing ourselves to get these quilts sold." The cooperative
was incorporated in April 1966 with Estelle Witherspoon as president;
she has led the cooperative ever since.
          Those early auctions led to two important New York
connections-Diana Vreeland, editor of Vogue, and
the nationally prominent interior design firm of Parish
Hadley. Vreeland and the Parish-Hadley firm were crucial to the
financial growth of the Bee. With their backing, the Bee's products
sparked nationwide interest in quilts and patchwork, which was soon
reflected in layouts in Vogue and House and Garden, and a promotion by
Bloomingdale's. The quilts struck a responsive chord partly because
their bold patterns reflected the popular taste in abstract art:
"The quilts had a dynamism resulting from their combination of
geometry and brilliance in juxtaposition of primary colors...such
opposition gave them a wonderful, almost Mondrian design."
          As the Bee's business grew, the product naturally changed. The
first quilts sold at the auction were made in designs handed down
through generations, with names such as Star of Bethlehem (also
"Stable Star"), Log Cabin, Climbing Vines, Stair Steps, Chestnut Bud,
and Pig in a Pen. They were made from scraps of material, many of
which were on a second life, having been cut from worn-out overalls,
flour sacks or discarded dresses. As the Bee developed, and especially
after a $20,000 order in 1968 from Bloomingdale's, the need to
standardize became apparent. In the beginning, the quilters did not
even have tape measures; now, colors, fabrics, backings and patterns
had to be standardized if higher levels of production were to be
possible. In addition, as time went on the Bee expanded beyond quilts
to make smaller items that were often profitable because they could be
made by machine; for example, in 1972 the co-op entered into a
long-term contract with Sears, Roebuck and Company to produce pillow
shams.
          In its first three years, members of the Bee sometimes gathered to
work together in each others' homes or in an old dog-trot tenant shack
that had previously been Witherspoon's home. The Bee's acquisition of
its own land and building in 1969 had both practical and symbolic
significance for its status as a permanent institution. With 

the help
of foundation grants and volunteer labor, the Bee built the Martin
Luther King Jr. Memorial Sewing Center. The 4,500-square foot masonry
structure stands out in the rural countryside. "To some, the
ultramodern facade...conjured thoughts of a giant spaceship from
another galaxy that landed accidentally on a sparse stretch of Alabama
cornfield."
          The success of the Bee must be evaluated in relative terms. In
Wilcox County more than 40 percent of family incomes are below the
poverty level. As one observer noted, "We're talking about Wilcox
County, where if there were no quilting bee, people would not be
working, period." The Bee has met its goal of enabling workers to
have a stable job where they make at least prevailing minimum wage and
can receive Social Security benefits. Its achievements also include,
beyond the quality of its quilted products, the fact that it is the
oldest handcraft co-op still in existence that originated with the
civil rights movement. And as the quilters repeatedly voice throughout
the book, there are many benefits to working in a co-operative where
each member has a vote in decision making, where a daycare center is
part of the operation, and where pictures of Abraham Lincoln, Martin
Luther King, Bobby Kennedy and John Kennedy hang on the wall.
          In chronicling the story of the Freedom Fund Quilting Bee, Callahan
tells a story that needed telling, and she tells it well. Exhaustively
researched, the book goes beyond simply describing the growth of a
business to document in detail the Bee's relationship to the civil
rights movement as well as its importance in reviving national
interest in quilting. Callahan's text is illustrated with many
black-and-white and color photos of beautiful quilts. Her chapters at
the end of the book on individual quilters are filled with extensive
quotations in their own voices and are some of the strongest sections
of the book. Less extensive use of quotes, however, would have
benefited the earlier chapters, which are weighed down with extraneous
observations of outside supporters and helpers of the Bee.
          The Freedom Quilting Bee skillfully shows how
the institution is itself like a quilt, an everyday object that in the
hands of an artful maker transcends its utilitarian function and
becomes an object of great beauty. The Freedom Quilting Bee is more
than a successful small business; it is a symbol of how much can be
achieved by people working together. Like a quilt, the Bee has
endured. 
          
            Deborah Ellis works with the Women's Rights Project of
the ACLU, and previously was a lawyer in Alabama.
          
        
        
          Hispanics Struggle for Parity in Texas
          By Davenport, ElaineElaine Davenport
          Vol. 10, No. 4, 1988, pp. 11-13
          
          
            By the year 2010, Hispanics will be a majority of the population in
Texas and will be more numerous than any other ethnic group, whites
included, in California.
            In sheer numbers and in buying power, Hispanics have growing
clout. In America as a whole, the Hispanic market is now estimated at
nineteen million and is expected to reach fifty-five million within
thirty years. And in politics, both Democrats and Republicans count
Hispanics as a potential "swing" vote in Texas,
California, Florida, New York, New Jersey and Illinois in the November
elections.
            Yet Hispanics still suffer from discrimination in education, jobs
and housing, and are currently launching widespread struggles for
equality, much as blacks did in the 1950s and 1960s.
            The struggle is especially evident in south Texas, where Hispanics
are seeking a federal court order to make more state money available
for higher education. The Mexican American Legal Defense and
Educational Fund claims deliberate neglect exists when just 3 per cent
of the state's higher education budget serves 9 per cent of the
population.
            Texas's important universities are all located north of an
east-west line running through San Antonio. South of that line are
just two little-known four-year universities-where faculty salaries
start at about $16,000 a year-and a long list of NO's: No accredited
medical schools, no accredited law schools, no accredited health
science schools, and no doctoral program except in bilingual
education. By contrast, cities such as Dallas and Houston are overrun
with degree programs.
            Equally grim statistics exist in other social categories in south
Texas: Jobs-for the past two decades, counties in south Texas have led
the nation in unemployment. Poverty-federal statistics put residents
of south Texas among 

the poorest of the poor in the U.S., worse off
than residents of Appalachia. Housing-researchers say more than 30
percent of the region's housing is substandard, citing the so-called
"colonias," the make-shift slums that have
sprouted along the Mexican-American border.
            For now, higher education is where Hispanics are demanding
equality. Dr. Juliet Garcia, president of Texas Southmost College in
Brownsville, says the formula for dividing the annual $4.5 billion
state expense for higher education has shortchanged south Texas.
          
          
            Equal Opportunity Discrimination
            "Everyone who lives in south Texas is being discriminated
against without regard to ethnicity, or economic status, because we
simply don't have the diversity of programs available in other parts
of the state," says Garcia.
            Students know there is bias: "A lot of people are forced into
going to a vocational school because they don't have the money to go
somewhere else. They just settle for that and the cycle
continues," says Martha Luna, a senior at Pan American University
in Edinburg. Ms. Luna will put off going north to medical school
because neither she nor her family can afford both school fees and
away-from-home living expenses.
            Anyone with a high school diploma or the equivalent can apply to
Pan American, and many rely on the university's Learning Assistance
Center for remedial help in reading, math and composition. Half of
last year's nearly 10,000 students used the Center. Of those, 34 per
cent were from homes with less than $9,000 annual income; 82 per cent
were first-generation college students, whose parents had attended an
average of 8.1 years of school; and 46 per cent said English was their
second language.
            "That tells you our job is a tremendous one," says Dr. Sylvia
Lujan, director of the Center.
            The lawsuit filed last December is part of a two-pronged attack on
the decades-old problem. During its last session, the Texas State
Senate passed a resolution asking the state's two most prominent
universities-the University of Texas and Texas A&M University-to
investigate ways of improving education for their poorer cousins to
the south. Discussions between officials from north and south have
ranged from bringing Texas A&I University in Kingsville and Pan
American into the state-wide systems of UT and Texas A&M, and
collaboration on improved programs for the south Texas colleges,
including Laredo State University and Corpus Christi State
University.
            None of this sounds very promising to some Hispanic leaders, who
have heard most of it before and now are trying to get something
concrete done. In May, a joint legislative committee set up because of
the Senate resolution heard testimony from Kenneth Ashworth, State
Commissioner of Higher Education. He said that he would take steps to
get the next state legislature to appropriate money for new programs
at south Texas colleges.
            State Senator Carlos Truan, who co-chairs the committee, made a
blistering plea for action now: "In my 20th year in the
legislature, I'm serving notice that we're not going to take it any
more and we want specific answers to the problems of south Texas. So
far we get less than half the per capita funding for higher education
in south Texas. We don't have any professional schools. We have only
one doctoral program and that being fourteen years ago, and we are
demanding equity from you, the Commissioner of Higher Education, and
the board you represent. We want to be fairly and equitably treated in
the distribution of money, facilities and programs."
            It is no coincidence that the squeeze is on at a time when national
politics is close to the top of everyone's agenda. The Democratic
presidential candidates held one of their debates in south Texas, in
what is considered an important Democratic voter stronghold. And in
June Democratic frontrunner Michael Dukakis stopped in San Antonio for
the funeral of Willie Velasquez, 44, the man credited with igniting an
explosion of Hispanic political power over the last fifteen years.
            Velasquez, who died of cancer, was head of the Southwest Voter
Registration and Education Project, based in San Antonio. Much as
Martin Luther King Jr. strove to put blacks on the political map in
the 1960s, Velasquez began in 

the early 1970s, through sheer hustle
and organizational abilities, to get Hispanics registered to
vote. Over the past decade, the number of Hispanic voters in Texas has
more than doubled, and Velasquez's work in California has borne
similar fruit.
          
          
            A Critical Core of Lawmakers
            Slowly, more Hispanics have been elected to office. The twenty-five
Hispanics now in the Texas House and Senate make up about 15 percent
of the 181 total members, whereas twenty years ago there was a bare
handful. And of Texas's twenty-seven members of the U.S. House of
Representatives, four are Hispanic.
            "Hispanic members of the Legislature now form a critical core of
lawmakers who are forcing the state's two premier universities to
include south Texas in their plans for the future," writes Jesse
Trevino, a columnist for the Austin American-Statesman newspaper. "The votes Velasquez has harnessed have been the key to the turnaround in the academic and economic fortunes of this area of Texas."
            Nationally, more than four million voters are considered Hispanic,
a generic category for persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban and
other Latin origin. That is still less than 5 per cent of all American
voters, but their potential influence is great because they are
concentrated in six states.
            Sheer numbers are making Hispanics more visible and powerful, but
there is also growing fear and suspicion of them. "Anglos are more
scared of Hispanics now than they were of blacks in the fifties and
sixties," says columnist Trevino. "We've got a different
culture, religion, and we're slow to assimilate-to become
American," says Trevino. "There's never been so large a
population that's bilingual and has a bond with a potential
enemy-Mexico."
            In a recent column, Trevino wrote about the problem of Anglo
backlash. A press release from Baylor, the large Baptist university in
Waco, announced that Texas could be facing a situation similar to what
South Africa is going through if projected population estimates
hold.
            "There are rising tensions among Hispanics, many of who believe
they have not been treated fairly and will continue to be treated
unfairly," the press release continued. "Much of the state's
new population in the next ten to twenty years will not speak English
but Spanish....The day is quickly coming when the Anglo Texan, the
native Texan, will himself be a minority."
          
          
            A Fear of Two Texases
            Alarmed, Trevino called the professor who had been quoted, and
learned that the statements had been mangled by an energetic writer
from the university's information office. "I stopped worrying about
it," wrote Trevino. "But driving home that day, it occurred to
me that someone did write it, and that someone believes that kind of
future awaits Texas....The fear, of course, is that the state is on
its way to becoming two separate Texases."
            "The old ethnic bugaboo refused to die," says
Trevino. "The fear is that now we have the numbers, something could
set us off end we'd do un-American things."
            The numbers, as it happens, are elusive whether non-citizens as
well as citizens are included. "This is a new distinction,"
says Trevino, "and reflects what people fear most about us-our
sheer growth in number. If you count non-citizens, Texas will gain
representation in the U.S. Congress and get more federal money. Yet
there is a reluctance to recognize reality."
            Other evidence of fear and loathing among the Anglo population
includes a negative reaction to funding for bilingual education and an
overwhelming vote in favor of a non-binding measure on the Republican
primary ballot in March to declare English as the state's official
language.
            Just at a time when Hispanics could use strong direction, one of
the most important leaders, Willie Velasquez, has died
prematurely. And Henry Cisneros, the mayor of San Antonio and widely
considered the most important and visible Hispanic in the country, has
put his political prospects on hold due to personal reasons which
include the birth of a son with a congenital heart defect.
            Cisneros was considered a strong contender for the 1990 governor's
race until he ruled himself out. And with that exit went much of the
visibility of the Hispanic plight. Cisneros was a constant reminder
that there is a tide of Hispanics who are good for the country and who
spend money but who also need a good education, jobs and decent
housing. Cisneros's Harvard education and matinee-idol good looks made
him and thus fellow Hispanics more acceptable and less of a threat to
Anglos than they might otherwise have been.
            "The Hispanic issue is still largely invisible," says
Trevino. "That just sets us up for a misunderstanding on where we
should go as a state. With half our kids dropping out of school, what
will the state have to look forward to when we're in the majority?
There's going to be, and already is, a lot of anger on all
sides."
            That same thought is uppermost in the mind of Reynaldo Garcia, who
became the first Hispanic to serve as a federal judge when appointed
in 1961 by President John F. Kennedy. "Education is the only thing
to get the people out of the cycle of poverty, but if it isn't close
to home, they won't have it," he says. "If we're going to be in
the majority, you'd better educate us." 
          
          
            Elaine Davenport is a reporter and producer who divides her time between Austin, Texas, and London, England
          
        
        
          Plutonium Politics: The Poisoning of South Carolina
          By Carothers, AndreAndre Carothers
          Vol. 10, No. 4, 1988, pp. 4-5, 8-11
          
          It's not hard to attract attention at the Savannah River Plant, particularly if you are roaring along its southwestern boundary in a 250-horsepower speedboat, as we were, with a man in the bow training a telephoto lens on the far bank. Particularly since the private army that guards this nondescript
stretch of South Carolina river is negotiating a new five-year, $300
million contract. And especially since, after thirty years of working
quietly behind a smokescreen of secrecy and deft public relations, the
lid has been blown off the business here, the business that has taken
up a Chicago-sized piece of South Carolina pine forest, poured
millions of gallons of toxic and radioactive waste into the
groundwater and veiled the southeastern United States in a radioactive
mist-the business of making plutonium and tritium for nuclear
bombs.
          So we weren't surprised by the uniformed guards that followed in a
cowled speedboat. Or the sheriff's deputies who politely interrupted
our lunch on the Georgia side of the river. But the helicopter, well,
that seemed like a bit much, at least at first. But that was before I
began to understand the psychological state of South Carolina and its
relationship with things nuclear, an uneasy alliance called
"schizophrenic" by one local activist and "downright
insane" by another.
          Today, South Carolina's once-invisible Savannah River Plant, like
its sister plant in Washington state and the entire U.S. government
nuclear weapons complex, is under siege. Three decades of undercover
production of plutonium and tritium have left South Carolina with more
high-level radioactive waste than any known place on earth. The
breakneck pace of warhead production set by the Reagan Administration
has forced the Department of Energy (DOE) and its contractors to run
roughshod over local laws and sensibilities and push the aging
reactors well past the limits of safety and common sense. The DuPont
Company, having managed the site since day one, is getting ready to
pack up and leave because the place is such a mess they don't want to
be liable for anything that might go wrong. And South Carolina, the
state that in the seventies was called "the most pro-nuclear state
in the country" is now wondering if perhaps it hasn't been burned,
forever.
          
            Origins of the SRP
          
          If there had been a cultural historian on the staff after World War
II, the Truman administration might have had second thoughts about
choosing South Carolina as the site for a multibillion dollar
"bomb factory." This is the ultimate Southern
state, General Sherman's "hell-hole of secession," where in
certain circles the Civil War is still known as The War of Northern
Aggression. This is the state whose econ-

omy for its first hundred
years had more in common with a one-crop Caribbean slave island than
the industrial north. When the U.S. government announced in 1950 that
the town of Ellenton and a few neighboring communities, comprising
1,500 families, a few small businesses and 150 cemeteries, would be
uprooted to accommodate a military facility, South Carolina
characteristically presented both faces. The invasion was at once
condemned as a Truman plan to "import alien and northern
voters," welcomed as an economic boon, and accepted with both
pride and resignation as a patriotic duty.
          And so the Savannah River Plant (SRP) joined Washington's Hanford
Nuclear Reservation as one of two massive complexes supplying fuel for
the nation's nuclear arsenal. E.I. DuPont de Nemours Company was asked
by the government to run it. For more than thirty years, DuPont has
reigned here, Washington's local emissary, managing state politics and
opinion in a manner that mixed cloying summer camp paternalism with a
Big Brother dictatorship.
          The Savannah River Plant News, an employee
newspaper published by DuPont, set the tone with reports on the
softball scores of the teams carved from the facility's 15,000
employees, the spotless safety record, the women's knitting club and
the latest promotions. DuPont tree specialists planted 40,000
seedlings a day, turning the condemned farmland into the state's most
productive tree farm. The happy family aura was pursued relentlessly
and with great success.
          
            Slowly the Memory Faded
          
          Local businesses championed DuPont's cause because the company
pumped $350 million a year into the troubled rural
economy. Politicians likewise rallied to the cause, in typical
Southern fashion.
          Legend has it that one state senator's support for splitting the
atom on the banks of the Savannah was guaranteed, "as long as he
got his half." The editor of the plant's newspaper became editor
of the nearby Aiken Standard, the town of New
Ellenton was established, and slowly the memory of Ellenton's death
faded. The mammoth construction site, with its five reactor complexes,
230 miles of highway and 153 scattered dumps for toxic waste and
radioactive debris blended chameleon-like into the porous, forgiving
South Carolina soil.
          Soft-spoken, almost fragile, with an air of kindness and gentility
that is almost unnerving, Bill Lawless seems at first a most unlikely
whistleblower. But in fact, just five years ago, he was one of the
first to come out. That's what they call it when someone breaks the
code of silence and goes public with evidence of wrongdoing at the
"Bomb Plant." They come out--like a debutante, or
a refugee.
          Within a year of quitting his DOE post as project manager of the
plant's Burial Ground, where radioactive waste and toxic chemicals are
buried or poured into pits, Lawless decided to testify at the trial of
a handful of protesters who had been arrested for trespassing at the
plant gates. Lawless's testimony was the first revelation of the
deceptive and unsafe practices that had remained secret since the
1950s. It would not be the last.
          His most famous confession ("It always gets their
attention," he told me) is about the cardboard boxes. Radioactive
wastes that are not so concentrated or dangerous that they must be
stored in double-walled tanks were buried in cardboard boxes. Not
special, reinforced, double-lined cardboard boxes, just plain old
cardboard boxes.
          Then he talked about the double set of books. DuPont and DOE, he
said, have two sets of information from which they analyze the rate at
which toxic and radioactive wastes travel through the sandy soil into
the groundwater. One set of statistics is drawn from the
"public" sampling wells, figures often
manipulated by flushing the wells with water or pumping them out and
then drawing a sample. The other is for internal use only. The
internal figures are either unpublished or buried reports often
labeled "draft" and thus protected from public requests under
the Freedom of Information Act. And, most chilling of all, he talked
about the waste contaminated with tritium and strontium-90 that was
slowly leaking into groundwater.
          This was the first deviation from the model-the way things ought to
be, according to DuPont and DOE-versus the way things actually
were. DuPont had models for how radioactive elements would move in
groundwater, how radiation would disperse over surrounding
communities, how safety records should look and how Dupont employees
should act. Things that didn't fit the model were not wrong, they just
didn't exist.
          
            Growing Opposition to
Polluters
          
          Thus, for DOE and DuPont, Lawless's testimony was more than just
treason, it was insanity. "People suffer from a form of cognitive
dissonance at SRP," says Lawless, "They see things are wrong,
but they are not supposed to be wrong, so they don't see
them. Radionuclide migration was something we weren't supposed to
see. Public records showed tritium levels two or three times the
drinking water standard, but our own records showed levels a thousand
times that. They said strontium-90 didn't move, and they said
plutonium didn't move, but we found it happening. It just wasn't
supposed to happen."
          "The people that work at SRP are normal human beings, and they
are great human beings, but there is a form of thought control
here. If they tell you that things are sup-

posed to look good, and they
tell everyone else that things do look good, then you can't expect
people to go against management and say it is not so. It took someone
very naive, like me, to write it up."
          At the same time Bill Lawless was undergoing a crisis of conscience
about waste-handling inside the plant, citizens outside-from Columbia,
Atlanta, Augusta, Savannah, and Charleston-were beginning to wonder
about the wisdom of the region's increasingly irrevocable relationship
with the atom.
          In the early seventies, Ruth Thomas founded Environmentalists,
Incorporated, hoping to organize legal challenges to the state's
polluters. A few years later, Michael Lowe helped found the Palmetto
Alliance, modeling it on New England's grass roots,
civil-disobedience-oriented Clamshell Alliance. These groups, in the
words of Bob Alvarez, of the Washington-based Environmental Policy
Institute, were the "midwives" of organized
opposition to SRP.
          Oblivious to the growing opposition, the Defense Department and its
partners in the commercial nuclear industry persisted with the rapid
nuclearization of the state. In the late seventies, Allied Gulf
Nuclear Services neared completion of a commercial reprocessing plant,
Barnwell Nuclear Fuel Plant, to recover plutonium and uranium from
spent nuclear fuel. At the same time, Chem-Nuclear Services opened a
low-level waste dump. Both were located in Barnwell County on the edge
of the Savannah River Plant.
          The final indignity came with the election of Ronald
Reagan. Already, the aging nuclear weapons production plants were
being pressed by outgoing President Jimmy Carter to increase
production of tritium and plutonium, and Reagan pushed the schedule up
still further. Reagan's first "Stockpile Memorandum," the Defense
Department's schedule for warhead construction (also known as "the
shopping list"), set priorities for fifteen years instead of the usual
eight, and proposed building 21,000 warheads inside of a decade.
          
            The 'Department of Bombs'
          
          Meeting this demand would require restarting an old mothballed
reactor at Hanford and one at Savannah River. It would shift DOE's
emphasis further into bomb-making, turning it, in the words of one
weapons lab physicist, into "The Department of Bombs."
"Carter restarted the engine of the nuclear weapons complex,"
says Alvarez, "and Reagan put the pedal to the metal."
          With the rekindling of DOE's nuclear fires, South Carolina found
itself facing a brand new nuclear future, just as a handful of
investigators were digging into what was 

appearing to be a very
frightening past. Inspired by the discovery in the University of South
Carolina library of a document showing that DuPont had been keeping
tabs on the waste stream and the radiation exposures of workers,
Alvarez filed a Freedom of Information Act request and soon found
himself the owner of three shelves of bound SRP data. "It was a
great collection of information. We could analyze their operations
based on their actual numbers-the releases, everything-not the reports
that they had prepared from the numbers."
          Once again, reality began to conflict with DuPont models. Based on
the reams of raw data supplied by DOE, Alvarez and his colleagues at
the Environmental Policy Institute pumped out analyses showing, among
other things, that people in the area were getting radiation doses
fifty times what they should have been getting according to DuPont
models. They discovered that the high-level wastes in the fifty-one
underground tanks contained more plutonium (about fifty bombs' worth)
than safety and common sense would suggest. They showed that a cloud
of radioactivity that DOE alleges had drifted over from a Nevada test
in March of 1955 was more likely the result of a serious release from
the reactor area.
          They discovered a leukemia rate among workers twice what it should
have been. They pointed out that if the U.S. Geological Survey was
correct, and there was a decent, if slim, chance that the Charleston
Earthquake of 1886 could repeat itself in Barnwell County, then a
rupture of the high-level waste tanks was likely. In that event, more
than a billion curies of long-lived radio-isotopes would be released
in the southeastern United States, making the fifty million-curie
Chernobyl accident look like spilled milk.
          
            Whistleblowers' Revelations
          
          Alvarez's revelations joined the criticisms of other courageous
whistle-blowers. After years of trying to encourage reform on the
inside, Arthur Dexter, a DuPont physicist, went public in 1985 with a
report on a leak from a building called the canyon, where the
reprocessing of spent fuel takes place. He became the leading critic
of the reactors' so-called "containment system."
Unlike commercial reactors, the military reactors have no concrete
dome to keep in radioactive contamination in case of an
accident. Instead, they rely on filters and carbon sponges, a system
that Dexter considers far from adequate. "An explosion would
destroy the air filters, and some water could render those charcoal
beds worthless," says Dexter, "And then you'd have radioactive
iodine and other poisons pouring out of the building."
          Engineer Fred Christensen came forward to recount the story about
the time the reactor almost blew up about the frantic control room
engineer who barked out, "close the rotor valves" to stem a
cooling water leak on the reactor floor. Had he not been countermanded
by a senior manager, says Christensen, "the reactor would have gone
off in a big whoof." Christensen's personal reactor safety plan,
he confessed, involved using a pair of wire cutters he kept in his
desk drawer to cut a beeline through SRP's fences-upwind from the
meltdown.
          But it was Washington's imperious push to open the L-reactor that
finally broke the nuclear spell over South Carolina. "They
basically said they were going to start up the reactor," says
Michael Lowe, "but they didn't have to do an environmental impact
statement. The idea that they could reopen a thirty-year-old nuclear
reactor, dump contaminants into the ground, heat up Steel Creek with
cooling water to 150 degrees and add to the already enormous pile of
sizzling radioactive wastes and say that there is no significant
environmental impact-it's unbelievable."
          "What they were really saying is, 'Look, don't bother us with
your rules and regulations. We've got bombs to build.' And anyone
who tried to stop them was 'working against the national
interest.' well, people down here just don't like to be pushed
around that way."
          Frances Close Hart, a member of one of the state's most prominent
families, was one of those people. A Palmetto Alliance volunteer for a
short time, she had just started her own group, the Energy Research
Foundation, to pursue legal challenges to the bomb plant. Joining with
the Natural Resources Defense Council, ERF sued the Department of
Energy for refusing to do an environmental impact statement. Soon they
were joined by several regional environmental groups such as Georgia's
Coastal Citizens For a Clean Environment and, halfway through the
proceedings, by the state of South Carolina.
          Two years later, they had won the lawsuit and significantly delayed
the L-reactor start-up. But they had also changed the tenor of South
Carolina's plutonium politics. The damage to DOE and DuPont was far
greater than the the two years in lost time and money. The state
government had joined Frances Close Hart and a national environmental
group in suing DuPont and the Department of Energy. Opposition to
DuPont and the SRP had become acceptable, even respectable. "Here
was one Southern state and a handful of Southern activists having a
tangible effect on the arms race," marveled Bob Alvarez. South
Carolina, "the most pro-nuclear state in the country," had
grown up. Or, as one South Carolina activist with a sense of history
put it, "We returned to our roots."
          After Chernobyl, it was no longer just a dozen other activists
against the Savannah River Plant. Suddenly, everyone was peering into
the Department of Energy's military reactors to see whether the
disaster upstream of Kiev could happen upstream of Savannah, or on the
banks of the Columbia in Washington.
          
            A Crescendo of Self-Examination
          
          The flurry of self-examination reached a crescendo in 1987. The
year opened with the revelation that the SRP reactors had been running
at a power level beyond the capabilities of the cooling system, and
the levels were reduced by a quarter. In January, a panel of experts
convened by the Department of Energy recommended that Hanford's
N-reactor be closed for repairs; in an unusual dissenting opinion, two
of the panel's members, including the chairman, called for it to be
closed down forever. A year later, it would be.
          In March 1987, it was decided that the SRP reactors were still
cranked up too high, and power was cut by half. Six months later, a
memo from a House Subcommittee revealed that DuPont personnel had shut
down sprinkler systems in the tritium facility because they were more
worried about 

computers getting wet than the building burning
down. And in October, the long-awaited National Academy of Sciences
report on the Savannah River Plant came out. The National Academy of
Sciences is the government's reality check. It has been called in to
look at the nuclear industry several times over the years, but never
before has it turned in such a scathing report.
          The 67-page critique called the oversight of DOE "ingrown and
largely outside the scrutiny of the public." All the reactors at
Savannah River Plant are subject to corrosion, cracks and "other
symptoms of acute aging." Confirming Arthur Dexter's criticisms,
the report condemned the filter "containment
system" as unlikely to withstand the hydrogen explosion
associated with an accident. Some sort of rigorous oversight is
required, concluded the National Academy of Sciences, to bring the
Department of Energy and its contractors under control. 
          The Academy's report was released the morning of
Oct. 29,1987. Three hours later, DuPont announced that when its
contract ran out at the end of 1989, it would leave.
          On the first of March, a Tuesday morning, I drove through the
Savannah River Plant on the state highway. At the entrance a guard
checked the time, counted the number of people in the car and wrote
the information on a card. I handed this card to another guard who
looked me over when I came out, twenty miles down the road at the
other side of the plant.
          
            'Security Means Jobs'
          
          The scenery is pretty, mostly pine trees and the occasional soupy
South Carolina marsh, broken by dozens of billboards that exhort the
SRP employees: "Security Means Jobs," "Security is Your
Business," and one curious admonition to "Play Safely."
Around lunchtime, over the radio, a broadcaster announced that a
release of radioactive tritium had occurred at the plant at 6:18 that
morning. It amounted to approximately 20,000 curies, the result of an
equipment malfunction. At no time was there any danger to the public,
the reporter quoted a DuPont manager as saying; the exposure at the
plant boundary would be far less than an average chest X-ray.
          It was difficult to feel reassured. I remembered Bill Lawless
talking about how they pulled numbers out of the air. I wondered if
the "exposure at the plant boundary" was calculated from one of
the many computer-generated models DuPont had devised, based on the
way they would like things to be. Obviously, tritium gas didn't fan
out in perfect concentric circles from the point of release. Didn't
the direction of the prevailing winds make a difference? The
reassurance came so quickly from DuPont it had the mark of an oft-used
and unthinking reflex, like arms raised to ward off a blow. [See news
briefs; page 7.]
          Arthur Dexter says these plants are too dangerous for humans to
run. "You have to be perfect to do what they do there," he
said, "and nobody's perfect. Eventually something will go
wrong." DuPont wanted to be perfect, so much so that it put an
elaborate false front on the messy business of making bombs in South
Carolina and painted a picture of a gleaming technological wonderland
where nothing went wrong, where the only news allowed was good
news. Such illusions, they found, become brittle with age.
          Compared to the half-life of some of the nuclear particles in its
soil, South Carolina's infatuation with the atom was vanishingly
brief. Like a giant sponge, the sandy soil will hold the millions of
gallons of contaminated water from SRP indefinitely. To clean up the
mess here, and the mess at Hanford, could cost $100 billion, or about
a dollar for every three dollars spent on the nuclear arms race since
1943. The thirty-five million gallons of high-level waste are to be
turned into glass and stored permanently, a dangerous and decades-long
process. And many people are convinced that what we have learned about
SRP's dangerous legacy in the last eight years is only a small part of
the story.
          But the Defense Department is poised to begin again, evoking
national security to support its demands for a new set of
multi-billion plutonium and tritium production complexes. South
Carolina is at the top of the list, but I doubt it will be so
accommodating this time. Many people here are wondering whether the
definition of national security shouldn't include the preservation of
the state's environment and the health and safety of its
citizens. "South Carolina responded to the call from Washington,
and for a while, we forgot to take care of ourselves," says
Michael Lowe. "Now, I don't know if we'll ever think about our
country's security in the same way again. It's taken on anew meaning
down here. It's a lot closer to home now."
          David Albright, a physicist with the Federation of American
Scientists, has devoted years of poring over documents, radiation
release reports and budget requests to answer two questions: how much
plutonium and tritium do the United States and Soviet Union have, and
how much do they need?
          The questions are important ones, because although the
U.S. plutonium and tritium production reactors are dangerously
dilapidated, the Pentagon insists on running them. At 

the same time
the military is also demanding up to $10 billion to construct a new
production reactor.
          The most annoying aspect of the problem is that the U.S. government
refuses to outline its needs. In fact, it has lied. "In the past,
the DOE has dramatically overprojected its needs for plutonium
production for new warheads," says Albright, "and the amount we
have is barely a secret. Certainly the Soviets are familiar with
it."
          When DOE Secretary John Herrington admitted last February that the
U.S. is "awash with plutonium," contradicting years of pleas
for more production, he did not reinforce DOE's reputation for
honesty. "If we can't believe the Department of Energy's statements
about plutonium," says Greenpeace nuclear campaigner Jim Beard,
"how can we believe it when they say we need a new production
reactor?"
          
            More Plutonium Production Not Needed
          
          Albright and his colleagues have come up with a number of for the
U.S. stockpile of plutonium-about 10,000 kilograms-and he thinks the
Soviet Union has about the same. Since plutonium can be recycled from
old weapons and essentially last forever, most analysts agree that
more production is not needed.
          Last November, a coalition* of experts and groups, including former
CIA head William Colby, SALT I negotiator Gerard Smith, former Arms
Control and Disarmament Agency head Paul Warnke, and MIT President
Emeritus Jerome Wiesner, circulated the "Plutonium Challenge,"
calling for a two-year ban on plutonium production. According to Frank
von Hippel of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International
Affairs, Yevgeny Velikhov, head of the Soviet Academy of Sciences and
top Gorbachev adviser, favors the idea.
          Tritium represents another problem. Used since the mid- fifties to
boost the explosive power of nuclear warheads, tritium decays-its
half-life is about twelve years. Tritium's short lifespan means that,
without a steady resupply of the material, most nuclear warheads in
the U.S. arsenal will eventually stop working. Tritium's lifespan also
creates a problem for the arms control community. Many environmental
and arms control groups, while loath to support the construction of a
new production reactor, find it hard to oppose a steady tritium supply
in the face of arguments for "maintaining deterrence." As
Albright says, "tritium erodes political alliances."
          But for some the question is not hard to answer. "I say we shut
the facilities down. They are just too dangerous," says physicist
Arthur Dexter, who for three decades worked for the Department of
Energy at the Argonne Laboratory and then at the Savannah River
Plant. Damon Moglen, director of Greenpeace's nuclear campaigns,
agrees: "Ensuring environmental health and safety requires that
plutonium and tritium production stop. If this means the Soviet Union
and the United States have to start thinking seriously about
disarmament, then so be it." 
          The Federation of American
Scientists, Greenpeace, the Environmental Policy Institute, the Energy
Research Foundation, Friends of the Earth, the Natural Resources
Defense Council, Physicians for Social Responsibility, and the Union
of Concerned Scientists.
          
            Andre Carothers is editor of Greenpeace Magazine.
          
        
      
    
  