
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 10, Number 2,
	       1988
        
          Texas Leads in Pesticide Right-to-Know
          By Davenport, ElaineElaine Davenport
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, p. 7
          
          One of Texas Agricultural Commissioner Jim Hightower's pet projects
has come to fruition, and he is calling it "the beginning of a new
age of enlightenment in the agricultural workplace."
          On January 1, Texas became the first state to require farm
operators to provide workers with specific information about chemicals
they may be exposed to in agricultural jobs. Known as the Farm worker
Right-to-Know Law, it applies to employers with a gross annual payroll
of $50,000 or more for permanent workers or $15,000 or more for
seasonal workers.
          "That would apply to almost all vegetable and citrus growers, or
they shouldn't be in business," says program coordinator Beltran
Chavez. In fact, the law is not meant to apply to small operators.
          Chavez estimates at least 10,000 employers are covered by the new
law and must maintain a list--by crop--of every chemical used or
stored on the farm in excess of fifty-five gallons or five hundred
pounds. The employer must keep the records for thirty years, or send
them to the Texas Department of Agriculture for storage and
retrieval.
          The Texas Department of Agriculture and the Texas A&M Extension
Service are jointly responsible for training agricultural employees
about the proper use of agricultural pesticides. This mandate differs
from similar laws for other industries, which put the training burden
on the employer.
          The TDA and Extension Service are developing bilingual crop
information sheets about the chemicals most widely used, their health
effects, emergency procedures, employers' responsibilities and
workers' rights. These sheets will be provided to employers for
distribution to farm workers. Video training materials are also
available.
          The TDA has hired three staff persons for the project and five
Right-to-Know specialists to work in the field. Despite recent hard
economic times in Texas, the legislature authorized about $400,000 per
year for the new program.
          "Agriculture is the last major recognized industry to come on
board with right-to-know," says Chavez, who previously
administered farm worker health programs at migrant clinics in both
Texas and California. "That's probably because of the strength of
the agricultural and chemical lobbies."
          Surprisingly perhaps, there have been few harsh responses from
employers. "We have had forty or fifty requests from producers for
information," says Chavez. "They seem to have realized that
some law was eventually going to affect them, so there was some
measure of acceptance."
          Chavez says that he expects other states to have right-to-know laws
for agriculture soon, probably not through legislation as in Texas but
through regulations from the Environmental Protection Agency and other
U.S. government agencies which will be extended to cover
agriculture.
          Commissioner Hightower has made the Right-to-Know program a
priority because he thinks agriculture should stop and take a look at
chemicals. "They are a habit and an expense," says
Hightower. "We should see if chemicals are warranted in terms of
the long-run ecological effect."
          
            Freelance reporter Elaine Davenport divides her time
between Austin, Texas, and London, England.
          
        
        
          Changing of the Era in Mississippi  ...A Southern
Tragedy
          By Williams, EdEd Williams
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, p. 10
          
          I remember Ross Barnett as a wonderful phrase-maker. In those more
trusting days, nobody thought that he might just be good at delivering
phrases made by witty writers, as John Kennedy was then and Ronald
Reagan is now.
          Barnett was governor of Mississippi when I was a student at Ole
Miss in the early 1960s. I can see him now, standing on tiptoes behind
a lectern, head back, right arm stretched skyward, poised to swoop
like a diving hawk as he pounded home his point. Even after he was out
of office, he continued to give speeches around the state, talking
about Teddy Kennedy ("that grrrrrreat driver, that grrrrrreat
swimmer") or the meddlesome federal government.
          I still get a lot of laughs telling stories about ol' Ross. There
was the time, for instance, when some Parchman prison trustys assigned
as servants at the governor's mansion took off to Arkansas on an
unauthorized trip that they obviously hoped would be one-way. Maybe
they took the governor's silver with them; I can't recall.
          Ross's comment: "If you can't trust a trusty, who can you
trust?"
          Then there was the time Ross had flown to make a campaign speech in
the Delta. He got out of the small plane and walked into the
propeller, which was, thank heavens, rotating slowly. When he came to
in the hospital, Ross said he had learned that "the front end of an
airplane is like the back end of a mule"--that is, you've got to
watch both of them.
          The islands of Quemoy and Matsu, off the China coast, figured in
one of the debates between John Kennedy and Richard Nixon during the
1960 presidential campaign. The islands were controlled by the Chinese
anti-communists in exile on Taiwan, and the mainland Chinese bombarded
them during the late '50s and occasionally in 1960.
          Statehouse reporters asked ol' Ross what he would do about Quemoy
and Matsu. "I'd appoint 'em to the Game and Fish Commission,"
he said.
          Ross Barnett died recently at the age of 89. He had been a trial
lawyer and a successful one, winning huge (for a poor state) verdicts
in damage suits against power companies and other opponents with deep
pockets. A friend of mine concluded that Barnett, the shrewd lawyer,
had played the dumb ol' country boy before so many juries that he had
finally become a dumb ol' country boy.
          I don't know whether that was true, but I know that when he had a
chance to lead Mississippi into a better future he chose instead to
embrace the bitter past.
          People can sit around all night telling Ross Barnett stories and
leave the impression that he was at worst a goodhearted, amiable
buffoon, but that's only part of the story. He was also a committed
racist. He believed that blacks were inferior, that segregation was
the will of God as well as the law of Mississippi. His rabble-rousing
resistance to the idea that the Constitution applied in Mississippi
provoked a bloody insurrection on the Ole Miss campus when federal
officials tried to enroll James Meredith. Two people died in the
riot. The next day, federal troops occupied the campus to end what I
have always considered the last battle of the Civil War.
          Barnett was a pleasant companion and in some ways a good and caring
man. But he was an eager servant of the force that for centuries
poisoned his region--racism.
          Perhaps it seems unfair to blame political leaders such as Barnett,
Orval Faubus of Arkansas and George Wallace of Alabama for reflecting
the passions and prejudices of their time. To me, that is no
defense. One measurement of excellence in political leaders is how
well they grasp the important opportunities and help shape their
times.
          Remember, Ross Barnett was governor of Mississippi at the same time
Terry Sanford was governor of North Carolina. The difference in the
two men says a lot about the differences in the two states.
          
            Ed Williams is editor of the Charlotte
Observer's editorial pages, from which this article is
reprinted.
          
        
        
          ...'Our Day Has Come'
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, p. 10-11
          
          My fellow Mississippians: Our day has come, and what a glorious day
it is.
          This is our day of hope and destiny, and we are eager to be about
our business. My speech will be brief--for the labor we have to do is
long--and the future of this great state requires our deeds and not
our words.
          Yet, it is appropriate today to pause and think and talk about the
journey we are beginning. For today marks not only the beginning of a
new administration, but a new beginning for Mississippi.
          This is, most of all, a time to speak of change and in these days
and weeks and months and years ahead, it truly will be our time to do
the work of change. We do not take up this challenge with an illusion
that it will be easy or fast, that all the barriers which have blocked
our progress will yield overnight. We know the struggle will be long
and difficult. We bear the burdens of past shortcomings of promises
unkept, of possibilities untapped, of dreams so long deferred, so
often disappointed, that they almost seem to disappear.
          Yet, now our people, in both parties, in every age, have risen
up--to reach beyond things as they are, to renew the quest for what
Mississippi can become. Our purpose yours' and mine--is not to blame
or look back in regret. Our, cause--yours and mine--is not to break
with what is best in Mississippi, but at long last to fulfill it.

          Into that effort, we carry the blessings of this state--a
magnificent heritage, an abundant land, an ideal location, and most of
all a people as brave, as resilient, as honest and as hard-working as
any in American history.
          By all rights, Mississippi should be leading and not lagging. We
have all had the faith that one day this would happen. We have been
patient. We don't have to be patient any more, for our day has
come. That new day demands of us here, of all who hold public office,
a new standard. Every dollar that is misspent, every resource that is
misdirected, represents a road not built, a school book not bought, a
police officer not hired, a sick child not healed. Integrity is more
than an ideal--and the cost of corruption must be counted not only in
broken laws, but also in human hurts and broken hopes.
          A new day also demands a new and uncompromising drive for the very
best in education. In the elementary and secondary schools of this
state, in our colleges and universities, at this very moment students
are reading and writing and being graded. In the quality of all those
classrooms, our future is also being written; our prospects can be
read; and there today, we are deciding whether Mississippi will make
the grade tomorrow.
          We will not have first-rate schools if we give them second-rate
resources.
          We will not advance economically if we are stalled
educationally.
          To any who say, "We cannot afford the price of better schools in
Mississippi," we reply: Mississippi can't afford the cost of
ignorance, illiteracy and wasted talent.
          A new day in this state means a new prosperity for all our
people. For too long, we've only talked the talk; now, we must truly
walk the walk. And the path to our prosperity will be marked by the
milestones of our own efforts.
          What is at stake is more than our statistical standing or our
material well-being. Opportunity is basic to human dignity; hope is
basic to the human spirit. Good jobs with decent wages, with a chance
for individuals to prove themselves and improve the standard of their
life, is central to the character of our state and to the condition of
our families. None of us, none of us, wants to see the next generation
moving away, drifting out, looking for work far from home. All of us,
all of us, want Mississippi to be a place to live in, and not a place
to leave.
          Finally, a new day depends fundamentally on our resolve to banish
racism forever from the state of Mississippi. We know in our hearts
that the chains of prejudice have bound more than one group: they have
held us all back. A society divided against itself will not
prosper. And we know from history and from our own lives the anguish
and the frustration of racial injustice--and we can be proud that so
many among us have given so much in the belief that we shall
overcome.
          We share the faith that we are each God's children. After all the
years, let us hear anew His truth that we are all brothers and
sisters. That ideal is written into our laws, and now it must be woven
into the fabric of our lives.
          Mississippi is among the oldest states of the American union, the
20th to be admitted, almost a century and three-quarters ago. Long
time and turmoil, great achievement and heartache, have passed since
that date in 1817--and since my own ancestors moved to Choctaw County
less than 20 years later. Mississippi has been tempered and tested;
this land and its people have known hard passages and good times--and
we have given much.
          Long enough have we endured. Now it is our turn to lead. It is our
turn to gather the strength that is in us, in our spirit and our
yearnings, and claim our rightful share of the American promise.
          In this endeavor, let us work together--legislature and governor,
separate branches in common purpose, willing to put politics aside for
the sake of progress. Those of us, legislative and executive, who were
honored by election last year were not chosen to simply stay where we
are. If that is all we do, we will have failed and have forfeited the
confidence of those who voted for us. None of us believe we will
fail.
          My fellow Mississippians: To you, we promise a government equal to
your hopes. From you, we ask involvement and a determination to hold
this government to a higher standard. To our children, we promise to
fulfill the future by giving our all to the present. And to my father,
I promise I will do my best.
          History is something that should be controlled and not
controlling. We in our generation can make the history of
Mississippi. We are affected by the stream of events in other places,
in earlier eras. But, in the end, the only limitations we face are
those we put on ourselves.
          So let us welcome this new beginning with a prayer for strength,
with a pride in our people and with the courage to do what is
right.
          Our day has come, so help us God.
          
            This is the text of the recent inaugural speech of Ray
Mabus, the new governor of Mississippi and a member of the Southern
Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Increasing Worker Participation Is Essential to Economic
Growth
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, pp. 18-19
          
          The 1987 annual meeting of the Southern Regional Council
was organized as a conference on Unheard Voices: Worker Participation
in the South's: Economy. Participants included men and women from all
parts of the region, with diverse backgrounds in labor, law, activism,
day care, economic development, government, finance, agriculture and
other fields. At the conclusion of the conference, the statement below
was adopted. Following the statement are excerpts from the remarks of
selected participants.
          
            CONFERENCE STATEMENT
          
          Increasing the participation of workers in decisions at their own
workplace and in the economic policies of their own region and country
is essential if the South and the nation are to realize future
economic prosperity. Worker participation can take many
forms--cooperatives, unions, worker-owned businesses, community
development cooperations, community- based enterprises,
worker-controlled pension funds and others. All are valid so long as
the voices of those who work are genuinely heard in the decisions
about the workplace, wages, and the governing economic policies.
          We believe that a country dedicated to democracy in its government
cannot function efficiently and equitably with authoritarianism in its
workplace.
          Increased worker participation helps to improve productivity,
preserve jobs, improve wages, and increase the opportunity for
economic gain by all. While these benefits are not the consequences of
increased worker participation alone, they cannot be accomplished in
the future in the South or in the nation without it.
          By almost every reliable standard, United States industries have
fallen behind as technology and the international economy have become
more prevalent. Some parts of the South, especially, have declined in
jobs and wages due to these trends. To reverse these developments--to
increase productivity and global competitiveness--investments in human
capital must become much more important in economic policy and at the
workplace, and workers' voices must be reflected in the
decision-making. Competitiveness--productivity, quality, flexibility,
and innovation--in a worldwide economy depends on well-educated,
well-trained people. Developed people are an almost unlimited asset;
underdeveloped people are a serious liability.
          Our future lies in recognizing this simple truth and in coming to
grips with its implications. Over the next thirty years the nation's
and the South's workforce will change as much as the
workplace. Demographic trends strongly suggest that within three
decades racial minorities will constitute as much as 40 percent of the
workforce in the United States and probably more in the
South. Similarly, the role of women will continue to increase in the
economy. Together, women and racial minorities will be the vast
majority of Southern workers in the early part of the next century. In
the past, these groups have been the least educated, the least
trained, and the least well-paid. Today, they continue to be the
victims of private and governmental discrimination. Tomorrow, however,
their work will determine the future of our regional and national
economy.
          Another important consideration influences our reassessment. If
ever it was true, no longer in this country is there a direct,
necessary connection between what is good for an "American" company
and what is good for American communities and its workers. The
existence of transnational corporations operating from the United
States across the globe means, simply, that the profit motive at these
companies may often direct resources, jobs, and investments in ways
that are not in our national interest. This phenomenon requires
international and national policies that protect the interest of
American communities by promoting the participation of workers in
decision-making and establishing minimal global workplace
standards.
          To achieve the benefits of greater worker participation, we believe
the following changes in policies and practices are vital:
          ~ The United States government should seek enforceable minimal
international labor standards that protect workers and promote human
development just as it now seeks international trade agreements.
          ~ The federal and state governments should develop a system of
lifelong education and training to foster improved worker skills and
to invest in human development. In its universal application to job
training, housing, and education, the system could be generally
modeled after the G.I. Bill.
          ~ The federal and state governments should adopt policies that
provide more equitable sharing of the benefits 

and costs of economic
change. Employers should be required to give adequate notice of plant
closings and large scale layoffs. Workers should be guaranteed notice
of and protection from hazardous materials in the workplace.
          ~ National and state investment banks should be created to meet
important economic needs that promote job creation, job retention and
improved wages--needs that are not now sufficiently met by private
credit markets. These banks should support valid forms of worker
participation.
          ~ The federal government should provide legislation guaranteeing
workers greater direct control of their own pension funds.
          ~ The federal government should improve the usefulness of federal
laws relating to the voting rights of employees in stock ownership
plans. It should also encourage more directly worker ownership through
taxes, law, and funding.
          ~ The federal and state governments should spur the development of
worker cooperatives and community development corporations and improve
the laws requiring reinvestment by financial institutions and
insurance companies into local communities and enterprises with valid
worker participation.
          ~ The federal and state governments should affirmatively adopt and
implement effective laws removing all forms of racism and sexism from
the workplace.
          ~ The National Labor Relations Act should be strengthened to
protect the rights of workers to organize and bargain collectively and
to streamline the procedures permitting representation elections and
prohibiting unfair labor practices. The Act also needs to be revamped
to accommodate the growth of service and information industries.
          ~ The federal government should increase the minimum wage of the
Fair Labor Standards Act so that the wage is at least half of the
average wage in this country.
          These changes will not solve all problems of the South's future
economy; however, they will give a meaningful voice to workers and go
further than other efforts to help assure future prosperity for all
citizens and communities.
        
        
          A Letter from Lillian Smith
          Edited by Gladney, RoseRose Gladney
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 27-28
          
          The following is the third in a series of letters selected from the
correspondence of Lillian Smith This issue's selection (from a carbon
copy in the Lillian Smith Papers at Emory University) is from a letter
to the Board of Directors of the Committee from Georgia, which was a
state affiliate of the Southern Conference for Human Welfare
(SCHW).
          Organized in 1938 as a coalition of Southern liberals representing
farmers, labor, politicians, educators, youth, journalists and other
professionals, SCHW advocated wide ranging reforms from improved labor
conditions and expansion of Farm Security Administration Programs to
uniform federal and state voter registration procedures and federal
aid to education. Today it is remembered primarily for its work to
abolish the poll tax. As a delegate to SCHW's 1940 annual convention,
Lillian Smith expressed high hopes for the organization whose racially
integrated membership she saw as symbolic of a changing South. She
served as a member of its executive committee from 1942 to
1945. Described as the Conference's "strongest gadfly, " Smith
consistently pushed for it to be more inclusive in its membership,
more democratic in its practices, more responsive to the needs of
rural people and more outspoken against racial segregation. With
regret she resigned from her position on the executive committee in
May 1945 because she felt the organization had grown narrowly
political and controlled by a small faction of ideologues. However,
she continued to support the goals of the Conference and served on the
board of directors of its Georgia affiliate in 1946 and 1947.
          The Committee for Georgia was one of the most active of the
state-wide organizations of SCHW. In his study of SCHW (And Promises
to Keep, Vanderbilt University Press, 1967), Thomas Krueger noted that
the Committee for Georgia "sponsored two test suits challenging the
constitutionality of the state's county unity system, helped secure an
equitable proportion of a school bond issue for Negro schools
(increasing the Negro schools' share from $1 million to $4 million),
and worked quietly against Eugene Talmadge during the gubernatorial
race of 1946." Both test-quits failed, and, because of the county
unit system (despite a popular vote lead of 9,661) James V. Carmichael
lost the Democratic gubernatorial nomination to Eugene Talmadge. With
a record breaking count of 100,000Negro votes in that election,
Talmadge promised: "No Negro will vote in Georgia for the next four
years." Furthermore, although Eugene Talmadge died in December
1946 before his inauguration, the Talmadge forces put his son Herman
in the state house and refused to relinquish their position until the
Georgia Supreme Court ruled in favor of the Lt. Governor elect, Melvin
E. Thompson.
          Primarily because of financial difficulties, both SCHW and the
Committee for Georgia folded after 1947. However, Lillian Smith
continued to advocate her psychocultural critique in political
campaigns from Harry Truman to Lyndon Johnson. Always her political
involvement included not only working for a specific candidate but,
more importantly, trying to educate both the candidate and the public
to a more holistic and long-range view of political issues. Her
intense interest in child psychology and psychoanalysis informed not
only her understanding of racism but her entire political
analysis. Significantly, she repeatedly appealed to women, church
leaders and journalists to exercise their power as moulders of public
opinion; she always could translate her long-range philosophical
perspective into concrete practices.
          As with so many of her letters, this one seems uncomfortably timely
to contemporary readers.
          June 3, 1946
          Dear Fellow Members:
          I have been asked to go to India on the American Famine Mission at
the invitation and expense of the Government of India. We leave by
plane on June 1 7th. Until then I am so rushed that I cannot come to
our board meeting. I am disappointed. But perhaps you will let me say
a few things that are on my mind:
          I am haunted these days by a little theme that says itself again
and again in my mind: The campaign may be more important to Georgia
than the election. Politics is a game over which we get excited and
this is a race calculated to raise anybody's blood pressure. With
Talmadge smearing poison wherever his voice can be heard, we take
sides, and should. Most of you here will agree that Carmichael will
make us a better governor than either of the others. Most of us are
going to work for his election. Nevertheless, it may be that the
campaign will be far more important in its effect upon our state than
the man who is elected. After all, though we live in Georgia, we also
live in the United States. No matter who our Governor is, we shall
still have a certain protection.
          But even the Constitution of the United States cannot protect us
and our children from the hate microbes that Talmadge is scattering
now from end to end of our state.
          Lately, I have been thinking of children. Of white and colored
children, sitting at radios hearing his words, reading them in the
paper, listening to their elders talk. White children swelling with
arrogance over having a white skin; colored children shamed to the
bone over being "colored." White children overhearing "nigger"
jokes...colored children overhearing bitter reactions from their
folks. It is not a good thing to think about.
          We know also that 10 percent of our population are mentally ill or
on the fringe of illness. They are people unable to cope adequately
with their fears and guilts. Talmadge's words open a window within
their sick hearts, giving a direction in which they may turn their
hats--and without consciences hurting. We know too, that a lot of hate
that once released itself on Germany and Japan is now back home
again. Free-floating hate, just waiting for somewhere 

to turn;
somebody to attach itself to.
          Our state which we all love so much is fertile soil for Talmadge's
words. And he knows it. He knows the loneliness of farms. . . the
emptiness of the small town. . . the bitterness and lack of love in so
many homes, and he is capitalizing on our weaknesses. He has appraised
our spiritual and cultural and economic deficits and is exploiting
them for his and his gang's advantage.
          And we are letting him do it. We sit here and let him go up and
down the state spreading germs of hate everywhere. Scattering bacteria
over radio. If a mad man scattered germs by plane, he would be
imprisoned. But Talmadge is free. I am not saying that he should have
his civil liberties taken from him though I think the day will come
when men will not be free to spread hate. I think the day will come
when their madness will be recognized and they will be put into
hospitals--not prisons--for treatment.
          But today, what can we do? I think we can do plenty. I think we can
inoculate against these germs. I think we can use vaccines to
counteract this poison. Maybe Mr. Carmichael has to talk about leaning
on Southern Tradition. We don't have to. And we mustn't. We are making
Southern Tradition, not leaning on it. And folks who make things have
to get busy and work. We should get in touch with Negro citizens
throughout the state and let them know that white Georgians, hundreds
of white Georgians, thousands of white Georgians are working with them
for human decency, for the chance of Georgia children to grow. We must
let them know that we want for all Georgia children the same things
that we want for white children. No more, no less.
          I wonder how many of us who are white have any idea what Talmadge's
talk does to Negro nerves. There is no way we can measure the
hopelessness it creates, the desperation it breeds. A "white"
imagination cannot embrace so much pain.
          But it does as bad things to white folks. And this is what we must
find the way to tell the people of Georgia. We must let them know...we
must make them understand how arrogance cripples a white child, just
as shame cripples a colored child. We must persuade them to understand
that when we discriminate against any human being, we discriminate
against all human beings. We want white children to be human to
Negroes, to all people. These things we must find a way of saying. One
way is through the Georgia press, in the letter columns. A hundred
well-known women could write such letters to the Georgia
papers. Though it is not customary for Southern women to write letters
to the press, I believe they would do it, if they realized the good
they might do.
          The harm now is in silence.
          I think every minister in the state of Georgia should be
approached, not politically, but from the point of view of the harm
this kind of talk does to growing children, how it promotes
delinquency and lawlessness, how it spreads hate and unrest among
white and colored. I think we might persuade a group of church women
to take over this project of writing to all ministers and appealing to
them to stem the tide of hate and fear and arrogance. I think a man
like Bishop Arthur Moore might be chairman of such a group, with
ministers from other denominations working with him. But would he?
          I think we could get nursery school teachers and social workers to
help on this. For delinquency is tied up so closely with the hate talk
and with racial arrogance and racial shame. If we could convince the
people of Georgia that Talmadge is waging warfare against the
emotional growth of children, we could get new allies on our
side. Most white people do not think they and their children are
harmed by racial discrimination. They think if they work for racial
democracy, that they are working for Negroes. Our job is to convince
them that they are working for themselves and their children's
future.
          I hope that we shall work in Georgia not only on political and
economic levels but I hope that we shall make of the Georgia Committee
a strong cultural force in our state. I want us to plow deeply...Not
all our misery in Georgia is caused by poverty and unemployment; not
all of it is caused by having the wrong men in office. Not all of it
is even caused by poor health. Our ideas of child- guidance, of
rearing children, our attitudes toward sex, toward scientific
knowledge of human relations have such a profound effect upon people
and upon the security of the whole earth today. The haters will always
find someone to hate, whether hater be rich or hater be poor. We must
reduce the need to hate; and learn "sanitary ways" of using our
hate--what children in my camp call "emotional toilet habits." Some of
the poor and ignorant have great understanding and wisdom; and we all
know Ph.D.'s as immature as children. So education isn't the answer
either unless our emotions are educated. Facts are fine tools to use;
but emotions are the driving force behind those tools. That is why I
am so anxious for us to work on our mental hospitals, and to establish
mental hygiene clinics throughout the state. This more indirect, but
fundamental approach to our racial and economic and political problems
may in the end prove to be the best and most efficient way to work. I
know we cannot do much with this until after election.
          Sincerely yours, Lillian Smith
          
            Rose Gladney is an assistant professor of American
Studies at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, p. 32
          
          MOTHER: Child, I told you all your life that white folks is
trouble. Treat them right but keep your distance.
          DAUGHTER: But, Momma Jean, I didn't do nothing wrong. I told the
lady she didn't give me the right change and she called me a
liar. And, I told her she was one.
          MOTHER: You didn't have to say that! Did she, Lawyer Chestnut?
          CHESTNUT: Well, maybe she thought she had to say it. In terms of
why you came to see me, it hardly matters. Her generation feels
compelled to say many things we felt compelled not to say. The world
is somewhat different these days.
          MOTHER: Yes, Jesus, the Bible says the world would grow weaker but
wiser. And, I have seen it. Don't get me wrong. I believe in voting,
and the Lord knows I believed in Dr. King. But there is some crazy,
mixed-up white folk who is dangerous. I want my child to be safe.
          DAUGHTER: But, Momma, right is right. Why should I respect some
fool who is going out of her way to disrespect me? If I do that, Momma
Jean, I don't respect me.
          MOTHER: You shut your mouth, child! Don't you be calling nobody a
fool! You don't know the world the way I do. It is better to go around
trouble than go asking somebody for it. I have taken more abuse and
suffered so long, only God understands. And, I did it, child, cause I
wanted to stay in this world long enough to raise you right. I don't
want nobody to run over you or treat you wrong, but black folks is got
to be careful. The world is not right. Justice is as white as them
judges, big shot law people and fancy pants. But, you ain't God,
child, and it is not for you to set white folks right. I wonder about
some black folks who are so mean to other black folks they think is
beneath them. It is the devil! Child, it is not for you, by yourself,
to attack the devil in his element. God said, "Vengeance is mine!" We
need to be careful. It is better for that white woman to keep that
little money than for us to get all mixed up with the police and have
to come bothering Lawyer Chestnut.
          DAUGHTER: We are not bothering Lawyer Chestnut. We are his
clients. It is his business to straighten these things out.
          MOTHER: I knowed Lawyer Chestnut when his Momma was carrying
him. Don't tell me nothing bout no client. Lawyer Chestnut got real
business and no time to be bothered with a mess you didn't even have
to get yourself in.
          CHESTNUT: Well, Mrs. (Blank), I want you to come see my anytime you
think I can be helpful. I would be disappointed if you didn't call or
come by. Now, these things do happen. And, I quite understand
everything you say and recognize the wisdom of your words. I think,
however, because I have to deal with these young people all the time,
I may understand somewhat the point your daughter is trying to
make.
          MOTHER: She ain't got no point!
          CHESTNUT: Well, maybe so and maybe not. Let's look at it this
way. The saleslady called your daughter a liar and your daughter
returned the accusation. You and I can agree that at that point they
were both wrong and not acting like decent people. The saleslady is
grown and you and I can agree that being grown she had a Christian
responsibility to act like a lady, especially in the presence of your
daughter. Now, your daughter is certain the saleslady was motivated by
racism. You and I would think that is probably the case, but wouldn't
draw that flat conclusion without knowing the lady or at least having
witnessed the incident. But, let's just suppose it was racism. In that
case, your daughter was merely responding to Dr. King's message about
not becoming part of the problem and standing up to prejudice. That is
what I meant about the world has changed. There are new things you and
I now have to accept, just as we accepted the old things.
          MOTHER: Glory be, Lawyer Chest! This is a dangerous world. But, you
know more about it than I do. You take care of my child. And tell your
Momma I will be to see her after the church revival ends. I have some
talk for her.
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
        
          Pulling Farms Out of the Hole
          By Hightower, JimJim Hightower
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 5-8
          
          The good news for American farmers in 1988 is that the farm crisis
has officially been declared "over" by the Reagan Administration. The
bad news is that their good news is a lie.
          With the national media's attention recently riveted on Wall
Street's problems, the Administration is trying to spread the
propaganda that the 1985 Farm Bill has worked and that prosperity is
just around the corner-for U.S.  agriculture.
          That is going to come as a surprise to the 235,000 farmers who have
been squeezed out of agriculture as a result of the price-busting,
surplus-generating 1985 Farm Bill, and it is going to offer mighty
cold comfort to the 130,000 other farmers forecast to go under in
1988.
          The Administration bases its rosy assessment of agriculture's
prospects on the fact that net farm income rose in 1987 for the first
time in years and that the volume of our farm exports increased. That
would be happy news, indeed, except that the small increase in farm
income last year came out of the taxpayer's pocket rather than from a
healthy increase in commodity prices, and while export volume went up,
the dollar value of those exports went down.
          This Administration is proving again that figures don't lie, but
liars do figure.
          Our nation's farm economy still is a wreck. Last year was not quite
as bad as 1986 or 1985, but it was not a year to celebrate, and 1988
looks even worse. Farmers will know that the farm crisis is "over"
when they start getting a-fair market price for their commodities and
a warm smile from their bankers. That day will not come until we do
away with Washington's ill-conceived farm program.
          The Reagan Administration promised that the 1985 

Farm Bill would
accomplish four goals: (1) increase farm income; (2) reduce taxpayer
costs; (3) increase agricultural exports; and (4) lower crop
surpluses. When Reagan signed the bill, he was quoted in the
New York Times as saying the legislation "provides new
hope for America's hard-working farmers and our rural
communities.'"
          After two years, we can see that the 1985 Farm Bill has failed
miserably on each point. Just consider this:
Net farm income rose by an average of $500 Million between
1985 and 1987, when adjusted for inflation, which is an increase of
less than 2 percent. Every penny of this very small increase was due
to record high taxpayer subsidies, which, for many producers, must now
account for two-thirds of their gross farm income. The prices which
producers were paid for most of their crops continued to fall, just as
they have since 1981, often to only one-half of 1987's actual
production expenses.As bad as prices were in 1987, they will get even worse in
1988. Under the Budget Reconciliation Act just signed by President
Reagan, target prices this year will drop an additional 1.4 percent on
top of the 2 percent reduction already mandated by the 1985 Farm
Bill.Taxpayer costs increased an additional 27 percent to support
these failed farm policies in 1987,when compared with 1985. The
projected three-year price tag of the current farm bill is now over
$68 billion--about $16 billion more than first estimated. Between
1981-88, this Administration will spend a whopping $122 billion on
failed farm programs, the third largest U.S. expense behind defense
spending and Social Security. This Administration has also spent
nearly $50 billion more on its farm program than all that was spent
for U.S. agriculture in the previous forty years.U.S. farm exports have declined by about one-third in the last
seven years, dropping from $44 billion in 1981 to $31 billion in 1985
to $28 billion last year. The decline between 1985-87 was over 10
percent. If you subtract the Export Enhancement Program, which allowed
Russian livestock producers to buy wheat at 36 cents a bushel less
than the U.S. price, the decline in farm exports since 1985 was nearly
12 percent. Even forecasters at the U.S. Department of Agriculture now
predict that the value of U.S. farm exports will decline by 2 percent
in 1988.Crop surpluses have not been reduced either, as the amount of
U.S. wheat and feedgrains in storage is up by 10 percent over the past
two years.
          The results are as ugly as you would expect. The 1985 Farm Bill
forced another 235,000 farmers out of business, not because they were
bad producers or bad managers, but because they had to fight bad farm
policy. It's the same policy which, since 1981, has caused us to lose
over 600,000 productive U.S. farmers--20 percent of our farmers shut
down in a stunningly brief time.
          According to the latest projections from the American Bankers
Association, well continue losing 2,504 U.S. farmers per week in
1988.
          These bad policies have stuck U.S. farmers with debts of nearly
$175 billion, while farmland values have dropped by another 19 percent
nationwide. In some parts of the Midwest. good, rich farmland is now
worth less than one-third of what it was in 1981. Farm lenders now
hold eight million acres in foreclosed farmland--property which they
cannot sell--of which the U.S. Farmers Home Administration possesses
1.6 million acres. Sixty-seven percent of the farmland sold by FmHA
was sold to speculators and agribusiness concerns which fall outside
the mandate of the agency.
          Both FmHA and the Farm Credit System are eager to sell only to
those who can pay cash. No family farmer has the cash money to plunk
down on farmland for a son or daughter, but an investment syndicate
does. A real estate.  developer from Mesa, Ariz., has purchased dozens
of farms in Iowa. He told the New York Times that he
rents the farms, sometimes to former owners, and gets up to 12 percent
in return on his investment in cheap, foreclosed farmland.  Since
1981, the number of acres managed by farm management companies has
increased by an area the size of Colorado. The twelve largest
land-owning insurance companies hold three million acres of farmland
worth $2.3 billion, while commercial banks hold about 400,000 acres
worth $350 million.
          The misery is compounded when you consider that the 1985 Farm Bill
has produced another 25 percent decline in tractor sales, has prompted
the layoff of another 8,800 farm implement workers, has forced another
700 farm implement dealers to close, and has caused over 100
agricultural banks to shut their doors.
          While we are now selling 28 percent fewer John Deere tractors than
in 1981, sales of Mercedes Benzes in this country have skyrocketed by
57 percent. While farm prices were falling, food-processing profits
were going through the roof, and the power of the food industry was
being concentrated at a dizzying pace. Five companies now control
two-thirds of the U.S. beef industry, and one of those companies,
Cargill, also is one of five multinationals which dominate 80 percent
of the world's grain trade. These are the companies that benefit from
a farm policy which saw the United States, in 1986, stockpile 250
million tons of unsold grain when only 40 million tons of grain would
have averted the famine taking place in Africa.
          If there is any good news for American farmers for 1988 

it is
contained in the farm credit rescue package that Congress passed and
sent to the President shortly before Christmas. This legislation is
good news for farmers for two reasons.
          First, it is real, tangible help for farmers who have been
struggling to pay old debts while trying to survive on less
income. Secondly, passage of this legislation is a victory that nobody
believed farmers could win until the American Agriculture Movement,
the National Farmers Union, the National Farmers Organization and the
Save-the-Family-Farm Coalition stood shoulder to shoulder and demanded
that the Farm Credit Act of 1987 address their credit problems as well
as their bankers'.
          This legislation includes debt restructuring and interest rate
write-down provisions. Additionally, Congress provided up to $500,000
per state for mediation services that can help farmers work through
their debt problems.
          Benefitting most from this legislation are the 150,000 farmers
nationwide who have been fighting for seven years with the very
federal agencies that were instructed by Congress to help them.
          With a victory under our belts, the farm community 

again has its
work cut out. Priorities for 1988 include:
          Election of a Democratic President. No farm
program is better than the people who administer it. This
Adminstration has used its discretion to hurt family
farmers at every opportunity, by lowering target prices to the maximum
allowable, by failing to comply with court orders on farm lending
practices, and by refusing to implement disaster programs authorized
by Congress. Without a President who is committed to helping farmers,
new farm legislation will be an impossibility.
          Strengthen the Democratic majority in the
Senate. By retaining the Democrats we now have, such as
Sen. Lloyd Bentsen from Texas, and winning contested seats in
Missouri, Minnesota, Washington, Pennsylvania and Nebraska, farmers
can gain additional clout for passing an effective successor to the
1985 Farm Bill.
          Tinker with the '85 Farm Bill. An example is
eliminating penalties for farmers who try to cut production costs and
protect the environment by reducing pesticides.
          Develop rural economic development
legislation. The federal government has a role to play in helping
farmers diversify production into new cash-value alternative crops and
become processors of their commodities as well as producers. Such
federal assistance should include federal loans and insurance for
alternative crops; financing for producer-owned and -operated
processing operations; research funding for the production and
marketing of alternative crops; and dissemination of market
information on alternative crops.
          Ultimately, there are three basic policy approaches to tackling the
farm crisis: (1) let the family farm system go, leaving control of our
food supply in the hands of investment syndicates and conglomerates;
(2) stick with some version of heavy taxpayer subsidization of
commodity producers and shippers; or (3) replace expensive tax
subsidization with some form of effective supply management.
          It is that third alternative that best serves American taxpayers
and American farmers.
          By strictly limiting our production of certain commodities to the
known demand, U.S. farmers will eliminate price-busting, tax-eating
surpluses. They will produce to meet the actual demands of the
domestic market, world cash and credit markets, and world hunger
needs. In return for matching their production with real demand, a
realistic and fair price floor would be established for these
commodities at roughly the cost of production, thus preventing price
busting by monopolistic purchasers.
          By selling America's farm commodities in the marketplace, instead
of to the government, we can "zero out" the humongous sums that
taxpayers have been forced to pay in the form of crop subsidies to
farmers, conglomerates and syndicates. In 1987, crop and storage
payments cost U.S. taxpayers over $22 billion. A supply-management
approach would eliminate all crop subsidy payments to farmers, saving
taxpayers $18 billion in its first year and $22 billion
thereafter. Under this approach, the only taxpayer outlays are to
combat world hunger, to create a conservation reserve, and to
establish a crop disaster program.
          Simply stated, this is the single best approach that exists for
pulling good farmers, overburdened taxpayers and the rural economy out
of the hole.
          
            Jim Hightower is serving his second four-year term as the
elected Texas commissioner of agriculture. His comments are excerpted
from an address to the ninth annual convention of the American
Agriculture Movement, which met in January in Wichita,
Kansas.
          
        
        
          Cause at Heart: A Former Communist Remembers by
Junius Irving Scales and Richard Nickson. (Athens: University of
Georgia Press, 1987.427 pages. $24.95.)
          By Sullivan, PatriciaPatricia Sullivan
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 29-31
          
          In 1946 the Interracial Committee for North Carolina (CNC) of the
Southern Conference for Human Welfare considered support for a bill
pending in the state legislature for the construction of a new
hospital. To the obvious annoyance of many of the white members
present, Junius Scales inquired how black patients were to be
accommodated, and how many black physicians and nurses would be
employed. Dr. Frank Graham, president of the University of North
Carolina and a founding member of the CNC, responded that the hospital
would be segregated and that no black nurses or physicians would be
employed. While recognizing that this was a "shameful" situation,
Dr. Graham suggested that it was unavoidable if the hospital were to
be built at all. Sales recalled that before he could reply, Dr. David
Jones, president of Bennett College, took the lectern: "'I and my
people would follow Dr. Graham to the ends of the earth,' he said. 'We
respect and love him. But my God!' His voice became an agonized
roar...'My God! How long must my people wait until the first faltering
word is spoken by white men of good will saying that segregation is
criminal--that it is destroying my people.' His impressive figure
trembling with emotion, he appeared to want to say something else, but
instead he resumed to his seat amid a stunned silence and sat with his
hand over his face."
          Junius Scales came of age during the era of the depression and New
Deal, in a South where segregation was still firmly intact. As the
hospital incident demonstrated, the majority of white liberals
"still clung to separate but equal delusions; were eager to avoid
confrontation on the 'race issue'; shied away from a chance to fight
segregation even on favorable grounds; and were all too often ready to
seek a 'solution' by promising a future fight which usually did not
take place." Scales was sensitive to the pervasive bigotry against
blacks prevalent even in the enlightened community of Chapel
Hill. "By established custom," he recalled, "20 percent of
the population was consigned to poverty, indignation and isolation
because of skin color." They were a concern only as a reservoir
for domestic servants. This gulf between the daily reality of racism
and discrimination, and the white liberal response helped stimulate
Scales's interest and subsequent membership in the Communist Party,
the only political organization that actively challenged the
segregation system and made racial equality a central component of its
agenda.
          Junius Scales appeared an unlikely Communist. He was born to one of
the most prominent families in North Carolina. John Rolfe and
Pocahontas were among his maternal ancestors. Scales's paternal
ancestors arrived in Jamestown, Va., in 1623, and after migrating to
North Carolina took an active role in politics, serving in the state
legislature, U.S. Congress, North Carolina Supreme Court, and the
office of governor. Alfred Moore Scales, Junius's father, was elected
to the state senate at the age of twenty five, twice re-elected over
long intervals, and declined an appointment as chief justice of the
North Carolina Supreme Court. In addition to a successful law
practice, his real estate investments were worth several million
dollars by the time Junius was born in 1920. The family suffered
severe financial losses at the end of the 1920s, but Alfred Scales
took the monetary loss in stride. He had always impressed upon his
children the futility of dedicating one's life to the accumulation of
material wealth, and demonstrated the importance of public service
through his political activities on behalf of liberal racial policies,
women's suffrage, and religious tolerance.
          While Scales shared his father's abiding concern for the greater
good, the traditional outlets for such a pursuit appeared less than
satisfactory. Unlike the majority of his contemporaries entering the
1938 freshman class at Chapel Hill, Scales had little interest in
social status and refused to pledge for a fraternity. His primary
interests were music, literature and ideas. Scales became increasingly
sensitive to the widening gap between himself and traditional Southern
values, finding that most of the intellectual yeast for undergraduates
was provided by "outsiders" from the North and West. (It was at Chapel
Hill that he met Richard Nickson, a native of New Mexico, who became a
life-long friend and assisted in the writing of this memoir.)
          Abernathy's bookstore, a noted gathering place for intellectuals
and radicals which Scales had frequented since high school days,
continued to provide a stimulating center for intellectual and
political discourse. The critical point in his political development,
however, came with his participation in a student-labor conference in
Durham, sponsored by the state CIO and a number of black and white
academic figures from throughout the state. For the first time in his
life, Scales met blacks on an equal basis, and shared a meal with
several black students, one of whom was the daughter of Dr. David
Jones. Shortly thereafter he joined the American Student Union, and
was soon invited to join the Communist Party. After careful
consideration, he decided to join the Party on a "trial" basis in the
spring of 1939.
          Scales quickly became disillusioned with the sectarianism and lack
of purpose of the Chapel Hill chapter of the Communist Party. He was
preparing to resign when he met Bart Logan, native Georgian and
district organizer for North and South Carolina. Scales assisted Logan
with a textile strike in High Point, an event that reaffimmed his
commitment to the Communist Party as the means for advancing economic
and racial justice. He was overwhelmed by the poverty and exploitation
that dominated life in the 

textile mill. At the same time, Scales was
stirred by the deep commitment of Logan and several veterans from the
famous Gastonia strike to help the powerless move beyond fear and
apathy by organizing. Scales concluded that more than a strike was
taking place; it was a social revolution. For the next eighteen years,
Junius Scales would strive to carry this effort forward as a leading
member of the Communist Party in North Carolina.
          Junius Scales provides an important and often moving account of the
Communist Party's role in labor organizing and civil rights activities
in the South during the 1940s. While Scales applies a critical eye to
the events of the past, his memoir succeeds in capturing the hope and
enthusiastic dedication that motivated him and many of his compatriots
some forty years ago. As a key organizer of the Communist Party in the
High Point area and Chapel Hill, and later district organizer for the
state, Scales sought political answers to local problems, and often
succeeded in adapting national Party directives to individual
cases. He spent his first year as a Party member working in a textile
mill, engaging workers directly, and responding as an organizer to the
harsh reality of their lives. After serving in the army during the
war. Scales moved back to Chapel Hill. Scales began graduate study in
History, and took a leading role in several liberal groups that
thrived in the early postwar period, including the American Veterans
Committee and the Committee for North Carolina. He avoided
sectarianism, and appreciated the efforts of white liberals who
perhaps were not moving as quickly as he. As a Communist Scales saw
himself as a gadfly-his role was not to subvert liberal groups, but to
push them as far as their program and membership would allow. Scales
believed that if socialism were to be realized in the United States,
it must come through the force of ideas and the ballot box, not by
violence and rhetorical coercion.
          Scales's account of the Party's positive contributions is
accompanied by a harsh critique of the dogmatism and moral limitations
of Party policy, which often guided his own behavior. Recounting his
part in the expulsion of two Party members, he writes, "was always,
the glorious ends justified the slimy means and I had to squelch that
persistent inner voice which suggested that perhaps the unsavory means
were tainting the qualities of the socialist goals." However,
during the 1940s, Scales repressed any doubts he had concerning the
Party and concentrated his attention on local issues and concerns. In
the early 1940s the Party organized broad labor support in High Point
to petition the Federal Housing Authority to provide low cost
housing. This effort ultimately succeeded, despite strong opposition
from local "slum lords," and greatly improved the standard of low-cost
housing in the area. Voter registration and education were also an
important part of Party efforts, in addition to running workers for
local office on third party tickets. The Southern Negro Youth Congress
provided an organized based for young militant black students, who
took an active role in voter registration efforts in the black
community. Scales's moving account of a 1946 SNYC meeting in Columbia,
S.C., attended by several thousand, provides a glimpse of the black
awakening already underway throughout the South. At that meeting
Scales was elected a vice president of the SNYC, the first and only
white to serve as an officer of the organization. There was also the
successful organization of the tobacco workers in Winston-Salem, a
predominantly black union with a powerful leadership that became an
active force in local politics. One final example is Scales's and

Louis Austin's timely intervention in the Mack Ingram case, helping to
avert the "legal lynching" of a black man convicted of assaulting a
white woman with his "glare," having never gotten within seventy feet
of her. Scales and Austin, black editor of the Carolina
Times, investigated the story, and fed it to New York
Post reporter Ted Poston. The national and international
attention that followed led to the appeal of the conviction, and its
reversal.
          The changing political climate of the late 1940s limited Scales's
ability to maneuver within the parameters of Communist Party policy,
as well as in the society at large. In 1947, he publicly declared his
membership in the Communist Party in an effort to counteract
anti-communist hysteria. His announcement had the opposite effect, and
left him isolated from many of his liberal associates. Meanwhile, the
national Communist Party was increasingly on the defensive in the face
of federal efforts to outlaw the Party, and the CIO's expulsion of
left-wing unions. Scales explains how the Party leadership turned
inward, becoming more sectarian and internally divisive, and less an
active force for political change. The early 1950s were painful years
for Scales and others whose efforts to remain a creative force on the
political scene became increasingly futile. For Scales, it came to an
abrupt end on November 18, 1954, when he was arrested by FBI officials
and charged with violating the Smith Act.
          As Scales undertook a long and lonely legal battle, his
disillusionment with the Communist Party and its increasing
irrelevance to the American political scene culminated with his
departure from the Party. Living outside of the Party, he writes, was
"an extremely painful adjustment .... The belief was dead and with
it had gone the innocence and joy forever. The truth as we saw it was
that the American Communist dream had become a cruel, convoluted
hoax." In spite of his "non-Communist" status, the government
relentlessly pursued Scales's case, which it built primarily on the
testimony of paid informers. The government sought to prove that by
virtue of his membership in the Communist Party, Scales was guilty of
conspiracy to violently overthrow the government. Despite the
brilliant legal counsel of Telford Taylor, Scales was convicted by a
jury in Greensboro. The legal history of the case and its relationship
to the interpretation of the Smith Act and the Internal Security Act,
is an important study in Cold War domestic politics. Ultimately, the
Supreme Court upheld Scales's conviction, 5-4, and he entered the
federal penitentiary on October 2,1961, to begin serving a six-year
sentence.
          Scales's reflection on his prison experience comprises the last
part of this memoir and is an integral part of it, for this book is
less a history of the Communist Party in North Carolina than the story
of one individual's unending quest on behalf of human decency and
justice. Scales's personal dignity and integrity sustained him in
prison. He spent much of his time trying to make the experience more
endurable for those around him. For example, he shared his love and
appreciation of music with fellow inmates by organizing popular Sunday
evening presentations of his favorite operas. Scales's separation from
his devoted wife, Gladys, and young daughter, Barbara, was the most
painful aspect of his imprisonment. Prominent liberals organized a
movement for an executive pardon. However, J. Edgar Hoover and
Nicholas Katzenbach wanted Scales first to prove the fact that he was
no longer a loyal Communist by testifying about other Party
members. With the full realization that a pardon might not be gained
unless he "cooperated," Scales refused to consider the
suggestion. Nevertheless, on Christmas Day 1962, Scales was reunited
with his family following an executive commutation of his sentence
(thus he remains a convicted felon).
          Junius Scales's participation in the racial and social reform
movements of the 1940s may seem little more than a footnote to that
history. While he was being tried and serving time, the civil rights
movement came to the fore of the national scene with the Brown
decision, the emergence of Martin Luther King, the mass protests of
the early sixties, and ultimately the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the
Voting Rights Act of 1965. It is ironic that while the Justice
Department focused its determined energy on the conviction and
incarceration of Junius Scales as a threat to the government, white
Southerners blatantly ignored federal law by obstructing the
integration of schools, with little interference from federal law
enforcement agencies. And, despite the gains of the 1950s and 1960s,
many of the promises of the civil rights movement remain unrealized in
the areas of jobs, housing, education, and economic
security. Moreover, organized labor has been unable to effectively
represent the economic and political interests of the majority of
American workers. Junius Scales's "God" may have failed. But the
struggle for economic and racial justice which challenged his youthful
idealism remains a powerful reality, yet to penetrate the mainstream
of American political discourse.
          
            Patricia Sullivan teaches history at Emory
University.
          
        
        
          Septima P. Clark 1898-1987
          By Steverson, BillBill Steverson
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 12-16
          
          I WAS BORN IN CHARLESTON, S.C., the same place where I am living
now. My father was a slave on the Joel Poinsette plantation. He came
out of slavery not feeling one bit of violence. I'm glad that he gave
to me a lot of that, because I have never felt angry with the people
who really shunned me or did any kind of thing to make me feel that I
was not worthy of things that they enjoyed. I still have that feeling,
however, that my life is a life that's different from theirs, so I
don't have that hate in my heart and I'm sure that I'll never have it
anymore.
          Now my mother was different. My mother was a strict
disciplinarian. Her mother was part Indian, and there were three sets
of children in her family. My father, too, had a number
of children, but he was Joel Poinsette's Great Fellow. He took the
children to school; he stayed with them when the mother and father
were having their fun. He saw to it that they were bathed and dressed,
and he grew up loving those kids. I'm glad for him, because as I had
to work, I felt that the nonviolence that he gave to all of us is
worthwhile. My mother was raised in Haiti and came back here to South
Carolina to live. She had an altogether different attitude from that
of my father.
          In South Carolina when I was around 18, I knew that there were no
public schools for black children. The missionaries from Boston,
Massachusetts, came down here and they started what we call Avery
Institute, but it was not a public school. We had to pay. We only paid
a dollar and a half, but the economy was such that my parents did not
have that much money a month to pay for me to go to school. So I
worked with a dressmaker across the street from where I lived at that
time, and there I helped take care of her children while she sewed,
and I worked at others in sewing, then I was able to go to Avery
Institute with that dollar and a half she paid me every month I could
get my work in high school.
          Those people did an excellent job. We had things in the
languages--Greek and Latin and French and Spanish along with the
English and social studies. When we finished, we took an examination
from the state, and after taking that, examinations in eleven
different subjects, it made us qualified to go over on the island on
the east coast of Charleston and teach. We couldn't teach in the city
of Charleston; segregation was at its height. And no black teacher
could teach in the city of Charleston although we had a Menninger
Normal School for whites and they had the same kind of training that
we had for blacks. But they taught the black children as well as the
whites, and we could not go to those schools; nor could we teach at
all. That was the way it was 1910-1919.
          No matter what you wanted to buy, you couldn't try on a dress in
any of those rooms in the stores. You had to go into a broom closet to
try on whatever you wanted. And then when I got to the place where I
would go down to the tax office to pay taxes on my house, I would have
to stand back of the wall until every white person had paid and then I
could pay my taxes. It was really something to think about. And on the
street on which I lived, it was integrated-that is-there were German
families, and Irish families and Italian families all on that
street. And when we got our skates at Christmas time we couldn't skate
past their door. We had to go on the outside of the street to
skate. That's what we had to do. We really had real segregation.
          IN 1919 I CAME FROM THE ISLANDS and felt, well, there was an artist
here, Edwin Halston, who told us about a thing called the NAACP. I
thought that was a good thing to join, and I did join. When I joined
up, I heard about black teachers not being able to teach in the city
of Charleston, so I took my class that I was teaching at Avery Normal
Institute and went from door to door to see if black parents 

wanted
their children to teach black children in the city of Charleston, and
I found that they did, so we got their signatures, some of them on
little pieces of paper bag. And after getting those signatures, we
gave them to the president of State College in Orangeburg-Tommy
Miller. He took them to the Legislature and in 1920 we got black
teachers in the school, and in 1921, they got black principals in the
schools in Charleston.
          When I taught on the islands at that time, I had 132 children in my
class and in my school. I was a teaching principal; there was one
other teacher with me. We were paid $25 a month. We paid board out of
that and taught the children as well. We had a schoolhouse with no
indoor nor outdoor toilets. We had a bucket where we could get some
water from somebody down the road from where we were. They did give us
a board on the side of the wall painted black. We used that board to
write our lessons on, and this is the way we taught. But you'd be
suprised to know that I have a young man living there in New York who
paddled across (to the island) to come to that school, and he is one
of the highest paid lawyers in the United States.
          During the (Depression) when we had no money whatsoever, and food
was being given, the only thing the people could do was to be sure
whatever ground they had in front of them and plant vegetables so that
they could have some vegetables to grow and to eat. We really didn't
know what we could do about meat. I can remember standing in line for
quite some time to get a can of hash. That can of hash would have to
last a family all day long. I do know that we could buy-we didn't call
them hotdogs at that time, but sausage, and cut them into little
pieces and with a plate of grits you were able to eat that little
piece of sausage with a whole plate of grits. I can't say we didn't
have any real troubles. On the islands, we didn't have babies
immunized. We had sixty-eight babies to die in a short time, and then
after that we had people who suffered because they didn't have
vegetables and meats, and because of that, pellagra took over, and we
lost a lot of people on account of pellagra. It was around the last
part of the 1920s into the '30s.
          I WENT TO COLUMBIA in 1926 to work, and I worked there as a teacher
for nineteen years. There I made a little bit more money. I got $62.50
a month and paid my board out of that.
          We found that white teachers were being paid so much more money
than black teachers. In fact, when I was on the island, the white
teacher that had her school there across from the one where I was
teaching, was getting $85 a month while both of us were getting just
$50 a month. So when I went to Columbia, I thought it would be a good
time to try to see if we couldn't do something about equalization of
teachers' salaries.
          I went (to Columbia) to teach the third (grade) at the C.A. Johnson
High School. All grades were together at that school. And, I must say
that I felt that the supervisor of that school-Mr. C.A. Johnson-was an
excellent person. He came around monitoring the rooms, and when you
failed to teach the children as he thought it should be done, he had
two meetings a week: a professional meeting and a building meeting in
that school. And so, we would be there on Tuesdays and Thursdays until
around five o'clock listening to Mr. Johnson teach teachers how to
teach. Sometimes it would be to figure addition for the little
children; another time it might be social studies for the bigger
ones. But whatever it was, that's the way he worked.
          But we still had segregation and we still had the unequal
salaries. So Benedict College and Allen University had meetings, and
with those meetings we learned something about the political side of
life and what we needed to do to sit where we needed to sit on buses,
to go into the restaurants and eat, to go into the five & ten cent
stores and be able to sit down and eat as well as buy toothpaste and
other things. Those were the things that you couldn't do. And the
hospitals. We had a time with babies and hospitals. The black babies
were really sort of discriminated against, but you know, there was a
white doctor who came to some of those meetings to tell us how about
how those black babies were suffering, and we were able through
Dr. Manse (a black doctor), we started a hospital there. I can't
remember the name of the hospital now, but most of us gave something
like fifty dollars apiece to get that hospital started. And in that
way, we were able to get people to see the needs of a big city like
Columbia, and get Columbia going so that we could have our rights.
          Of course we walked at nights from one place to another with
equalization of teachers' salaries.
          And Thurgood Marshall came down and we showed him our checks, and
with those checks we went to the statehouse, and after a discussion of
quite some time, they decided that the National Teachers' Exam should
be given and black teachers would then be able, after taking that
test, to try to qualify to get the same type of salary. About
forty-two of us decided that we would take the test. We took the test,
and we made good. Salaries raised. They tripled, not doubled. 'Cause
from $62.50 it went up to $175 and I felt so wealthy that I decided I
would go back (to Charleston). You know I didn't have a bachelor's
degree then. I taught in the mornings and went to Allen and Benedict
at night. And when I finished Benedict in '42, I went to Hampton and
got a degree in'46.
          IN JANUARY 19,1957, the South Carolina Legislature passed a law
that no city or state employee could be a member of the NAACP. The
Clarendon County teachers decided they would say that yes, they were
members. Most of our teachers wouldn't say yes. Forty-one teachers in
Clarendon County decided they were members of the NAACP and because
they said "yes" they were hauled to Charleston and Anthony Williams
was the judge and he claimed that we did not-he did not have enough
facts in the case-so he closed that thing down that day. When he did
that, the next day the Legislature opened up and said, "Change the
wording from 'no city or state employee could be a member of the NAACP
to list your affiliations'." And those who listed their
affiliations were dismissed also.
          They took away my job and my pension and everything. Over my name
went 726 letters to black teachers, and those black teachers were
afraid, of course. And they had to be, because about 169 teachers came
from Virginia and Washington to get our jobs. But you know the people
in Clarendon County refused to board them. Anyway, they sent me a
letter June 8,1956, that I could not teach in Charleston any 

longer,
so I couldn't. That's when I went to Highlander Folk School.
          I had put in money in my retirement pension-the letter's right
there-but I could not get them to say that I should have my
retirement. Four per cent of my monthly money had to go to the
retirement, and when I received an award down in Miami, in 1975, the
Governor of South Carolina then decided I should have some of my
money, and also he sent me a letter with $3,600. Later on, in 1981-25
years afterwards-they sent me a part of my money. They owed me
$72,000. 'Cause it's $5,000 a year, and they owed me $72,000 but they
wouldn't give it to me. They gave me $20,000. It was good because I
was able to pay the mortgage off on my house. Right now I'm working
for my current pension. I'm supposed to get $5,000 a year until I die,
but I haven't gotten it. I'm still working on it-I've got some people
working on it now. I never did get back to teach any more in South
Carolina, but I was a member of the School Board for eight years.
          When we went down to the hearing at that courthouse, Judge
(J. Waites) Waring was the (federal) judge here. When we down to that
hearing, some of those white people didn't want us to sit in the
seats, and Judge Waring said "Why they're the people that are
supposed to sit in those seats. They're being tried." Then we sat
on those seats.
          Judge Waring played a great part in South Carolina. One night we
had a testimonial for him after he opened the Democratic Party, and he
said that night that you know a judge has to live with his
conscience. Judge Waring said, "I have to live with my conscience
and I can see white fellows that I know are bums come into that court
and being treated like first class gentlemen, and I see black people
come into that court who I know are great men, and they're treated
like bums. I couldn't bear to see that go on."
          Of course, you know he was terribly harassed. His wife was going to
speak at the YWCA. That night some white men surrounded the house and
took pieces of cement and threw through her window. She was sitting on
the couch, but they didn't hit her, thank goodness. Another time he
had to have guards when he went to the barber to get his hair cut; men
had to stand on both sides of him. Mrs. Waring went on Broad Street to
get a paper written and the woman refused, she decided that she
couldn't do it for her. And then she invited some people to a tea at
her house, and they had some people coming all the way in here from
Florida, but the black people in Charleston were afraid, and they
wouldn't go. Just a few of us. Mrs. Waring differed from Judge
Waring. She called them decadent and low-down when she spoke at the
YWCA. She really blessed them out, but he never would do a thing like
that. He just said to the reporters, now here are the papers, if you
want something to print, here it is.
          HIGHLANDER FOLK SCHOOL was really a school for problems. People
were afraid of Highlander, but Highlander did an excellent job getting
attitudes to change and making social change as we went along. I went
in 1954. I felt very good about the Highlander Folk School, and then I
felt that I would try to get some of the people off the islands to
come to the Highlander Folk School. While up there, we got them to
meet northern whites and southern whites, northern blacks and southern
blacks. They slept in the same room. They washed dishes together, and
held their conferences in the library together.
          Esau Jenkins was one of the fellows. He decided it would be good if
he could come back home and get his people registered to vote, so they
could have a better life on the islands-on Johns Island in particular
at that time. And so, that's what they did. We didn't have a place. A
minister wouldn't let us have any meetings in their churches-they were
too afraid. So we bought a building with the help of some people in
the north; they sent us some money through the Highlander Folk School
through Myles Horton (founder and director of the school) to buy a
building. We started the Citizenship School there. We found out that
they didn't want teachers who were certified teachers to teach them,
so we found people who could read well aloud and write legibly to
teach in those schools.
          WE DIDN'T HAVE STORES over on the islands, so we had to teach them
how to fill out applications, how to write out money orders for things
that they wanted. Some wanted to read the Bible-those who were living
on plantations and having those Wednesday night meetings. There were
others who wanted to read the newspaper. And those are the kinds of
things that we did. We listened to them, and so we found out just what
they needed, what they wanted. We worked on that, 'cause when we found
out when they learned a word from the paper they could use it with the
Bible, they could use it in other ways. That's the kind of thing that
we did.
          Then the Marshall Field Foundation came in and they gave us some
money and we were able to get people together. When it was a busy time
for them on the farm, we paid them to come to school at nights. And
when we paid them to come to school, it was surprising to see them
feeling so good about being able to buy a new pair of jeans, or
whatever they could. [This was on Johns Island]. The teaching-we
started with thirty-seven women in 1957, and then when we were
teaching them for three months, we were able to get them to come to
Charleston to go up to try to register to vote. But you know South
Carolina had that silly law where they had to read and say "I am
not guilty of miscegenation, wife beating, larceny or anything against
the election laws." Now when they could read that, they could get
a registration certificate. And when we were able to get through
quickly, Esau taught them in the buses when he brought them over to
the places. The men worked at 

nights on the wharf and so the women in
turn had to teach their husbands how to memorize that part of the
election laws. That's the way we did it.
          Anyway, after we were able to get them to say that, the law was
changed. Well, the Voting Rights Bill came and they did not have to
read that section of the election law. I don't know if you know it:
Georgia had thirty questions and they had to answer twenty-four of
those correctly. Louisiana had twenty-four questions, and one question
was "I am not the father of an illegitimate child." Even though she
was a woman she had to say that. All of those things have been wiped
out with the Voting Rights Bill in 1965.
          Alabama-it's real funny. We had a man with a Ph.D. there, teaching
at that Tuskegee, and he was teaching there and he could not answer
that registrar. The question was, what is a thief? And he never could
tell that man what is a thief. He found out when he came to Highlander
that he should have said: "A thief is a nigger that steals." As
long as he did not say that, he could not get a registration
certificate, although he was a Ph.D. fellow.
          In Mississippi we had twenty-four questions that they had to
answer, and then there were questions after that that were given by
the registrars. Those questions-they wanted to know how-something
about living in Mississippi. As long as they couldn't tell how well
off they were in the state of Mississippi, they could not get a
registration certificate. But you know, it's suprising, after the
Voting Rights Bill when they didn't have to do all of that,
Mississippi sent the first black man to its Legislature, by the name
of Robert Clark.
          HIGHLANDER WAS CLOSED DOWN in 1959. I was arrested, you know, in
August of 1959. They had a court trial-teaching an integrated
group. They really said I was serving whiskey but they found out that
I was teaching-it was against the laws of the state of Tennessee to
teach an integrated group. I had sixty blacks and twelve whites in
class, and Myles (Horton) was in Monaco at the time, taking this
American citizenship education over there, and these people didn't
like it, so they surrounded us one night when we were having a
workshop. They surrounded the school house, and we were showing a film
that I had from the Southern Regional Council-"The Face of
the South"-and it was telling how the Southern people
failed to give black children education and the like.
          They came in. They wanted to know, where's Septima Clark. I said:
"Here I am." They put me in a car. The moving picture was still
going on. The man told some of the people to turn it off, and they
said, well, you have arrested Septima Clark and we don't know how to
work this machine, so they just jerked it out of the wall. Those
people started (singing) "we will overcome." Two or three white
boys were there at that time, and one started strumming on a guitar,
and they put all three of them in that car with me. When we got to the
jail, I asked them if I could make a phone call. I was gonna call a
lawyer in Nashville, but they said "No." I said that I know I have the
right to make one phone call, but they wouldn't let me make it. About
two o'clock that morning, two white missionaries came to take me
out. When they came, they would not let them use a check. They had to
get cash money. And Esau said it was suprising to know that those
people all came together and found $500.
          THE FIRST TIME I MET Martin Luther King was in 1957 when we had
that 25th Anniversary [Highlander had been founded in 1932.]
Mrs. Roosevelt came too. So Dr. King and Mrs. Roosevelt and a fellow
from North Carolina- the fellow that did the evaluation of my book,
Echo In My Soul, he came at that time too.
          I thought well of (King). He spoke so well for a young man, and I
was very happy to hear him talk about this nonviolence that he found
was so great. That's when he talked about (how) the South is going to
really go ahead of the North, and that integration and registration
and one other kind of -gration he says, with laborization, was going
to be the things that would help the South to become the kind of
thing-I always felt that the South would out do the North too. At that
meeting, we had a black fellow to come from New York who was related
with the communists. We had another white fellow to come in on the bus
who was also related with the communists. And when Dr. King and those
left they put those great big billboards on the road, and under that,
they put "Communist Training School." Put them
all up through Tennessee-from Georgia to Tennessee. I can't figure
that man's name that came, but...this was a white fellow that was
working with the governor in Atlanta, Georgia, at the time.
          Right after the hearing-after we had that court trial- the school
was closed down, but we stayed on there and we worked right there. We
had a big workshop of people from the foothills of Missouri. Lots of
them were afraid, but they came. Then we had some people from the
Appalachians we were trying to get to do something about milk...and
their section at the time. They became afraid so they left, but the
black people came on, and then we started our schools throughout. We
started workshops, and we started schools in the eleven deep South
states.
          Rev. (Ralph) Abernathy's wife gathered together quite a number of
women who came from the (Montgomery) Improvement Association. I can't
think of quite a few of those ministers' names who came up one night,
but we had lots of big workshops-fifty or more at a time would come,
and when they came up, we talked about the government under which they
were living and tried to get them to see that they needed to change
the kind of government that they had so that things would be
better. That's when we started branching into those various states,
and starting affiliate groups 

throughout the eleven deep South states,
and also starting the schools-teaching them to read and write. You
know in some places they had to write their name in cursive writing
[in order to vote].
          IN 1957 I HAD A LETTER from Mrs. (Virginia) Durr telling me about
Rosa Parks. She wanted to know if Rosa Parks could come to the
Highlander Folk School, and would we be able to send for her so that
she could come free of charge. So, we sent her money to ride on the
bus, and also money to eat on the way, as she was coming. I was really
impressed with this woman. She kept the faith, saying, she had no
qualms whatsoever about being arrested because she would not give up
her seat to a white man who came into the bus after she had been
seated. And so, she was arrested. And after being arrested,
fingerprinted, and Mr. Nixon from Montgomery went down there and took
her out.
          At the Fiftieth Anniversary (of the Highlander Center) she was
there in Tennessee. So.  Rosa Parks turned a lot of things around from
refusing to give that seat in Montgomery, Alabama. Well, it has been
good to know her.
          IN COLUMBIA, S.C., WHEN I was teaching there, there was a woman
named Fleming who got on that bus and refused to go to the back. And
that bus driver thought that he was going to be very much of a
hoodlum, I guess, and he was going to put her off that bus, but she
fought back. Of course, we had quite a case there with Fleming and
that bus driver, but that wasn't the first time for South Carolina. I
was on that bus on one of the main streets and a white man pulled the
coat off of a black man because he was getting in the bus ahead of
him. You know what I did, I rode all the way down to the bus station
that day, and I told them that this man had paid his fare just like
that other fellow, and he didn't have to wait for a man. He could wait
for women, but he didn't have to wait for a man to get on the bus. He
could get on the bus in front of a man, and he couldn't understand why
that man had that kind of feeling.
          They brought in a man from Atlanta who spoke to us and got us
stirred up about that thing. I can't think of his name now but he was
over there at one of those universities, and we all became concerned,
and we decided that we were not going to let anybody tell us where to
sit on those buses. We didn't get any result until the Rosa Parks
affair, we really didn't get any results. We always had somebody
fighting.
          (Many people in South Carolina) didn't think about using the
courts. They were going try to do it themselves- violently. That's
when we had a number of meetings at Benedict College, with Herman
Long, and a number of meetings when Thurgood Marshall came down. Those
are the kinds of things that we did, but we really didn't feel as if
we could do any nonviolent work at all. We were going to fight that
thing out ourselves. But we didn't have success, because over and over
again those things were happening- you know-fussing and fighting on
buses. We weren't going to sit to the back if we didn't have to.
          We didn't feel as if we could listen to the people who were really
feeling that they had to work nonviolently. We didn't feel that
way. Not only Columbia, but I know we had the same thing in Atlanta
with Stokely Carmichael. He didn't feel as if we needed to work
nonviolently. Dr. King had him at his house one Sunday afternoon and
then that Monday I had him and he brought six boys and I fed them all
at a restaurant there on Auburn Avenue, but he still didn't feel as if
we should be nonviolent. So, he took me home that night and he told me
that, "Miss Clark, I'm not gonna let anybody hurt you. But I'm not
going to feel that Dr. King has the right idea." And I said,
"Do you think its well to have boys to knock out the windows of the
merchants on the street?" He said, "Well, if they don't do
right, we just have to do that." Anyway, he left us and he went to
England, and I happened (in 1972) to go to Washington and when I got
into that Martin Luther King Center there, he was speaking. He saw me
coming in the door, and he said, "Here comes the lady who helped me
to be nonviolent."
          But you know he came here two years ago, and I bet you 600
policemen surrounded that church in front of that Piggly
Wiggly. They're still afraid of Stokeley Carmichael. Nevertheless,
Stokeley spoke that night, and I said everybody else could take over
the city because the policemen were all there.
          We had numbers of people who didn't feel as if nonviolence was the
thing. They really didn't. They thought you were foolish to be
non-violent. Stokeley thought so, too. He thought I was foolish to try
to tell them not to fight. They were going to fight.
          THE ONLY WAY YOU CAN GET (change) to happen is to get the people to
see things like you see them. If you don't get them to organize
themselves within and see what's happening to them, you don't get
anything done. Don't try it by yourself. See how many people you can
get to realize what you would like to have done, and this is the way
you can get change.
          When I first started, I thought that I would be able to just tell
people (to change). I thought I could tell teachers that you just tell
the people that you're going to be a member of the NAACP and that
would solve the problem. It didn't happen that way. They didn't have
that same feeling, so they wouldn't do it that way. When we got them,
got all of the illiterate people ready to register and vote, then we
were able to let them see how far behind they were with jobs, how far
they were behind with money, and how far they were behind with
everything else. That was the way we got them to come together. If
change is to come, we've got to get groups together who think about
the things that need to be done, otherwise you don't get change to
come. 
          
            Septima Poinsette Clark died December 15,
1987, at a nursing home on John's Island, S.C. She was 89 years old,
and during her long, productive life had been involved in many of the
most significant civil rights struggles of the century. Her words
below are excerpted from an interview recorded in 1983 by Worth Long
and Randall Williams for the Southern Regional Council's Civil Rights
Radio Documentaries Project.
            Edited by BILL STEVERSON
          
        
        
          What Price Are We Willing to Pay?
          By Sanders, RoseRose Sanders
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 23-24
          
          Since I have been in the South it has come to my attention that the
Black Belt has the greatest potential of any region in this country to
reach economic independence with equity and justice.
          Historically, the Black Belt has experienced some of the harshest
forms of economic and racial repression. In spite of the political
gains that have been made there since 1965, the Black Belt remains one
of America's poorest regions. In spite of the fact that we now have
black elected officials, we still remain economically under the
control of the same people who politically controlled us for over a
century.
          But there is potential in the Black Belt and with the emergence of
political voices, some of the desires of the people are beginning to
be heard. Yet even the voices of our recently elected political
officials in the region are not heard by those in power who can change
things. For it is not in their best interest to change things.
          It is disheartening for me as an individual, a mother, and a
community worker to have people come up to me day after day and ask
for something that should be very simple in this country. Teenagers
with whom I work come to me and ask, "Ms. Sanders, can you help me
find a job." I have young friends who have made the sacrifice and
have gone to college asking me to help them find jobs. Only yesterday
a hardworking couple that I know came to me wanting to buy a
house. Despite their hard work, they remain without the income to
purchase even a modest home.
          We have a situation that clearly deserves a new vision.
          Not long ago I had the opportunity to spend ten days in 

Cuba with a
group of state legislators, including my husband. I was touched by
things that I saw. I could not help but think of things I had
experienced in the Black Belt.
          In Cuba, I didn't see any beggars on the street. I didn't see any
homeless people. In each of the communities that I went into there was
a doctor taking care of the sick. I saw an educational system where
every person received schooling up to the university level free of
charge. I saw a system where everyone had free medical care. I
wondered how is it that a country that is considered "underdeveloped"
can provide for its poor, can provide for women and minorities, while
America, the richest country in the world cannot or will not.
          If we ask who would agree that all people have the right to health
care, all of us would say yes. To an education? All of us would say
yes. To live above the poverty level? All of us would say yes.
          But how do we plan to achieve these ideals in the Black Belt or in
America? I have just about reached the conclusion that the methods
that we are using now will not do. We have economic development
programs. We go to seminars on economic development But something
remains wrong.
          I recall asking my husband why would someone be against free
medical care. He said, "Rose, don't you go back to America talking
about free medical care. The doctors would have a fit. They have a
monopoly on how many doctors, who is to be admitted, how much money is
going to be made...."
          What I am trying to say is that we have to focus on what we want
and how to get it. We don't want people in poverty. We don't want
homeless people. We don't want people uneducated. How will we turn it
around? How can we turn it around in this system?
          One thing the Cuban people did right after the Revolution that
we're trying to do in the Black Belt of Alabama was to educate their
people. To rid the country of illiteracy.
          In the Black Belt of Alabama, there are as many people who can't
read as there are those who can. So, even if we could find the jobs,
how can people do the work? People who gain literacy gain hope. They
are more likely to dream and to make those dreams come true. So, when
we talk about economic development, we must place more emphasis on
education.
          How do we do it? In the Black Belt of Alabama, we are in control of
at least five of our school systems. We are physically in control of
them, but we are, in fact, trapped by tradition. If you're in a race
and you are behind, you can't do things like everybody else and expect
to catch up. So it requires creative solutions not just with community
organizations, but in institutions and in systems like the public
school system.
          There are a few superintendents who are beginning to move in that
direction. But it should not surprise you if the innovators are being
attacked by the power structure in the Black Belt that still finds a
way to manipulate even though politically they are not in control.
          Most of us want to maintain our present standard of living and not
give up anything. Most of us, even the activists among us--including
me--really don't want to change ourselves as much as we want to change
those around us who are less fortunate. But, change is going require
some sacrifice from us, the fortunate.
          There's a community in the Black Belt very close to my nice house
that was one of the most impoverished that I have ever seen. The
community was known locally as "Slave City." No water, no running
water; the outhouses didn't have tops on them. There were ninety
children living in that community. We began a campaign to try to find
decent housing for the people of that community. Because of the
national attention we generated we were able to get those people into
some decent housing.
          But that did not solve the problem. The people who lived there had
become so dejected, so full of hopelessness, that moving them out of
their physical surroundings did not solve their problems. There are so
many people in deep poverty who are psychologically enslaved, who do
not realize that they have the power to be heard by themselves as well
as by others. There are so many people who are working on jobs that
are being mistreated, who are being paid low wages, who remain
psychologically indebted to a system that has shown them very little
grace. And then there are people like us who remain enslaved to old
ideals and to old ways of thinking and doing things.
          If we want full employment, if we want to make sure that there are
no homeless people, if we want to decently educate every child, if we
want to end hunger--what price are we willing to pay to make this
happen?
          
            Rose Sanders practices law and community activism in
Selma, Ala.
          
        
        
          Unions Must Move Past the Plant Gates
          By Raynor, BruceBruce Raynor
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 22-23
          
          The subject of the economic development of the South is never
complete without some talk of the role of organized labor. Despite
economic development, despite tremendous gains in other parts of the
country, the South still trails the nation with the lowest wages and
worst benefits for our workers. We still trail the nation with the
fastest decline of high-paying jobs and the most rapid increase of
low-paying jobs. Faced with the lowest wage-benefit structure in the
country, the problems that Southern workers face are getting worse,
not better.
          You hear a lot of talk these days that new management strategies
have made unions unnecessary. I think it's important to point out that
despite the newest personnel policies, the development of human
resources as a theory and a science, progressive employment programs,
job training, and new styles of management (including Japanese
management), American management has always made unions necessary and
I don't see any change in that. A favorite story of mine involves a
Japanese plant that was put up in Macon, Ga. When we organized that
plant, the management hired American anti-union lawyers and used the
very American arguments to the workers about why they don't need a
union:
          You don't need a union because we don't want you to have the
union. In Japan it's different, those are good unions. In Georgia,
they're not good unions. If you support the union, we're going to fire
you.
          This version of Japanese management didn't work on the majority of
the workers in the Macon plant; they voted for the union. Then we set
out to bargain with the company, the American and Japanese
managers. The Japanese manager didn't speak very good English, but he
was able to communicate very quickly to the union that the few
Japanese things that they had imported to Georgia didn't work. Things
like sick-days. In Japan if the worker does not get sick, he does not
use the sick days. In Georgia we give sick days and if workers don't
get sick, they can still take these days away from work. Well, the
Japanese managers didn't want to do that. They wanted to change the
style of management and do away with sick days.
          What it comes down to is a division of power and money between
management and workers. Whether it's Japanese style or American style,
management will continue to make unions necessary.
          So how do we establish a strong labor movement in the 

South? Many
of us have been at work for our entire adult lives trying to do
this. It is widely understood that workers organize for better pay and
benefits. But, in my opinion, that's not why Southern workers or most
workers join unions. Workers join unions not primarily to get more
money and better benefits, but primarily to have a voice, some power,
on their job. For democratic reasons. Organizing a union is the one
time in our country where people actually stand up and put something
on the line to fight for a right to have something to say. You don't
put much on the line to vote for a candidate in a political election,
but a worker who wants to support a union in Georgia or South Carolina
puts an awful lot on the line. And many times it is not for economic
benefits, but for the right to stand up and look the boss in the eye
and have some say. Even with a strong union, the bottom line remains:
The power belongs to the companies. But with a union, workers achieve
a measure of power. That's why Southern management opposes unions as
vigorously as they do. It comes down to the question of sharing
power.
          The other by-product of unionization is leadership. Unions create
leaders. Workers develop leadership skills and abilities in their
communities and their states. Political change in this part of the
country needs to be aided by the power of a strong labor movement. We
don't have a strong labor movement in any single one of the Southern
states, but I think labor with its allies has been able to achieve
some significant progress in changing the social makeup of the
South.
          What does this mean for non-union people? Labor unions have tended
to be our own worst enemy. The labor movement reflects society at
large. And, when the South has in it a tremendous amount of racism,
the labor movement has a tremendous amount of racism. When the South
has conservatism, then that's mirrored in the labor movement. You
cannot change the South, you cannot change the labor movement, without
changing the social makeup of our organizations and our beliefs.
          Some things that unions are doing in 1988 are different than what
has been done in the past. The only Southern state that has a law
permitting public employees to organize is Florida. Traditionally
labor has waited until it had the political power to achieve
collective bargaining laws before it attempted to organize public
employees. In Georgia, however, one of our service employees unions is
attempting to organize the state employees without a collective
bargaining law. It's a very innovative kind of organizing, yet it is
also the kind of organizing that unions did forty or fifty years
ago. This is an attempt to organize workers as we build the political
framework to change the law that would permit 50,000 Georgia state
employees to join a union. Imagine the force that this group could
embody with the progressive goals of affirmative action, of equality,
of a just society. Such a union would become the single biggest force
for social change in the state. I think this campaign deserves and
needs the support of like-thinking people around the South.
          Another area where people are organizing across broader lines is a
campaign called "Justice for Janitors." This is an effort to win
recognition for the cleaning people in all the buildings in the
growing cities across the South. In order to gain support for the
janitors who clean the buildings for little more than minimum wage,
the Service Employees Union is reaching out to the everyday person who
uses the buildings.
          If unions are to be successful organizing in the South, they have
to move beyond the plant gates. Workers need to build ties with
progressive elements in the community with whom they share a vision of
a more just society. Millions of people here in the South have been
economically, politically, and socially excluded from sharing power. I
believe the labor movement offers an opportunity for people to break
the barriers that separate the disfranchised.
          
            Bruce Raynor is the Southern regional director and an
international vice president of ACTWU.
          
        
        
          Talking Down Reform: Filibustering Campaign Reform
          By McBride, AnnAnn McBride
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 4-5
          
          During February, the cots were back in the United States
Capitol. For the first time in years, the Senate was involved in an
extended round-the-clock filibuster-endless debate to thwart the will
of the majority.
          The bill under discussion was S.2-the Senatorial Election Campaign
Act. This measure, introduced in 1987 on the first day of the 100th
Congress, is a comprehensive campaign finance reform bill, designed to
fundamentally transform congressional campaign financing. And while
S.2 has fifty-two Senate co-sponsors and broad support in the country,
a minority of Senators has blocked the bill.
          There can be little debate that the present campaign financing
system is in desperate need of reform. Unlimited campaign spending, in
the words of Majority Leader Robert Byrd (D-W.V.), threatens to make
Congress "a part-time legislature because we must be full-time
fund-raisers." Congressional campaign costs have increased
fivefold since 1974, totaling $373 million in the 1986 elections. An
average Senate seat now costs $3 million, requiring candidates to
raise the equivalent of about $10,000 every week during a six-year
term. The average cost of a House seat has also soared-from $87,000 in
1976 to $329,000 in 1986.
          With these costs, only those who are personally wealthy, or those
willing and able to raise large sums from special interests, can even
consider seeking congressional office. This system of unlimited
spending creates an arms race mentality in Congress-candidates faced
with an unlimited spending system seek huge and ever-growing sums of
money to run their campaigns.
          Freshman Senator John Breaux (D-La.), elected in 1986, says:
"MY first task in considering whether I would have the opportunity
one day to serve in the U.S. Senate was not whether I was old enough,
constitutionally, or whether I was smart enough to handle the job
... whether I had any ability to legislate, which is the duty of this
very august body. The first question I had to decide was how I was
going to raise enough money.... How much of my life and family life
was I going to have to commit to raising enough money before I would
be able to have the opportunity to exercise any talent or ability or
education to be a good member of the U.S. Senate."
          And retiring Senate President Pro Tem John Stennis (D-Miss.), first
elected in 1947, said, "The amount and sources of money spent in
Senate campaigns is an embarrassment to our country and it is a blot
on the integrity of the Senate because of the appearance of
impropriety."
          With the increase in campaign costs, congressional candidates have
increasingly gone hat-in-hand to the special interest political action
committees (PACs). In 1974, PACs gave $12.5 million to congressional
candidates. By 1986, PAC giving exceeded $130 million. As a result,
the 100th Congress came into office more indebted to special interest
PACs than any other in history.
          PAC money, far from being even-handed, heavily favors incumbents
over challengers. In the 1986 election cycle, PACs gave $90.7 million
to Senate and House incumbents and only $19.4 million to
challengers. In the same election, according to a Common Cause study,
one-third of all PACs gave 80 percent or more of their contributions
to Senate and House incumbents.
          PAC money is money given for a legislative purpose-it is
contributed to provide special access and special influence for
special interest groups on Capitol Hill. Rep. Barney Frank (D-Mass.)
put it most bluntly: "We are the only human beings in the world who
are expected to take thousands of dollars from perfect strangers on
important matters and not be affected by it."
          To be sure, PAC contributions do not necessarily guarantee votes or
support; PACs do not always win. But the influx of special interest
money is eroding public confidence in our elected officials and
creating the image-if not always the reality-that PACs are buying
access, influence and results in the United States Congress. Sen. Jim
Sasser (D-Tenn.) has said, "The average citizen feels that public
officials are beholden to special interests. This sense of alienation,
this feeling that the electoral system is no longer their system, is
responsible for much of the cynicism and lack of participation by
citizens in politics today."
          S.2 squarely addressed the fundamental problems of the current
system-unlimited spending and ever-increasing dependence on PAC
dollars.
          First, S.2 would establish a system of spending limits for Senate
elections; the individual limits would be based on the population of
each state. In return for agreeing to 

spending limits, Senate
candidates would receive public benefits, such as reduced mailing
costs for their campaigns. No direct public financing is provided as
long as both candidates agree to abide by spending limits. If one
candidate decides not to participate, and raises funds or makes
campaign expenditures in excess of the spending limit, then public
money would be provided to his or her opponent.
          Second, S.2 would limit the growing dependence on PAC dollars by
establishing an overall limit on the amount of PAC contributions a
candidate may accept. For House candidates, the limit is $100,000; the
Senate limits are based on the population of each state. If the S.2
limits had been in effect in 1986, PAC contributions to Senate
candidates would have been cut by two-thirds-from $45 million to $16
million.
          S.2 received strong support within Congress. Fifty-two Senators
co-sponsored the bill-the first time since Watergate that a Senate
majority has gone on record in support of a comprehensive reform
bill. But Senate action on S.2 was blocked during the 1987
filibuster.
          S.2 moved to the Senate floor in June 1987, and Majority Leader
Byrd tried a record seven times to limit debate. While fifty-five
Senators were willing, invoking cloture requires the support of sixty
Senators-and the debate droned on.
          The Senate returned to S.2 in February 1988 and again the
obstructionist minority turned to a filibuster. Sen. Byrd scheduled
round-the-clock sessions in an effort to break the filibuster and took
an eighth cloture vote. But the minority prevailed once again. And S.2
was set aside.
          During debate on S.2, opponents raised a number of false
claims. "It will cost hundreds of millions," they argued. In
reality, if both candidates in a Senate race agreed to spending
limits, no direct public funds would be provided.
          "S.2 doesn't do anything about PACs," opponents claimed,
ignoring the fact that the aggregate PAC limits established by the
bill, had they been in effect during the 1986 campaign, would have cut
PAC contributions to Senate candidates by two-thirds.
          "S.2 will protect incumbents," they argued, ignoring the
tremendous advantages enjoyed by incumbents under the present campaign
financing system.
          "S.2 will prevent Republicans from winning in the South,"
they argued. Yet this claim ignored the recent experience in the
South. In 1980, for instance, four Southern Republican Senate
candidates-all non-incumbents-won election while spending less than
the limits in S.2. In 1986, three of these four candidates sought
re-election as incumbents. Each Senator spent more than the S.2
limits, and each Senator lost.
          This issue will not go away. Efforts to reform the system will
continue.
          Millions of citizens will be involved in the fight. More than
seventy national organizations have joined the coalition in support of
S.2. Included are traditional allies within the public interest
community, but also joining the coalition are such diverse
organizations as the American Association of School Administrators,
the American Jewish Committee, the American Public Health Association,
the American Public Power Association, the International Association
of Chiefs of Police, the National Farmers Organization, and the
National Farmers Union.
          In addition, more than 270 newspapers nationwide have supported the
bill. The Washington Post, for instance, has
called the current campaign financing system "fundamentally
corrupt. Every citizen knows it. So does every legislator."
          As former Watergate Special Prosecutor and Common Cause Chairman
Archibald Cox has noted, most scandals involve broken laws. In the
case of the campaign financing scandal, the laws themselves are the
scandal and they must be changed.
          
            Ann McBride is the Senior Vice President of Common Cause.
          
        
        
          Community Development Corporations
          By Lamm, CarolCarol Lamm
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 19-20
          
          Over the years, MACED has worked at economic development from many
angles. We began by providing technical assistance to worker
cooperatives and then went on to work with locally owned private
businesses. We did our first policy work in the late 1970s when we
convinced the state of Kentucky that there was more to economic
development than branch plant attraction. Back then we helped state
officials design a loan fund for small businesses. We have worked with
bankers to make mortgages more available to moderate income
families. We have a couple of for-profit subsidiaries now that invest
in businesses, mostly forest product industries, where we concentrate
our technical assistance.
          A couple of years ago, MACED decided that we could not continue to
put all our eggs in the diversification basket, that is, into looking
for ways to get around the coal industry. We began to do some research
and policy advocacy on ways to make the coal industry itself have a
more developmental impact on the region.
          Our most recent project involves grassroots education as we assist
an organization in Kentucky's fifth congressional district which has
the lowest percentage of high school graduates among its adult
population of any congressional district in the country. Over the past
year we have started or worked with seventeen affiliates in the
district's twenty seven counties.
          When I step back from this recitation of activities and ask,
"What have we learned that I can share today?" I came up with
three major areas.
          First of all, we have learned that economic development is more
than job creation. Ken Johnson spoke yesterday about the limits of
counting jobs as a measure of progress. He pointed out that the ways
wages are earned and the distribution of wages are other important
measures. Whenever a region's economy can serve moderate and low
income people better, that is economic development. Sometimes economic
development can mean new and better jobs for people. But, economic
development can also mean better housing, schools, and medical
care. There are a number of ways to make the economy work better for
people besides job creation, critical though that is.
          A second lesson recognizes the importance of doing something, then
thinking about it, then doing the next project based on what you
figured out. This sounds so obvious, but I have seen community
organizations, to say nothing of state government agencies, that
skipped the thinking part, or constrained their evaluations in such
narrow ways that their question became, "Did we send out as many
brochures as we said we would?" One of the most satisfying aspects
and exciting things about working for MACED is the way that we
repeatedly step back and look at the results in the light of bigger
goals. We keep getting new insights into what might work.
          Let me tell you a little bit of how we looked at forest products
when we started out about twelve years ago.
          There are hundreds of small sawmills in eastern Kentucky. They are
very important in the economy for the low income people who are
employed in them and in logging. So we began providing technical
assistance to existing sawmills. Then, we stepped back from that and
said, "Well this 

is not really having the effect that we would like
to have. It is not creating new activity. Let's start working with
sawmill startups." So we did that through financial and technical
assistance. Then we stepped back and said, "This is not getting us
to very many people. What can we do that will give us a lever on this
forest products industry and, actually make a significant
difference?"
          We saw that each of these little sawmills had marketing
problems. They were so small that they could not accumulate enough
lumber to sell in certain markets, even if they knew where they
were. They were selling high quality hardwoods to be made into pallets
because they could not get together enough of them to sell to a major
buyer. So we established a lumber yard and sawmill that was big enough
for the export market. This had an impact on many sawmills in the
area. They now had a steadier market than before.
          Our ability to act and reflect points to a special role that
Community Development Corporations can play in state policy-making,
too. Because we are small and energetic organizations, CDC's can try
out different approaches and get some feel for their relative success
while the state bureaucracy is still waking up to the thought that a
new direction is in order.
          Part of thinking involves choosing issues opportunistically,
strategically.
          We looked the housing situation over for several years, looking at
the reasons given for the dearth of housing starts and the prevalence
of sub-standard housing, even among middle-income families in the
mountains. We chose a housing issue upon which we could make a
difference. We concluded that one problem lay in the kind of mortgages
that were available. Banks were offering ten- to fifteen-year
variable-rate mortgages with from twenty-five to thirty-three percent
down payments, minimum. The thirty-year fixed-rate, five-percent down
mortgages that were widely available throughout the US, simply weren't
to be had in eastern Kentucky.
          In the rest of the country, banks had figured out ways to sell
their long term mortgages to buyers who wanted long term fixed rate
investments through secondary mortgage market mechanisms. In eastern
Kentucky, bankers weren't familiar with those mechanisms, and there
existed a handful of regulations that made secondary mortgage
marketing difficult in rural areas.
          MACED organized a consortium of ninety-four out of the 102 bankers
in eastern Kentucky. We negotiated the necessary changes with one of
the secondary mortgage market outfits that was receptive, and we
organized training sessions with the bankers. They then were able to
make loans that they could sell in the secondary mortgage market. We
also put together two bond issues that together raised $46 million for
low-interest rate mortgages and used some innovative financing that
made the mortgages available to considerably lower income families
than would have qualified otherwise.
          We chose that point of intervention very strategically to make a
difference.
          
            For the last nine years I have worked for MACED, the
Mountain Association for Community Economic Development. From an
office in Berea, Kentucky, MACED works in the central Appalachian
Mountains.
          
        
        
          Framing the Debate from a Worker's View
          By Johnson, KenKen Johnson
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 24-25
          
          For more than two decades, Southern governments, Chambers of
Commerce, business supporters and others, when measuring the South's
economic well-being and quality of life, have framed the debate on
economic development and prosperity in the most restrictive terms.
          These debates have focused almost entirely on the number of new
jobs created. Obviously, when measured along these lines, the South of
cheap land, low wages and low taxes has done exceedingly well. For the
ten-year period 1975-1984, for example, Texas, Florida, and Georgia
were among the top five in the U.S. in new job growth, and North
Carolina and Virginia were among the top ten. But absent from these
measures has been any discussion of the impact of these new jobs on
the workers themselves and of the question of whether these new jobs
raised the standard of 

living for the average workers of the
region.
          The Climate for Workers in the U. S., the report released last year
by the Southern Labor Institute, sought to broaden the discussion on
economic development and job creation policy. The report challenges
the notion that economic development depends on cheap land,
unreasonable tax concessions through industry, and an unorganized,
untrained and uneducated work force willing to work for less than
workers elsewhere. The document, sharply different from the usual
business climate report, illustrates that despite nation-leading
numerical gains in job growth and recent improvements in state
financing of education, the Southern region has failed to meet
national standards in almost every other way. The South exhibits the
smallest gain in wages and per-capita personal income, the largest
proportion of the working poor, and the highest incidences of
poverty.
          To quote directly from the report, "The challenge and the task
that face the South today and in the future is to create jobs with the
incomes and benefits needed to bring the region's workers above the
poverty level. Not just new jobs as in the past, but jobs that will
significantly improve the standards of living for people who work full
time year round."
          The picture has changed. Local economic developers can no longer
rely on the South's usual selling points: low-cost of production and
an abundant labor supply to attract traditional manufacturing
jobs. Government and private sectors alike have been torn by import
pressures and technological advances which have significantly reduced
the job-creating potential.
          Increasingly the potential for job growth is in service industries,
indigenous small businesses, and information based industries which
have less demand for low production costs and more need for a
well-educated work force, high quality of life, rapid transfer of
goods and information, and access to financial capital.
          In short, our competitive future rests on the quality of our work
force and on the investments we're willing to make in the men and
women who produce the goods and services that bring economic gains.
          Southeastern states have banked their future on job growth while
neglecting the rewards and the protection of their workers. Southern
states fill the bottom rung of nearly all of the more than two dozen
indicators considered in this study of the nation's labor climate. The
South's extraordinary job growth in jobs during the past ten years has
been accompanied by the least change in personal income of any
U.S. region.
          Working people are more likely to be poor in the South than any
other U.S. region. Southeastern states have the lowest per-capita
income in the nation. Nine Southern states are among the bottom
thirteen in manufacturing wages, averaging less than $8 per hour. In
eight southeastern states, more than 40 percent of the manufacturing
jobs pay less than $8 an hour.
          Treated as a percent of all the manufacturing jobs in each state,
the results show why the southeastern states can rank high in job
growth and yet rank low in wages and income. A significant finding of
the report reveals the poor standings of the southeastern states with
regard to statutory protection of workers, governing the workplace,
protecting workers' rights and safety and providing compensation for
disability and unemployment, the South falls considerably lower than
all the other U.S. regions.
          The report examines the states to see how many of fourteen common
statutes protecting workers were in effect and whether or not their
provision made them meaningful. The eight states with the least worker
protection are in the southeast. In Alabama and Mississippi, not one
of the fourteen laws had been enacted. In South Carolina, only one. In
Virginia and Louisiana only two; in Tennessee, Florida and North
Carolina, only three. Six of the nine states in the nation with no
state minimum wages are in the Southeast. At the bottom of the benefit
scale, five of the six states that pay the least for permanent
disability, under $200 per week, are in the Southeast. In the nation's
twelve worst states, the weekly unemployment benefits is $100 or less,
and eight of the twelve are in the Southeast, with Mississippi on the
bottom.
          Until recently, blacks and women had been excluded from traditional
white male occupations; officials, administrators, professionals,
technicians and craft-workers. Southern states ranked on the bottom in
the percent of working women and minorities employed in these jobs.
          The report also considers several indicators of the states' general
quality of life. Among the findings are some historically familiar
refrains. The Northeastern states report the lowest rates of poverty,
from 8 percent in Connecticut to 13 percent in New York. The
Southeastern states remain the poorest region. Mississippi, with 24
percent of its population in poverty, ranks worst. Blacks are more
likely to be poor in the Southeast. The nine states with the highest
proportion of black poor are in the Southeast. Rates of poverty for
blacks in the southeast range from Virginia's 25 percent to
Mississippi's 44 percent, again, the highest in the nation.
          A telling indicator of the quality of health care in the state is
its infant mortality rate. Sadly, a baby is not likely to survive its
first year of life in the Southeast. The two states with the worst
infant mortality rates, over fifteen deaths for every thousand births,
are Mississippi and South Carolina. The eleven worst states, all with
death rates of thirteen or higher, include West Virginia, Alabama,
North Carolina, Florida, Louisiana and Georgia.
          We have heard and will continue to hear about the Sunbelt, but job
growth in the Southeast has occurred in large part at the bottom end
of the wage scale and has not improved significantly the conditions or
prospects for wage earners in the region. As the Southeast economy
follows the national trend of fewer manufacturing and more service
sector jobs, the region's employed and unemployed workers are less
likely to see much change in their personal conditions. Reversing
these trends, of course, will depend largely on our ability and
willingness to increase worker participation in both public policy and
the workplace decision making process.
          
            Ken Johnson is director of the Southern Labor Institute
and co-author of The Climate for Workers in the United
States.
          
        
        
          Women and the Constitution
          By Hannon, SharronSharron Hannon
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 1-3
          
          In 1776, Abigail Adams wrote husband John, importuning him to
"remember the Ladies" in drafting the code of laws of the new
nation.
          However, the "ladies" were not remembered by
the founding fathers. Eleven years after Abigail Adams's letter, the
framers of the Constitution drafted a document beginning, "We the
people." What they meant was, "We the men." In 1787, women
were not considered even three-fifths of a person, as male slaves
were. Women were disfranchised and largely invisible in public
life. It would take more than a hundred years of struggle to get the
U.S. Constitution amended to allow women to vote; an amendment stating
that women have equal rights with men has yet to be added, despite
more than sixty years of trying.
          In the fall of 1986, as preparations got underway for celebrating
the bicentennial of the Constitution, a group of women approached
former first lady Rosalynn Carter with the idea for a symposium that
would "remember the ladies." She lent her support and so, in
February 1988, an overflow crowd of 1,500 women from every state and
ten foreign countries gathered in Atlanta to study and discuss and
call attention to the founding fathers' omissions.
          "Women and the Constitution: A Bicentennial Perspective" was
sponsored by the Carter Center of Emory University in conjunction with
the Carter Presidential Library and Georgia State University. Rosalynn
Carter asked three former first ladies-Lady Bird Johnson, Betty Ford
and Pat Nixon-to join her as convenors of the symposium. All agreed,
although health problems prevented the latter two from actually
attending the conference.
          Nancy Reagan was also invited to be a convenor. She
declined-understandably. For while attempts were 

made to keep the
conference scholarly and non-partisan, there was no way to avoid
comparisons of women's generally forward progress during preceding
administrations and the retrenchment that has followed during the
Reagan years. It was similarly impossible not to wonder what a change
in White House tenants may mean for the future of issues like the
Equal Rights Amendment, which was defeated three states short of
ratification in 1982.
          "We've become comfortable with our prejudices," noted
Rosalynn Carter in a pre-symposium press conference. "We need to be
inspired to make our country better. I hope that's something the next
election can do."
          Though none of the presidential candidates attended the symposium
(being busy campaigning in New Hampshire at the time), the organizers
no doubt hoped to catch their attention by scheduling the event less
than a month before Super Tuesday. They at least caught the attention
of the media: 150 reporters and radio and TV people swarmed around the
hotel where the conference was held-a surprisingly large number for a
conference on women.
          But then there were some big drawing cards: Supreme Court Justice
Sandra Day O'Connor and former Vice-Presidential candidate Geraldine
Ferraro. Their presence drew attention to how far women have come
since 1870, when Myra Bradwell was denied a license to practice law
because she was a woman, and 1872, when Susan B. Anthony was arrested
for trying to vote.
          Women still have a long way to go, however. As Coretta Scott King
noted in her address to conference participants, if black women were
represented in Congress in proportion to their numbers in the general
population, there would be 

thirty black women in the U.S. House of
Representatives and seven Senators. Instead, there is only one black
woman in Congress: Rep. Cardiss Collins of Illinois.
          Many conference speakers pushed for women's increased involvement
in politics, both as voters and candidates. "If you don't run, you
can't win," was the theme of Ferraro's speech.
          Former U.S. Rep. Bella Abzug had a unique idea for speeding up
women's access to political power. "Let's ask both parties to
commit all open seats to women until some measure of equity is
reached," she suggested during the closing plenary. "Let's ask
that one Senator of the two from each state be female. Why
not?"
          Other speakers looked at the judicial system as an arena for
advancing women's rights, pointing out that it wasn't until 1971 that
the Supreme Court used the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment to find sex discrimination unconstitutional. Since then,
more than fifty cases have been heard by the Court relating to hiring,
promotions, maternity leave, disability insurance, pension rights and
seniority.
          "Not all such challenges have been successful," noted
Justice O'Connor in her keynote speech. "But there is no question
that the Court has now made clear that it will no longer view as
benign archaic and stereotypic notions concerning the roles and
abilities of males and females."
          In the l980s, however, the number of sex discrimination cases being
heard has declined. "There are not a lot of Fourteenth Amendment
cases left to bring," said Isabelle Pinzler, director of the
ACLU's Women's Rights Project, in a panel discussion with other
attorneys on the role of advocacy in promoting women's
rights. "Without the ERA, there won't be much change."
          Another drawback to progress through the courts was raised by
former EEOC chair Eleanor Holmes Norton: "We must depend on the
generosity of a largely male judiciary."
          This is especially true of federal courts. Since 1981, President
Reagan has filled 334 seats on the federal bench-and only twenty-seven
of his appointees have been female.
          So what about the Equal Rights Amendment? It was the topic of both
a mini-plenary ("ERA: Was It Worth It?") and a panel discussion
("Putting Women in the Constitution: The Future of the ERA"), and it
was obvious from both sessions that there is no consensus on the
future of the struggle for ratification.
          There is not even consensus on the past. Some regard the 1972-1982
period of national focus on the ERA as the finest hour of the women's
movement.
          "Never have women learned so much and moved so fast," said
panelist Erma Bombeck, who spent a year traveling with former White
House Press Secretary Liz Carpenter to lobby in unratified states.
          Others, however, resented what political scientist Janet Bowles
termed the "artificial consensus" to make the ERA the
centerpiece of the women's movement. "The demise of the ERA gave
feminists freedom to reassess other goals," she said.
          Eleanor Smeal, who as president of the National Organization for
Women was the strategist behind the ERA Countdown Campaign, was
unwilling to pause to argue the past.
          "We must go forward," she said. "The drive for total
equality is still so needed. Statutes can be reversed. Executive
orders overturned. What we knew then intellectually, we now know
through experience-we need a constitutional guarantee."
          NOW, in fact, has already launched a drive for "the new ERA" and
activists were busy circulating petitions among the conference
participants. It was the only active organizing visible-a fact that
troubled some.
          "It doesn't make sense to spend these resources and gather this
talent without using it as a stepping stone," said Margie Pitts
Hames, an Atlanta attorney who argued Doe
v. Bolton, the companion case to Roe v. Wade, which established
the right to abortion in 1973. "I see no agenda, no plan, no
direction. We'll go back to our various places without mobilizing the
energy I feel here."
          Hames and others had hoped the conference might at least generate
some resolutions. And they were further disappointed by what they
perceived as a decision to avoid issues like abortion rights,
homelessness and the feminization of poverty, which were not directly
addressed in any of the thirty-one panels or five mini-plenaries.
          But the goals of the conference were academic, not activist;
focused, not broad. What the organizers aimed to produce was not
resolutions and a plan of action, but some serious scholarship on the
conference topic which will be disseminated through various
professional journals and through a secondary school curriculum being
developed in conjunction with the Carter Center.
          The research generated by the conference as well as audio and video
tapes of the proceedings will be maintained by the Carter Center and
the National Archives. Georgia Public Television is also putting
together a documentary on the conference which will be shown on PBS
stations nationwide.
          For most conference participants, the best part was just being
there-in one place at one time-with women who have been Cabinet
members and served in Congress, who have argued or been plaintiffs in
landmark court cases, who are deans of law schools and college
presidents.
          "It was a real high to literally rub elbows with so many
incredible women," said Heather Kleiner, who is working to
revitalize the Women's Studies Program at the University of
Georgia.
          It was impossible to come away from such a gathering not feeling
empowered and energized. "This conference is a kind of political
chicken soup," noted Bella Abzug. "It helps you get out of bed
in the morning and say, 'I can conquer the day.'".
          
            Sharron Hannon is a Georgia-based freelancer who writes frequently on women's rights issues.
          
        
        
          Starting a Worker Owned Cooperative
          By Adams, FrankFrank Adams
          Vol. 10, No. 2, 1988, pp. 20-22
          
          There are a variety of reasons for starting a worker
cooperative. They include workers' desires to own and work in a
business where human values are of equal importance to productivity
and profits, an owner's decision to retire or sell an existing
business, the threat of a plant closing, or a community's
determination to help create jobs by starting a new business. Whatever
the reasons for starting a worker cooperative, there are several steps
which can be taken to increase the probability of success.
          Most new businesses, including worker-owned cooperatives, typically
develop through four phases:
          Organizing. A three to six-month period in which the decision to
organize is made.
          Startup. A phase that usually lasts for six months in which the
basic business strategy is tested.
          Growth. A phase that may last for several years in which the
markets are expanded, management techniques and governance systems are
refined, production techniques are altered as dictated by experience,
and the workforce is expanded.
          Consolidation. The phase in which the worker-owners assess their
experience in reaching the targeted growth and develop the firm's
goals and strategies for the next three to five years.
          During the organizing phase prospective worker-owners 

must decide
whether they really want to establish a worker cooperative. If, for
whatever reason, you are thinking of forming a worker-owned,
democratically controlled business, either to produce goods or provide
services, you must ask yourselves some hard questions about your
motivation and the risks involved.
          Are your reasons for wanting to start a worker-owned business
sound? Do you and your prospective fellow owners share a common
understanding and enthusiasm for the venture? Do you have a viable
business idea or concept? Is there a market for your proposed product
or service? If so, is the market growing or shrinking?
          Are you knowledgeable about the various legal and organizational
forms which can be used to set up a democratic workplace? Is a worker
cooperative the type of business you want to set up? What about
finances? Do you have sufficient money to start or buy a business? How
much money will have to come out of your own pockets and where can you
obtain the rest?
          Worker cooperatives are for-profit businesses in which only the
firm's employees can be owners, usually after a probationary
period. Worker cooperatives are somewhat different from consumer and
agricultural producer cooperatives. Consumer cooperatives are owned
and controlled by their patrons (customers) who want to purchase high
quality groceries at reasonable prices and obtain cost savings on
other consumer goods. Producer cooperatives are primarily supply and
marketing cooperatives created by independent farmers to purchase farm
supplies or process and market their products. Neither type is owned
or controlled by its employees, and neither type sees worker ownership
and workplace democracy as its primary objectives.
          Worker cooperatives are usually started by more than one
person. The organizing group, or steering committee, understands and
accepts the basic tenets of workplace democracy:
          ~ Every worker-owner owns one membership share which entitles
him/her to vote in the election of a board of directors and to
participate in self-governance;
          ~ All worker-owners contribute both labor and capital; No one
outside the firm can be an owner. Profits earned or losses sustained
are allocated to worker-owners according to hours worked, gross pay,
or both;
          ~ Wages vary according to skill and seniority, but usually the
range between the highest and lowest paid workers and managers does
not exceed a ratio of 5:1. This fosters the well-being of the entire
group and insures that a few do not get rich in comparison with, or at
the expense of, the lower paid workers.
          Reading and agreeing with these tenets is easy, but putting them
into practice in a business is tough. The fundamentals of
worker-ownership are almost self-defining, but because most workers
have had little or no experience owning or managing their workplace,
putting these principles into practice requires experimentation,
patience, and attention to fairness.
          In order to fully understand worker cooperatives, it is necessary
to talk about the relationship of money and ownership to employees and
workers. Money is needed to organize a worker with materials and a
place to work, to meet the expenses of daily operation, and to use
when the going gets tough or business recessions occur. Whoever puts
up the money to start the business becomes an owner and holds equity
in the enterprise. These investors take the financial risks and earn
the financial rewards of entrepreneurship.
          In a traditional for-profit capitalist corporation, the degree of
control is directly related to the equity held by the individual
investor. Investors do not have to work in the business to exercise
the rights of control. Dividends on the net profits of the business
are paid out to the stockholders according to the size of their equity
investment as denominated in the number of shares they own.
          Unlike traditional capitalist corporations, worker cooperatives
give workers control of the business on a one person-one vote basis
without regard to their level of equity except for the membership fee
paid by each worker-member upon joining. The membership fee is a
capital contribution equal to the contribution of every other member,
which puts the new member at equal risk with fellow worker-owners. The
balance sheet of a worker cooperative differs in several 

ways from a
traditional firm where capital controls labor. In a pure labor-managed
cooperative only workers are shareholders, and each owns only one
share of stock. A member's one share of stock is divided into two
parts, political and economic rights, which have differing but related
functions. First, a worker-member's share of stock insures a right to
vote, certain other membership rights, and the right to a share of any
profit or loss. These constitute the political rights of
worker-ownership. Second, a share of stock assigns the net worth of
the cooperative's assets to a system of internal capital accounts. An
account is established for each member-worker. The initial balance in
these accounts is the membership or equity contribution made by each
member upon joining the cooperative. These internal accounts are the
repository of the economic rights of the worker-owners. They derive
from the contribution of labor, not the purchase of stock shares.
          The worker cooperative system of internal accounts generates
internal debt capital for expansion and modernization, creates
reserves against recessions, and provides worker-members with a share
of equity.
          It is largely through the internal, individual accounts system that
a worker cooperative raises the owner's share of risk capital to start
a business and generates the internal debt capital to run a
business. The internal accounts also help effectuate the principles of
workplace democracy.
          Another unique feature of work cooperatives is their policy of
employment security. They make every effort to keep their members
employed even during economic downturns. In a conventional capitalist
firm, workers directly involved in the production of goods and
services are assumed to be expendable. They can be hired and fired as
demand warrants. Direct labor is determined by production, which is a
function of sales and the desired level of inventory investment. If
sales decline, workers are laid off or dismissed so that inventory
does not build up too high.
          In a worker cooperative these relationships are reversed. After a
probationary period workers are either accepted into membership or
rejected from membership and terminated. Thus the amount of labor is
fixed, at least in the short run. Since the number of workers (and the
labor available) determines production, in order to match production
with sales it is necessary to adjust inventories upward or reduce
prices of products or services to maintain sales volume during
economic downturns.
          During business downturns or recessions worker cooperatives use a
variety of techniques to maintain employment levels and prevent
layoffs. Worksharing, aggressive sales efforts including reductions in
prices, and ultimately shared reductions in income, may be used as
part of the strategy of balancing the production and sales
equation.
          Placing people ahead of profits in a worker cooperative increases
the importance of the planning process and of maintaining a flexible
workforce; it also accentuates the need for good management. These are
the same employment security principles which have used so
successfully during the past two decades by a few enlightened American
firms, and by the Basque worker cooperatives in Spain.
          
            Frank Adams is author of Putting
Democracy to Work, a practical guide to worker
cooperatives.
          
        
      
    
  
