
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 10, Number 5,
	       1988
        
          Living the Day Labor Life
          By Williams, RandallRandall Williams
          Vol. 10, No. 5, 1988, pp. 7, 20
          
          Earlier this year, the Southern Regional Council
published a lengthy investigative and analytical report of the growing
temporary manual labor industry. Workers in these "labor pools" are
among the least protected and most poorly rewarded persons in the
U.S. labor force. The SRC report, entitled Hard Labor: A Report
on Labor Pools and Temporary Employment, contained first-hand
accounts by many unemployed and homeless men who rely on labor pools
for their meager existence. One such worker is Wade Wagner, who was
interviewed in Austin, Texas, by Randall Williams. Wagner's edited
comments follow. To obtain the complete forty-eight-page report, with
illustrations and a statistical appendix, send $10 to the SRC, 60
Walton Street, Atlanta, GA 30303.
          Monday, I had the flu. It took me till Tuesday to feel like going
outside and getting a job. Wednesday, I get up and go out there about
8 o'clock. I worked about three hours yesterday. Trimmed trees. A
contractor came through that I had been helping all along. I made
about 16 bucks. That's it up to this point. And I was standing around
over there at Salvation Army when you came up. That's been my week.
          All I did was go in, get a shower, get something to eat. Actually,
that diet, sometimes you have to eat food to satisfy your hunger but
actually didn't satisfy the taste buds at all. I got me a shower, and
then a guy came through about 8 o'clock, and said, was anybody
interested in going to church? And I said, I might go. "Will they
have any refreshments?" And he said, "Yeah, I'm quite sure they
will. I can't say definite, but they usually have
refreshments. Sometimes we have used clothes and things, too." So
about four of us jumped in this van and went and had services. And
then after service, they didn't bring any refreshments, so the church
guy brought us back and on the way he stopped by a chicken place. So
we all had chicken. Had a pretty nice time of it.
          The Salvation Army can be okay. It can help a person because when
people are living in the streets, and they have been living under
normal conditions, you always like to have a change of clothes. At
least every two days, you want to get out of 'em and change. But
anybody that has lived normal like that, they're going to find out, if
they're living in the streets, they can only carry what they carry in
a bag. So therefore, you have to leave your bags, and they find that
very hard to do. You know, in a safe place. And then going over here
and taking a shower, where they're going to sleep [at the Salvation
Army], putting back on the same clothes they got out of, that they've
been wearing two or three days or longer, actually it's not going to
do you much good to take a shower.
          Another place you can stay is the labor hall's bunkhouse. There's a
guy that sits there in the office. You go in to the window and pay
your rent. They assign you a bunk. If you are a regular you can get a
regular bunk assigned to you.
          It is definitely adequate. I ain't going to say it's spic and
span. But it's clean enough. The linens are clean. It's sanitary. It's
safe. Well, actually, anytime you have a bunch of men together, you'll
always going to find some disturbances. Somebody may have too much to
drink, start a fight. Normally it's just fists, but there has been
some stabbings in the past. But usually everybody gets along fine. You
can come and go as you please. Stay out all night if you want. No
curfew. TV is usually off by 12 but sometimes they leave it on all
night. You can play cards. You can gamble. You can have alcohol.
          But getting back to the Salvation Army, in the dorm I was in, there
was probably close to a hundred.
          I got up and ate breakfast--about 4:30 they woke us up. Actually, I
tried to eat breakfast. It was oatmeal and to tell you the truth, I
couldn't quite eat it. Even from a child I never could eat oatmeal. So
then I walked over on Sixth Street to this 7-11 store and 

had myself a good cup of coffee. Then I walked down on Second Street. It was real cold. Everybody was not going to get work. So then I walked back down on Seventh Street to the
labor hall. But there wasn't much going on this morning.
          Most days are routine like that, if you can come up with enough to
eat and get a place to sleep. Going back to what makes people happy,
everybody likes to eat the best food that they could possibly get,
like meat, vegetables, you know, an adequate diet, a nutritional
diet. There are places where you can show up and get food. It might
not be real tasty and it probably ain't got that many vitamins but
it'll get something in your stomach.
          With my cheap labor, I mostly have enough to cover coffee,
cigarettes and food. What else do we spend money on? Everybody could
probably get all the outside clothes--pants, shirts, tee-shirts--that
he could humanly possibly carry around. He wouldn't have to spend his
money on that. Buying a car is completely still out of anybody's
income bracket. Bus fare is fifty cents, costs you a dollar to go
round trip anywhere around town.
          I don't know any program that's going to cover any medical
expenses. I've been lucky. I've had flus and colds, but--Eckerd Drug
has been my doctor, what with buying cough medicines, aspirins.
          You asked about recreation. Well, we used to shoot backcourt ball
down at the bunkhouse. I used to jog up to last year. There's a track
by the riverside, real nice. I used to jog but I found out my diet was
not sufficient to jog, so therefore I was going to do more body harm
by trying to jog on malnutrition than I was going to help. I like to
go to movies but I usually don't have the money. There's a dollar
movie over on Red River and fellows go over there if they have a
dollar. Otherwise you can't go. If you got in a card game and won $25
or something like that you might do it. But if you want to go to
Antone's, or a club with entertainment, if you like blues, and I am a
blues fan... I've been trying to get there but I never can afford the
$20 it takes.
        
        
          A Southerner in Nicaragua
          By Whisnant, David E.David E. Whisnant
          Vol. 10, No. 5, 1988, pp. 1-5
          
          David E. Whisnant, longtime commentator on Southern
Appalachian culture who is perhaps best known as the author of All
That Is Native and Fine (The Politics of Culture in an American Region
CINC Press, 1983), returned this summer from a five-month visit to
Nicaragua as a Fulbright scholar. Whisnant, a professor of English,
American studies and folklore at the University of North Carolina, was
interviewed in Chapel Hill in June by Southern Changes editor Allen
Tullos. The topic was Whisnant's trip and the historical study of the
politics of culture in Nicaragua that is his current project. His
edited comments follow.
          THINK THE FIRST thing to say is that I came to Nicaragua from a
different direction and with a different set of expectations than
those which were characteristic of many of the internacionalistas (and
there were many) whom I met there. Some of them came out of a history
of political activity that goes back in their families for a
generation or so. One of my acquaintances was the son of a Communist
Party organizer from New York in the 1930s. There were people who had
come out of SDS or other kinds of 1960s organizing. I did not. I came
there with political awarenesses and interests that had developed
relatively late in my life, primarily through work I was then
beginning to do in the Appalachian region.
          As I got to know more people from the U.S. who were in Nicaragua, I
discovered some other Southerners. I had a few discussions with a
couple of them about whether and to what extent their being from the
South had anything to do with the way they experienced being in
Nicaragua.
          One reaction we turned out to share was that as Southerners we
frequently had difficulty conversing with Nicaraguans. The difficulty
seemed not to have much to do with the language barrier, since we all
spoke Spanish. As well as I could understand it, it had to do with
people's accustomed styles of verbal interaction. For a number of

reasons, Nicaraguans, particularly Nicaraguan men, tend to be highly
verbal and domineering in conversation. Such a style and dynamic are
uncongenial to me, mainly I think because in the mountains where I
grew up, people talked relatively little and listened a lot. They
tended to be self-effacing in conversational situations. But most of
the Nicaraguan men I met weren't.
          When a Nicaraguan man begins to talk, I learned to my utter
astonishment, he may talk for an hour and a half without
stopping. Although he may give certain verbal cues which are (at least
formally) invitations for response, it is clear that he really doesn't
expect you to respond, because no time is left for a response to
occur. I found that difficult to deal with, and so did the friends I
made there from the South.
          
            Men and Women in Nicaragua
          
          I had more serious difficulties with Nicaraguan men's treatment of
women. Having grown up in the South, I am not unfamiliar with macho
behavior, and I know also that macho, though it has a Spanish name, is
a virtually universal phenomenon. Nevertheless, what I witnessed in
Nicaragua was frequently shocking and depressing. In conversation
among a group of adult married couples, for example, men frequently
would literally shush their wives when they tried to say
anything. Such a gesture offended me; I had never seen anything like
it. Although women in the mountains where I grew up were somewhat more
taciturn than men, when they did talk they were usually listened
to.
          Partly to try to avoid seeing such behavior, I spent a lot of time
talking with women--frequently about machismo, about the ways
Nicaraguan women and men interact, and about the general situation of
women there.
          Margaret Randall and others have written eloquently of the central
and heroic roles Nicaraguan women played in the armed struggle
preceding the overthrow of Somoza, and of their continuing importance
in national reconstruction. What has not so often been talked about is
that machismo is still a fundamental fact of life for virtually every
man and woman in Nicaragua. Indeed a number of women told me it is
worse now than ever. It takes a larger variety of forms than I ever
imagined before I went. I had never imagined how pervasive it was, how
many aspects of life it affects or even determines, how brutal it can
be and frequently is. And how ultimately dysfunctional it is for a
social order that is trying to go through the transformations that
Nicaragua is trying to go through.
          Besides being degrading and
painful to individual women, machista attitudes and behaviors
(personal and institutional) block and frustrate the potential
contributions that a vast number of very bright, sensitive women could
make and are trying to make to the process of reconstruction. They are
making contributions nevertheless, basic and crucial ones, but much
less efficiently and effectively than they might, and at an
unconscionably high personal cost.
          What Nicaraguan women say about machismo varies depending upon who
one is talking with--on how self-consciously ideological they are, on
their social class and profession. One woman friend of mine--a highly
transitional professional who has suffered considerably from the
operation of machismo--said in essence that dealing with this and some
other women's issues has to wait because the first priority must be
the solidification of the revolution. In her mind there was a
hierarchical ranking between the urgent needs of "the revolution" and
the urgent needs of women. My own feeling is that it is artificial to
partition those two dynamics in such a way. It is also damaging,
because it leaves things too much in the hands of men, who are still
for the most part setting the parameters of the revolution and
controlling its institutions.
          If one talks to working-class women--and I spent a lot of time
talking with maids, with the women who came to wash clothes and iron,
with women who were working in the markets--one finds that the forms
machismo takes in their lives are sometimes very brutal. Wife-beating
is quite common, and there is a great deal of drinking and
philandering. Women know it and know what it costs them, and have
little protection against it, though some recent laws expressly forbid
such behavior. In any case, working-class women seemed to me less
willing than some more ideologically oriented professional women to
excuse machismo, or to comprehend it within some higher critique.
          If I frequently felt out of sync with Nicaraguans in conversations,
and if I felt put off by machismo, I also felt that we Southerners had
a real commonality of experience with them in certain other ways. We
knew in the first place what it was to be in a subjugated, dominated
and deprecated culture. More particularly, as a hillbilly I felt that
I had some intuitive feeling of what Nicaraguan people had experienced
culturally and politically vis-a-vis the U.S. And that helped me in
some ways with what I went there to do.

          
            Culture and National Reconstruction,/hi>
          
          I went to Nicaragua to work on a book on the politics of culture
there, to follow up some questions I had dealt with in All That is
Native and Fine. I took as my focus for talking about the politics of
culture the development of cultural policy and programs under the
Sandinistas since 1979.
          But one obviously cannot begin to talk simply about what has
happened since 1979. So I tried to do a lot of historical work on the
dynamics of cultural change in Nicaragua since the middle of the
nineteenth century. As soon as one begins to look at Nicaraguan
cultural history it becomes clear that one must talk about
intervention.
          Certainly the Spanish conquest was a massive and destructive
cultural as well as economic and political intervention. Many of the
most fundamental dynamics of Nicaraguan cultural and social history
since the 1600s flowed from that conquest: the virtual extermination
of the original population, mestizoization and catholicization, the
east/west division of the country, the Liberal (Leon) vs. Conservative
(Granada) antagonisms and wars.
          But the Spanish intervention was not the only or the last one by
any means. The British, for instance, intervened in the seventeenth
century on the east coast and dominated life there until the
1860s. Serious U.S. intervention began in the 1840s and has continued
with few interruptions since. One of the best known nineteenth century
books about Nicaragua, Nicaragua: Its People, Scenery, Monuments and
the Proposed Canal (1862), was written by Ephraim G. Squire, the
U.S. consul who was sent to Central America to do reconnaissance in
preparation for building the proposed canal through Nicaragua. Passing
up the San Juan river, Squire noted that a few American business
establishments were already there, and some Nicaraguans had already
picked up a few phrases of colloquial American English.
          The arrival of the U.S. Marines in 1912 was a cultural as well as
military and political intervention. The national sport of Nicaragua,
for example, is baseball, brought there by the Marines. Following the
ascension of the first Somoza to power in the mid-1930s, Nicaragua
became a major consumer of the worst of U.S. commercial popular
culture. That pattern continued through 1979 and in some degree still
continues, though it has been modulated considerably by Nicaraguan's
lack of money to travel or buy goods, and of course by the Reagan
trade embargo.
          What have the Sandinistas done about those historical patterns? My
answer is that the original intention was to institute a whole range
of policies that were culturally sensitive and responsible, and they
have attempted a number of things, some more successfully than
others. They have tried in the first place to counter the history of
cultural intervention, particularly that emanating from the U.S. They
have also tried to democratize cultural activity, to make it more
accessible, to legitimize more forms of it, to disperse cultural
institutions throughout the country. Nicaragua had very few cultural
institutions before 1979, and Managua had become almost the only
center of institutionalized cultural activity. So an effort was made
to build a new set of cultural organizations and
institutions--museums, libraries, theater and dance companies--and to
distribute them throughout the country.
          They have also focused more on cultural production than on
consumption--on empowering and training people to think of themselves
as producers of culture rather than as passive consumers. They have
tried to integrate cultural concerns into other arena of development
policy, such as economic policy and housing policy.
          Such a projection seemed very attractive to me when I began to read
about it several years ago. After all, I had just spent a couple of
years reading about cultural policy in the United States, and it was
precisely the lack of such concerns--for democratizing cultural
institutions, for extending respect to non-elite culture, for
sensitivity to cultural values in other policy sectors--that seemed to
me to characterize most cultural policy in this country, where there
has been any at all.
          So I went to Nicaragua with a very positive set of
expectations. And having been there, I still feel that the
Sandinistas' intentions in the area of cultura1 policy were good. But
the situation proved to be much more complicated than what I had read
led me to expect.
          In the first place, at present most efforts at social or cultural
reconstruction are effectively at a standstill and have been for
several years--as a result of the war. Unfortunately, the
militarization of Nicaraguan society has been necessary to confront
the real threat that U.S. policy has presented. The past eight years
have made it clear that there is nothing the Reagan administration
won't do to 

destroy the Sandinistas if they think they can get away
with it. Whether they can get away with it is the only
consideration. So one cannot know what the Sandinistas would have done
in the cultural arena if they had had the tranquility (and money) to
do it.
          If you look at the national budgets from 1979-81, what you find is
that military expenditures were taking less than 10 percent. By
1987-88, it was about 50 percent. And the problem is not only the
expenditures themselves, but also the social and cultural distortions
that occur when you're putting that percentage of the budget into
warfare. Virtually all young men over the age of sixteen, and many
young women, are going to end up in the military. And there are many
losses because of that. People who might be poets, who might be
writers, who might be singers or dancers or whatever are not doing
those things with proper concentration and intensity. The years
between sixteen and twenty-five, after all, are crucial years for the
education and artistic formation of any creative person.
          So the loss of human potential is enormous, and in a small country
of three million people such losses are especially critical.  The
distortion of institutions, including cultural ones, is also
serious. The country has managed to open several small new museums,
start a number of new dance and theater companies, an art school, a
school of dance, and so on. But the facilities of all are pathetic;
there is no other way to describe them: tiny buildings minimally
converted from other uses, and virtually no equipment. Clearly, things
have not happened on anything like the scale envisioned in the heady
days of late 1979.
          On the other hand, as some Nicaraguan artists and writers have
pointed out, revolution and war can also offer new creative challenges
and possibilities. Nicaraguan poetry during the past quarter-century
is a good example. If one reads it not only from 1978-79 and later,
but also from the early 1960s on, one sees that it is remarkable in
both quantity and quality. The forced transformations of people's
lives and consciousness led to enormous creativity. Poetry by FLSN
people who were imprisoned by Somoza in the 1970s--such as that
written by Ricardo Morales Aviles from Managua's La Aviacion
prison--is deeply moving and beautiful, and it could not have been
written under any other circumstances. Similar things occurred in
music and theater.
          But the war and its economic consequences have not been the only
problems in the area of post-revolutionary cultural development. It
turns out that some of the Sandinistas' thinking about culture, and
therefore their programmatic projection of it, has not been as
well-grounded as it might have been. The most dramatic case of their
lack of cultural sensitivity and sophistication was of course their
treatment of the Miskitos on the east coast. That has been much
discussed. It arose out of a complex set of circumstances, but central
among them was the fact that like the majority of Nicaraguans, the
Sandinista leadership was from the west coast and knew very little
about the east coast of their own country.
          It also seems to me that there has been some tendency to
romanticize and simplify the cultural history and the contemporary
cultural realities of the country. In a way this is understandable
because so little has been written about either. The kinds of detailed
cultural studies that exist in abundance for the United States and for
many other countries simply have never been done in Nicaragua. A
researcher in the area of culture or cultural history in Nicaragua
cannot hope to have the kind of research materials and facilities that
would be necessary to do the job well. Archives, where they exist, are
small and poor. So in some ways it is hard even for Nicaraguans to
learn about their own cultural past or present.
          Moreover, a good many of the Sandinista leadership came out of
urban, middle-class backgrounds, which afforded them limited
understanding of the culture of the majority of Nicaragua's rural,
agricultural population. So in a curious way I see the Sandinistas
making some of the same kind of romantic assumptions that were made by
the New England ladies who came to protect and revive Appalachian
culture at the turn of the century: projecting some of their own
somewhat romantic and simplistic cultural fantasies on a situation
that is complex and dynamic, reviving "traditions" of debatable
authenticity, and so on.
          For instance, there is a fairly extensive folk dance movement in
Nicaragua, supported by the Ministry of Culture and Sandinista
Association of Cultural workers (ASTC). Some of the dance groups are
splendid, and it is in any case extraordinary that such things are
going on at all under such difficult economic and social
circumstances. Nevertheless, as has happened at other times in many
other places (the Ballet Folklorico de Mexico, to cite one well-known
example), some of the dance productions amount to a rather prettified
and romanticized version of what they may once have been.
          Nevertheless, what is going on now in dance in Nicara-

gua is far
healthier culturally than what was going on before 1979, which was
mainly importing second-rate ballet companies from the U.S. or Europe
to perform for the Managua elite in El Teatro Ruben Darzo itself an
Edward Durrell Stone white marble copy of Edward Durrell Stone's
Kennedy Center.
          Perhaps what ought to be said finally is that these things are
difficult and perilous to talk about. The processes are subtle and
complicated, and I feel uneasy about making any generalizations at
all. Although I have read a vast amount about Nicaragua, and have
spent some time there traveling, talking, reading and observing, I am
acutely aware of the dangers of commenting on the cultural situation
in such a cursory way.
          On the other hand, it is important for U.S. people to know these
issues exist--that the cultural life of a nation moves forward even
under the most difficult of circumstances--and must be understood if
we ever are to play a positive role in the reconstruction of a small
and struggling country we have done so much for so long to confuse and
destroy.
          I would hope that people in the South who have been put down
culturally for so long by so many, who have been stigmatized as
rednecks and hillbillies and crackers, who have been the pitied
objects of many a cultural missionary effort, who live in a part of
the world the snobbish and sophomoric H. L. Mencken dismissed as the
Sahara of the Bozarts at about the same time the U.S. government was
trying to discredit and destroy Augusto C. Sandino as a bandit--may
find themselves able to draw upon their own experience to comprehend
and empathize with the struggle of Nicaraguan people to survive,
decolonize, recover and reinterpret their own cultural past, and shape
a cultural future for their children.
        
        
          Henry Wallace's Campaign Foreshadowed the Movement as Well as
the Rainbow
          By Sullivan, PatriciaPatricia Sullivan
          Vol. 10, No. 5, 1988, pp. 11, 16-17
          
          Late in the summer of 1948, presidential candidate Henry Wallace
embarked on a week-long tour through the Deep South. For a brief time,
he was able to break through much of the Cold war hysteria that
clouded the Progressive Party, and focus public attention on a
fundamental issue and purpose of his third party campaign. Wallace's
Southern strategy grew out of President Roosevelt's earlier efforts to
address the South as the nation's "number one economic problem."
          In order to carry New Deal reforms forward, Wallace embraced the
emerging civil rights struggle as essential to realizing the economic
and political potential of the region, and the nation. He attacked
segregation from North Carolina to Mississippi, and encouraged black
Southerners in their burgeoning effort to dismantle the structure of
white supremacy. Henry Wallace's Southern campaign was about hope and
inclusion, and a notable chapter in the politics of progressive
reform. It is also a reminder that the roots of the civil rights
movement go deeper than the 1950s and 1960s.
          The Progressive Party was part of the ferment, sparked by the New
Deal, which would transform twentieth century Southern politics. The
New Deal had "aroused the political interests and political hopes
of classes of people left unmoved by traditional Southern
politics," wrote V.O. Key. Franklin Roosevelt's unsuccessful
attempt to purge Southern Conservatives from office encouraged
grassroots efforts to mobilize the New Deal's constituency in the
South--particularly blacks, and working class whites--a constituency
that was largely disfranchised. During the 1940s Southern New Dealers
joined with the NAACP and other organizations in a campaign to
eliminate disfranchisement laws enacted at the turn of the century. At
the same time, black civil rights activists, labor organizers and
Southern progressives supported local voter registration efforts
throughout the South.
          Following the Supreme Court's 1944 decision outlawing the white
primary, black voter registration in the South increased
dramatically. When South Carolina resisted the Court's ruling, black
activists John McCray and Osceola McKaine organized a separate party,
the Progressive Democratic Party (PDP). In 1944, twenty years before
the well-known challenge of Fannie Lou Hamer and the Mississippi
Democratic Freedom Party, the PDP took a delegation to the Democratic
National Convention to contest the seating of the all-white
delegation. Osceola McKaine ran for the Senate on the PDP ticket that
November to stimulate black political participation in the Palmetto
State. The number of registered black voters in South Carolina
increased during the 1940s from 3,500 to 50,000.
          In tandem with the early voting rights movement, civil rights
organizations worked with local communities in preparing for a frontal
assault on the segregation system. As early as the mid 1930s, the
NAACP's Charles Houston and Thurgood Marshall joined with black
lawyers around the South and initiated the legal challenge to racial
discrimination in education. Their efforts would culminate with the
1954 Brown decision. In 1947, CORE staged the first "Freedom Ride"
through the upper South following the Supreme Court ruling outlawing
segregation in interstate transportation.

          Building on these earlier efforts, the Progressive Party's Southern
campaign provided another means for challenging the segregation
system, while stimulating political interest and
participation. Southerners who organized for Henry Wallace in the
South had been active in the voting rights movement of the 1940a They
included: Louis Burnham of the Southern Negro Youth Conference; Palmer
Weber, of the CIO Political Action Committee and member of the
executive Board of the NAACP; Virginia Durr, of the National Committee
to Abolish the Poll Tax; and Clark Foreman, president of the Southern
Conference for Human Welfare.
          Other supporters linked the '48 campaign with the movement of the
1950s and 1960s: Dr. Sam Williams, who was Martin Luther King's
philosophy teacher at Morehouse in 1948 and later national chairman of
CORE; Rev. and Mrs. Maynard Jackson Sr., parents of Atlanta's first
black mayor; Daisy Bates, who led the effort to desegregate Central
High School in Little Rock; and Randolph Blackwell, then a student at
North Carolina A &T College who became a top aide in the South to
Martin Luther King Jr.
          
            Tactics Previewed the Movement
          
          Progressive Party organizers used tactics that previewed the
sixties movement. Northern student volunteers came South in the summer
of 1948 to help with voter registration and the petition drive to get
Wallace on the ballot. Black candidates ran for office on the
Progressive party ticket throughout the region. And participants and
supporters routinely challenged the segregation system, a practice
that drew national attention when the former vice president came South
late in the summer of 1948.
          The issue of race overshadowed the candidate's appeal for an
expansion of the New Deal programs and increased federal aid to the
poorest region in the nation. Wallace attacked segregation and the
one-party system as endemic to the South's economic problems. He
refused to address segregated audiences, and would not patronize
hotels or restaurants which excluded blacks. Several near riots and a
stabbing marked Wallace's first full day of campaigning in North
Carolina, and captured national headlines. Pete Seeger, the young
balladeer of the Progressive Party campaign, recalled that Wallace's
advisors were anxious to cancel the rest of the tour. But Wallace
refused to concede to terror and lawlessness. They continued on,
deeper into Dixie.
          The entourage of campaign workers and reporters traveled
alternately by bus, train, and motorcade, taking most of their meals
picnic style along the highway. "An integrated group, traveling
through the South in 1948...We were sitting targets expecting to be
blown up at any minute," recalled a reporter for the Baltimore
Afro-American. A Life reporter sported a large "I'm for
Thurmond" button in a feeble effort to distinguish himself from the
group.
          Birmingham, Alabama, previewed the violence and police terror that
would distinguish that city fifteen years later. Police Commissioner
Bull Connor, "a Horatius at the bridge of Alabama's states rights,"
was prepared for a showdown. A hostile mob of several thousand greeted
Wallace's motorcade armed with pipes and baseball bats. Connor used a
rope to segregate supporters waiting for Wallace on the courthouse
lawn. A campaign worker read a brief statement, noting Wallace would
maintain his policy of not addressing segregated audiences. Police,
armed with tear gas, stood by as a jeering crowd surrounded Wallace's
car, and began to rock it, hollering "kill Wallace." The police
finally cleared a path for the motorcade. Palmer Weber, who had
instructed everyone to keep their windows closed and not leave the
cars, said they could have been killed in Alabama. Those reporters who
had viewed the Wallace campaign in the South as a cynical effort to
stir up trouble in the South in order to gain votes in the North began
to see it differently. "They were terrorized," Weber
recalled. "They knew they had been on the edge of hell. They
realized if we wanted to create a riot we could have done it very
easily. It was very educational for these reporters," he said with

a trace of sarcasm, "very educational."
          Wallace went on to Mississippi, Louisiana, Arkansas and Tennessee
and addressed mostly peaceful gatherings on the steps of local court
houses, in black churches, and in a baseball park. He reached back to
the South's Populist tradition when he reminded audiences that
"greedy men, the Big Mules...have ruled the South for generations
and kept millions of common people in economic poverty and political
bondage. They have fought trade unions bitterly. They have kept wages
in the South below those in the North....Their profits are multiplied
by keeping people divided--section against section, race against race,
farmers against workers."
          But Wallace reached beyond the economic arguments of Southern
populism. Race, he said, was the major obstacle to the South's
economic and political development. He also appealed to the religious
tradition of the region, explaining that segregation was more that an
economic liability. "Social injustice is sin...segregation is
sin," Wallace said, a violation of "the fundamental Christian
and democratic principles in our civilization." Finally, he warned
that, in the postwar world, segregation had serious implications for
national security. In a press conference towards the end of the tour,
Wallace told reporters that segregation was the nation's number one
problem, threatening America's position of leadership in a world where
the majority of the population were people of color.
          James Wechsler of The New York Post reported that
Wallace "shattered a wide variety of political precedents during
his tour." He faithfully boycotted Southern restaurants and
hotels, sleeping alternately in pullman cars and private homes. He
addressed the first unsegregated public meeting in Memphis since
Reconstruction. He was the first presidential candidate to address
unsegregated meetings in the South. President Truman cancelled his
tentative plans to tour the region that fall, and no future
presidential candidate would ever address a segregated audience in the
South again. Wechsler praised Wallace for "saying a good many
things that needed to be said on Southern property, and establishing
in at least a dozen...places that unsegregated meetings could be held
without a civil war." A founder of the ADA who had viewed
Wallace's campaign as little more than a communist front, James
Wechsler was shaken by the Southern tour. He later recalled, "in
that atmosphere, the ideological distinctions I talked about didn't
seem to loom as large. In the South it was a campaign for civil
rights."
          Wallace's civil rights effort is vaguely remembered as a political
challenge which forced a reluctant President Truman to address the
issue. Beyond the desegregation of the armed forces, however, little
action followed at the national level. The primary significance of
Wallace's Southern campaign was twofold. In the shadow of the Cold
War, he attempted to educate America about the real and present danger
to its democratic system, which was home grown. And, more importantly,
he participated in the movement already underway to smash Jim Crow and
democratize Southern politics. Palmer Weber reported to Thurgood
Marshall, "the various Negro communities were electrified and
tremendously heartened to see one white man with guts willing to take
it standing up....By and large I find the Negro leadership fighting
for the ballot as never before. The only limitation is full-time
workers." Wallace and his supporters engaged and endorsed those
Southerners who would carry the struggle forward--at the ballot box,
in the courts, and in the streets.
          Jesse Jackson's presidential campaign is a measure of how far the
country has traveled since Henry Wallace headed South forty years
ago. Born of the struggle that finally transformed the South, Jackson
is carrying the progressive movement forward. By remembering the early
organizing efforts of the 1940s, we can better understand the rich
texture of reform politics in America, and the broad significance of
the civil rights movement. And, by remembering, honor those civil
rights pioneers for, in Palmer Weber's words, "not faltering on the
simple principle of human rights." Reflecting on the 1948 campaign
as the McCarthy decade got underway, he wrote Wallace, "we owe it
to ourselves to hold that torch firmly and high regardless of the
consequences because that is the way forward. There is more than one
way to measure political success."
          
            Patricia Sullivan is the assistant director of the Center
for the Study of Civil Rights at the Carter G. Woodson Institute for
Afro-American and African Studies, Charlottesville,
Virginia.
          
        
        
          From Protest to Process: Ann Braden's Inside View of the Rainbow
Campaign
          Interview By Kuhn, CliffCliff Kuhn
          Vol. 10, No. 5, 1988, pp. 10, 12-15
          
          
            I. Winning and Losing at the 1988 Democratic Convention
            As a supporter of the Rainbow Coalition and the Jackson campaign I
felt pretty good about the convention. Now, some people didn't so
that's going to be a topic of discussion for some time. It depends on
where you start from. I felt that Jesse Jackson and our
movement--generally the peace and justice forces in this country--set
the tone of the convention. Although we didn't have the power, we had
the moral authority. Hardly a speaker got up to that podium that
wasn't plagiarizing Jesse Jackson. I felt that you could see many of
our ideas in that convention. We didn't come there with enough votes
to get what we really wanted which was the nomination for Jesse. We've
just got to face facts, we didn't. I think partly that the Democratic
machinery was rigged against us, and some of that is going to change
in 1992 with the new rules that we got adopted. But we came with an
awful lot of votes and we represent a lot in this country. Jesse
Jackson and other people who spoke at the convention who are a part of
our movement--Ron Dellums, Richard Hatcher, and others--really lifted up
a new vision for a new direction for this country.
            There was some discussion about where we go from here. Obviously
people are asking, what did we get out of this? Certainly you will
hear some people say that we didn't get anything. Some of us haven't
done much for the last year except work in the Jackson campaign. We've
let other things go and maybe important things we should have done. I
was especially concerned about increasing our white vote, which I was
not satisfied with in 1984; I wasn't satisfied with it this year
either although we did a lot better and there was a more conscious
effort to do that.
            I know there were some people who were disillusioned. Not with
Jesse, not with our campaign, but with the whole system and whether it
was worth it, and how can you crack the Democratic Party, and
everything's rigged against us and is it really worth it? And did we
win anything? I think we won a lot.
            You would not know it to read the establishment media, because they
tried to do everything from the very beginning of Jesse's campaign to
destroy it in one way or another. First they belittled it, and when he
obviously was getting a lot of votes then they began to figure out
different ways to attack him. They looked for some scandal in his
background. That didn't work. The whole line, 'he can't win,' came
from the press. We were not really successful in overcoming that
psychology.
            If everybody who thought Jesse was the best candidate had voted for
him, I really think he'd be the nominee today. Our main failure was
that we couldn't overcome the 'can't win' thing, which was nothing but
giving in to racism. He could have won. On the floor the night after
Jesse spoke I ran into Merle Hanson, the farmer advocate, who was with
the Iowa delegation. He said what is just so heartbreaking is when you
listened to Jesse's speech last night and saw the reaction to it from
people both there and in other places watching it on TV you know he
could have won. He's able to overcome all those barriers once people
can actually hear him.
            But we didn't win the nomination. I want to talk about what we did
win. Jesse's whole performance was practically a miracle. Everybody
knows the figures. He got seven million votes. He won ninety-two
congressional districts. He carried state after state and came in
second in the others. He got more convention votes than any runner-up
has ever gotten-1218.5 at the end.
            The mass media played it up as the Jackson forces have been
defeated. In fact, the day after the vote on the platform they played
that we were defeated on those two planks therefore the Jackson forces
had been defeated and Dukakis was firmly in control.
            I don't think Dukakis was in control of that convention. Jesse was
in control morally. He was setting the tone. It has been played up as
a defeat, when it wasn't. We came there a tremendous bloc of voters
who cannot be ignored in this country.
            At this convention more than any other in history there was a real
rainbow in the racial sense and more delegates of non-European
descent-not just black, but Asian and Latino and Native American. You
felt a real sense of pride on the part of everybody that we
represented this quilt. Jesse presented it as a thing to be proud
of. The rainbow means a lot more to us than the racial quilt, but
that's one element of it.

            It doesn't make headlines that before
we ever got to this convention because of the force of the Jackson
movement we had basic changes in the rules of the Democratic Party. We
won everything the Jackson forces went into the rules committee asking
for. Well, not entirely; we'd like to cut out the superdelegates
entirely, but in 1992 they'll be cut down by a third. The
winner-take-all system that really did us in in some states will be
eliminated. The bonus delegate thing which worked against us will be
eliminated. There are some other technical changes which add up to be
important. Somebody calculated that if the rules now in effect had
been in effect this year Jesse would have come to Atlanta with 400
more delegates and Dukakis with 400 fewer. We would have had a
different scenario. We won that.
            We've changed the equation within the Democratic Party. In terms of
the way the Democratic leadership looks at this movement, it's been
legitimatized; it's gotten respect. The visible expression of that
fact is that they've added these members to the Democratic National
Committee who are Jesse's nominees. How much power that represents, I
don't know, but they recognize that this is at least a wing of the
party that is a significant movement in this country.
          
          
            II. A Platform Worth a Fight
            To some people the platform doesn't matter. A platform is usually
ignored by candidates and forgotten once they get in office. But a
good platform gives you something to fight about. We got a fairly good
platform though people didn't realize it because they read that we got
defeated on the two planks that went to the floor. One was for a no
first-strike policy--I don't know how anybody can be against that--and
the other one was tax-the-rich. The Jackson forces were basically
saying that we will not increase taxes, in fact we will try to reduce
taxes on low-income and middle-income people, but that we will go back
at least to 1977 in terms of the taxes that the corporations and very
rich people are paying. Most of us, since most of us aren't rich,
should be for that. It's a policy trying to reverse the unfair trend
of the tax structure, not just since Reagan came in but since World
War II, because the tax burden in this country has shifted
dramatically since World War II. Sixty-something percent of the tax
revenue came from corporations and very high income people. But now
that's completely reversed and the largest share, maybe up in the 70
percent range, comes from poor and middle income people. All the
Jackson forces were asking was that you undo what Reagan has done,
which has been robbing from the poor to give to the rich. As Jesse
said in his convention speech, they've had this party, let them pay
for it. The people who argued against that plank were really
dishonest. I don't mind somebody being against me if they'll be
honest. They were presenting that platform proposal like it was going
to be taxing poor people. "We can't do that or we won't get elected
like Mondale." It wasn't that and they knew it.
            Those were two planks we lost and it was heartbreaking. But of the
thirteen points of dispute on the platform, we won in negotiation on
nine of them. They are not worded as strongly as if we'd had the votes
to elect Jackson but they are pretty good planks. On Central America,
on nuclear testing, on health care, on headstart and programs for
children, on budget priorities. We got in our concepts of what the
priorities should be for human needs.
            The one plank that did not go to a vote but that we think was a
victory in that we were able to have our speaker on the floor was on
the question of self-determination for the Palestinian people. A lot
of people who were watching TV that night had an opportunity to hear a
viewpoint they just haven't heard. That was a victory in itself.
            The other thing that people don't realize is that the whole thrust
of that platform was what Jesse has been pushing since 1984 basically
economic justice at home and peace abroad. It really is there and of
course we have to bring it to life. I was wandering around the floor
that night after we lost those votes, wandering around like everybody
else; nobody listened to the speakers. Suddenly I heard Richard
Hatcher at the podium speaking on one of the platform planks. Ron
Dellums was speaking on the South Africa plank. This platform calls
for declaring South Africa a terrorist state. I thought, "Gee, I'd
better sit down and listen to what's going on. Because this is our
platform." It really is.
            In 1984 in San Francisco one of the disputed planks that we lost
was affirmative action. This time that's in there. People ought to
look at it. We know it can be a scrap of paper that doesn't mean
anything. But it also gives us something that we can hold those two
candidates accountable for. We can use it as a litmus test for other
candidates who want our support. I think the very fact that Jesse
could set the direction of that platform shows again that we have
taken a major step toward our real objective--to change the 

direction of this country.
            We came out of this election season the winner in the sense that
the movement for peace and justice in this country is stronger than
ever. It has legitimacy. It has a power base within the Democratic
Party. It gives us certain advantages. There are disadvantages. I
think more advantages than disadvantages at this point in history. It
gives us a platform from which we are going to reach millions of more
people before 1992.
            When we came to Atlanta we knew Jesse wasn't going to be the
presidential nominee. We really didn't think he was going to be the
vice-presidential nominee and a lot of people didn't want him to be. I
don't know whether he wanted to be. Jesse talked for a couple of hours
with his delegates on Friday morning in Atlanta. One of the things he
said was, "You people are saying they didn't get nothing. That's
like if you go to the grocery store and your family is really hungry
and your people need something to eat and they haven't got any
steak. You come home with an empty sack. And money in your pocket. Yet
there was hamburger and sausage and pork chops and you didn't get
them. Is that what you are going to do?"
            We didn't get the steak but there was a bit of sausage and
hamburger and we'll get the steak next time.
            A lot of people keep saying, "Let's get out of this mess" of
the Democratic Party. But Jesse has said since '84, "No, the
conservatives hope we'll leave. They are scared we'll stay and take
over the party." He thinks it's possible to use this machinery to
further a peace and justice agenda.
            So far he has been right.
            I think we are in a new stage of history. Jesse said the other day
this is not a short sprint. It's a long-distance run. I think we
passed a major milestone this year.
          
          
            III. Beyond Protest
            My first political action was forty years ago in 1948 in the
Progressive Party, which was an alternative program not too different
from what we're working for now. Henry Wallace--a lot of younger people
don't even know who he was now--was the standard bearer. He was talking
about the same thing--justice at home, peace abroad--and it was just
when the cold war was starting and the segregationists and racists
were gaining strength in the South. That was a powerful movement. It
was destroyed. That was a special period, the cold war and
everything.
            Henry Wallace, who had been in the Roosevelt administration and
then started this third party movement because the Democratic party
was going on a different direction, was a good guy. To lead the kind
of movement we need, frankly, he was the wrong color. He was
white. I'm white and you're white and there's nothing wrong with white
folks. We've got a role to play. But because of the whole history of a
racist society, I think it's inevitable that the only way this
inclusive coalition that we need can really come together is with the
leadership of people of color.
            Forty years ago black people, especially in the South, were just
being able to struggle and emerge out of the seventy-five or almost a
hundred years of terror. But they were organizing and lining up to
vote at the courthouses all over the South. I was a young newspaper
reporter then watching them line up in Birmingham where one of them
got registered. Veterans coming back from World War II and all that
sort of thing. That was going on.
            That movement for black freedom had to emerge and develop to bring
to the fore leadership that could pull together the coalition that
would include everybody. That has happened now. At the founding
convention of the Rainbow in 1986 I really got to thinking about
it. That was the first time I heard Jesse talk about the quilt--how one
patch isn't big enough but you put all the patches together and you've
got a quilt. He said that to poor white people in the mountains of
Kentucky during this campaign--a big rally up there. He says, "Your
patch isn't big enough, but you put it together with all the farmers
in the Midwest and the paper workers in Mobile and we'll get
together." When we come together this way we are the new
majority. We are not minorities anymore.
            Most people want a government that reflects humane policies. But
all these people who want a new direction are coming from different
directions. You go to meetings and talk about forming a coalition. We
sit in a meeting and plan it but it doesn't happen. Until now.
            That is the new element that makes it possible to talk about this
new majority running the country. That is not rhetoric. I think we are
going to do it. But it is such a shift of gears for people like me who
spent the last forty years--all my adult life--protesting. Your
psychology gets to the point that you think that's what the social
justice movement is-protesting. We are real good at picketing and we
know how to descend on city hall and raise hell and get some things
done. You can beat city hall. We do it a lot.
            But it almost
never occurs to us that we could be running city hall. I remember in
the '50s and I can remember a different group in the '60s,
revolutionaries, that would sit around and talk about seizing power. I
don't think they believed it. About two years ago I started thinking
and it was like I had to change the gears of my thinking. We don't
always have to be a protest movement on the outside. Our movement can
take power and run this government and change the policies. That is
like a new thought.
             *  *  *
            A lot of us think we need a real two-party system in the

country. The traditional Democrats and the Republicans are so much
alike that you can't tell them apart. The current Democratic
leadership is having to acknowledge Jesse Jackson now but of course we
know they came out of the '84 election with this strange analysis that
some way they could win all these voters if they sounded more like
Republicans than Republicans. That never made any sense. If somebody
wanted to vote for that they'd go vote Republican.
            Jesse has given them a different way to win, to offer an
alternative program to the country. In practicality, the advantage to
building this movement through the Democratic Party is that without it
I'm not sure we as a movement would have reached millions of people
this year with our message. A lot of people have heard the truth from
Jesse Jackson and those who have worked with him this year. I am not
sure that would have happened if we had not been in the Democratic
structure. Somebody told me a hundred million people were watching
Jesse on TV. It was information they needed.
            We are talking about power. We are tired of being a protest
movement. The objective of this movement is to take governmental
power. That scares some people. We have seen power corrupts and all
that. Some of us think that the policies of our government are so bad
that we've got to be about taking power and changing them.
            For example, if Dukakis wins it is possible that within six months
we will get official government action declaring South Africa a
terrorist state. That is not just semantics. That sets up certain
things sanctions, stopping trade, stopping trade with countries that
are giving South Africa arms. If you are outside that structure you do
not have access to that governmental power. It is a debatable
question. This is the course that Jesse Jackson has set and I think it
is working in the interests of the people right now.
          
          
            IV. Of Men and Movements
            Martin Luther King wasn't the movement although people are not
learning that now, unfortunately, the way King is being presented. On
the other hand this movement wouldn't be at the stage it is without
Jesse Jackson.
            I do not like to compare Jesse with Dr. King because it gets you
into all kinds of crazy things. They are two very different people,
very different personalities. I think you can make some leadership
comparisons. I had the deepest respect for Martin's character, and I
do for Jesse's, too. I saw Martin take some very courageous stands. He
would do what he thought was right whether he was going to get glory
for it or not. But I've always felt that the real genius of Martin
Luther King was that he was able to articulate and bring to the
attention of the country the message that many people were feeling in
their inner beings. Therefore he became a catalyst that did not create
the movement at all; he didn't even create the Montgomery movement as
we know, but that role as catalyst did raise it to a different
level. In the process I think the movement made Martin. I think he
changed and grew under the impact of that movement. He responded to it
and to the challenge of history and what was expected of him.
            In a sense you can make a parallel with Jesse. His great genius is
that he is able to articulate what everybody's longing for, in terms
of a new direction, a new vision. It is something that is welling up
from the people and he is able to give a voice to that. He has risen
to do that at this time. He has become the catalyst. The movement as I
see it, with a capital 'M,' has never stopped. We got repressed in the
late sixties. Some people got co-opted in the seventies. People went
on strike. They went on to doing different things. Jesse has pulled it
back into a national focus. It is growing because of that and much
faster than it would have otherwise. In the process it is creating
Jesse. He is changing and growing under the impact of that movement. I
think that is the way it should be.
            He isn't perfect. Martin wasn't. None of us are. We are all a
bundle of contradiction But Jesse gets more blame for it. The problem
is that if you are in leadership the mix of good and evil gets
exaggerated. People can tell you all the bad things about
Jesse. Before Martin got put on a pedestal they could tell you all the
bad things about Martin.
            I think that Jesse has developed into a great leader under the
impact of this movement. Obviously he had the potential to do that.
          
          
            V. In the Embrace of the Party
            I think Jesse has enough sense not to become co-opted, though that
is the strategy of the traditional Democratic Party at this
point. They would like to have ignored this movement until it went
away. It hasn't gone away. So the next thing is to try to co-opt
it. If they are not able to do that they may start trying to crush
it. That has been the history--if they can't co-opt you they repress
you. We are not to that stage yet.
            The convention was orchestrated to try to make it look like the
traditional Democrats had taken Jesse and his movement in to their
fold and they are in control. Our people weren't thinking that
way. The most vital meeting that happened outside of the convention
hall was the Friday morning meeting with Jesse with his
delegates. They all came--Dukakis and Bentsen and [DNC Chairman Paul]
Kirk and Kitty Dukakis. They all trooped on the stage with Jesse. I
think they were impressed. There were these hundreds of delegates up
at eight o'clock in the morning. I bet they couldn't get their's up at
eight o'clock in the morning.
            Someone said, "What do you mean by co-optation?" I had to
think about it. Somebody asks you what you mean by 

something when
you've been using the word for years. I think what I mean by
co-optation is that there's a dominant force that tries to co-opt a
movement by pulling in our people one by one, using our energy and our
commitment for their agenda so that our agenda gets lost. They might
co-opt some individuals. I don't think they'll co-opt Jesse. I don't
think this movement as a whole is co-optable. I think it's too
strong.
            Jesse has sort of laid out a practical agenda--not an issue agenda;
we know what the issues are--of things that people need to be about
now. He is saying that people need to really work in the November
election. Some people are going to have a hard time doing that. Some
people may not do it. There are arguments for doing it. The most
essential thing right now is to remove from Washington those people
who have been running the government for the last eight years.
            Dukakis has pledged he is not going to support contra aid. He is
not going to support UNITA in Angola. He has said that. You have got a
platform that says we will declare South Africa a terrorist state. You
can't say there is no difference because there is even though it is
not our program, our candidate. Jesse is saying that the first thing
we have got to do is get those folks out of Washington. The only way
to do that is to work for the Democratic ticket and see that they get
elected.
            That is not all. He told people to go home and do at the state,
city, county and congressional district level what we are doing at the
national level--create a new equation in the Democratic Party. Make
sure that our forces are represented. That hasn't been done in a lot
of states. He uses Mississippi sometimes as a model because after '84
they went home and organized and now the Rainbow forces or the Jackson
forces have taken over the leadership of the Democratic Party. He is
also saying, "Run for everything." Run for the Senate, run for
the Congress, run for mayor, run for city council, run for
dogcatcher. Get your Rainbow candidates to run. That started in
'84.
            He keeps stressing the census process in 1990 because if that isn't
done right it can screw up a lot of things on the numbers that give
you your representation. Then be organized to deal with the
legislatures in 1991 on reapportionment. By then we are into another
presidential race. There is plenty to do.
            In tangible expressions of respect for the Jackson movement, the
Democratic leadership has committed itself to support some really
important legislation. The Dellums bill on complete sanctions against
South Africa will probably pass now. Another is the D.C. statehood
bill which affects all of us, because with the present power
relationships in Washington it means two more progressive Senators and
another progressive governor. There has also been a commitment to
comprehensive child care. They have also promised to implement the
economic set-asides for minorities. That is millions of dollars in
goods and services that would amount to a community investment program
in minority communities.
            There is commitment to the Conyers bill for on-site, same-day
registration so that people can go on voting day and register to
vote. Jesse Jackson and all the forces around him feel that that this
measure is critically important for expanding the electorate; it
already exists in some states. It would make a a difference. I was
working at Jackson headquarters on Super Tuesday. People were coming
in droves wanting to know where they could vote for Jesse Jackson. We
said, "Where's your precinct?" They didn't know anything about
a precinct. "Are you registered?" They weren't registered. It
just occurred to them that day they wanted to go vote. That is what
this bill says they would be able to do. All the election officials
are going to scream and holler. The bill includes money for the states
to set the machinery for this, the necessary computers to make it
possible. There's plenty to do.
          
          
            VI. Politics, Power and Possibility
            I think a lot of people who have been in protest movements almost
shy away from actually taking over. Do we really want power? We have
seen what power does and power corrupts and absolute power corrupts
absolutely. Maybe we'd rather be out here real pure, picketing all our
lives. I've thought about that, too. It seems to me that we really
think that the policies of the government are so destructive and are
destroying people here and all over the world. Threatening the
existence of this plane-then we've got to think about taking power and
changing those policies. Now it is really possible. It is going to
happen. I think it is going to happen soon. I think it could have
happened this year. The problem is that even if we had been able to
nominate and elect Jesse as President this year--if that miracle had
happened--we might not have been ready for it because we didn't have
Congress. We can have Congress. We won ninety-two congressional
districts. One thing he's telling people is to go home and see whether
your representative in Congress is representing what that vote stood
for. If he isn't then he or she needs to be replaced. All that can
happen pretty quick. I started saying a year and a half ago that we'd
have a Rainbow government in Washington by the year 2000. This year I
thought maybe 1988, maybe 1992. I think it will happen soon. I hope it
happens in my lifetime. I would like to live to see a government in
Washington that really cared about the people of this country. That
was committing our resources to meeting the needs of the people of
this country and working with the people struggling for a better life
all over the world instead of trying to crush them in my name and
using my tax money.
            I grew up during the New Deal which I think did have those
commitments--or the movement forced it to have them. Ever since World
War II we just haven't had that. We've had to be ashamed of our
government. Now wouldn't it be nice to be real proud of our government
for a change.
            I think we are going to live to see that.
          
        
        
          Pursuing the Shadow Government
          By Guthey, EricEric Guthey
          Vol. 10, No. 5, 1988, pp. 5, 8-9
          
          Last May, Southern Changes reported on the work of
the Christic Institute, a Washington-based public interest law firm
that has a strong history of legal activism throughout the South.
          The Christic Institute had filed a civil suit in a Miami Federal
court against twenty-nine alleged members of the "Secret Team"
Christic believes to be behind the Iran Contra Affair, behind a
massive guns-for-drugs campaign to fund the U.S.-backed Contras, and
behind a whole litany of covert acts of right-wing terrorism
stretching back over twenty-five years. The defendants included
retired Major General Richard Secord, retired General John Singlaub,
Oliver North's aide Robert Owen, businessman Albert Hakim, former CIA
operatives Theodore Shackley and Thomas Clines, and Thomas Posey, a
self-styled mercenary and head of the Alabama-based Civilian Materiel
Assistance, a Contra-support group (Posey is currently under
indictment in Miami on separate charges of violating the Neutrality
Act).
          The lawsuit held out the possibility of forcing key figures of the
Iran/Contra affair to answer tough questions that had not even been
asked by the mainstream press, by the Tower Commission, by the
Congressional Iran/Contra Committees, or by Special Prosecutor
Lawrence Walsh.
          But on June 23, just four days before the trial was to begin, Chief
U.S. District Judge James Lawrence King threw the case out of court,
maintaining that it wee based on hearsay and inadmissable evidence.
          The Christic Institute had filed its $24 million suit under the
Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organization statute (RICO). Under
the statute, the Christic Institute would have to prove that each of
the defendants committed at least two acts contributing to a criminal
conspiracy that also resulted in the injury of the Christic
Institute's client, journalist Tony Avirgan, during the 1984
assassination attempt against former Contra leader Eden Pastora
(another alleged operation of the Secret Team). In 0a ruling, Judge
King said that the "causation link" between the injury to Avirgan and
the various criminal acts cited by the Christic Institute was
missing.
          Charging that Judge King's ruling was "arbitrary" and full of
"gross legal errors," the Christic Institute immediately appealed the
decision, and will bring its case before the Eleventh Circuit Court of
Appeals in Atlanta sometime later this year.
          In a funding appeal mailed to supporters shortly after the
decision, the Christic Institute suggested that political motives were
behind the abrupt dismissal of their case. "Apparently, Judge King
looked at this evidence and realized that his Miami 

courtroom was
going to become center stage for a riveting political drama--right in
the middle of the '88 election campaign. So he stopped the trial,"
the mailing said.
          But Judge King is not the only one to question the Christic
Institute's "Secret Team" theory. In an article written before King's
decision but published just afterwards, David Corn of The
Nation called the theory a "political device" intended to
rally opposition to the national security apparatus as well as an
"ambitious historical thesis that purports to explain much of
U.S. foreign policy since 1959." ("Is There Really a 'Secret Team'?",
The Nation, July 2/9, 1988) According to Corn, the
Christic Institute uses the Secret Team hypothesis to portray the
secret war against Castro, the CIA assassination program in Vietnam,
the covert war in Central America, and a whole slew of other covert
operations as ventures of the Secret Team and therefore private,
non-governmental acts. Said Com, "This lets the CIA, the Pentagon,
the State Department and various administrations off the hook."
          Corn also noted that the Christic Institute emphasizes the "dark
conspiracy" overtones of the Secret Team hypothesis because it is
"easy to package and offers a highly visible target for the
institute's crusade." (For example, the Christic Institute's
mailing that came out immediately after King dismissed the case
stated, "We must continue to expose the Secret Team
for who they are--private operatives of a "shadow government"
that wages secret ware, assassinates innocent people and smuggles
drugs to finance illegal foreign policy operations." [Christie
Institute's emphasis]) Corn claimed, however, that the Secret Team
hypothesis is merely a legal necessity which glosses over the
historical reality of government covert activity in order to win a
case in court. Corn therefore charged that the Christic Institute,
"in pursuit of its educational and political mission, is offering
this version of history to the public at $15 a copy" and is
therefore placing a historically "problematic document" in the hands
of its constituency.
          Responding to Corn's criticisms last month, Christic attorney
Andrew Love said that the Christic Institute has always recognized a
certain amount of tension between its litigation and public
information efforts. "But, legally, we have to work within the
constraints of the RICO statute," he said.
          Love said that for this very reason the public version of the
Christic Institute's legal declaration, which is entitled Inside the
Shadow Government, includes an introduction which explains why RICO
requires the Christic Institute to concentrate on the activity of the
Secret Team. "We wish that David Corn had read that introduction
more carefully," 

Love said.
          Love also reiterated that the legal focus of the case is not
intended to deflect criticism away from the U.S. government, but
rasher to expose connections between the Secret Team's private
operations and the government. "I don't think we've ever said that
the Secret Team is removed from the government," he said. "But
we're not going to come out and say that everything they did was
sanctioned by the government--because that could be interpreted as a
defense for them."
          "We can't take on the government--we would be thrown out of
court right away," Love explained further. "So we've taken on
the next beat thing. The whole idea of going to trial is to expose
what's going on--and we assume that this process will expose
connections with the government along the way."
          The Christic Institute's investigation has indeed uncovered
considerable evidence that a "shadow government" has been waging war
in the name of the American people and without their knowledge or
consent. But Christic's focus on the Secret Team should not be taken
to suggest that the shadow consists solely of a radical fringe of
rogue operative I perpetuating such countersubversion outside of the government and outside
of the law. Studied carefully and in the context of Reagan
Administration policy, the evidence provided by the Christic Institute
suggests that covert acts of a terrorist nature have become a legal
commonplace within our system of government--and this conclusion can
be supported by the findings of other investigations.
          For example, investigative journalists Frank Snepp and Jonathan
King recently reported in the New York Times that federal authorities
knew of Tom Posey's violations of the Neutrality Act for over three
years, but did not move against him because his illegal activity served
Administration purposes. King and Snepp maintain that the Justice
Department felt compelled to take action against Posey and his
associate, Jack Terrell, "only after Mr. Terrell soured on
Administration policy and began criticizing it openly--and only after
Congress began investigating." ("Iran-Contra Folly," New
York Times, July 31,1988) Meanwhile, Snepp and King point out,
government officials who encouraged Posey and Terrell or conducted
similar operations of their own go unpunished, and the investigations
of those former Administration officials who have been indicted (i.e.,
Oliver North and John Poindexter) are being deliberately hampered by
federal intelligence agencies unwilling to release relevant
documents.
          Two recent books also reveal the extent to which the
U.S. government is willing to mislead the public and subvert the legal
system where Administration policy is concerned. In A Candid
Inside Story of the Iran-Contra Hearings, Maine Senators
George Mitchell and William Cohen (a Democrat and a Republican,
respectively) assert that the Congressional Iran-Contra Committees on
which they both eat failed to ask important questions or to follow up
significant leads uncovered in the course of their hearings. And Jane
Mayer's and Doyle McManua's new book, Landslide: The Unmaking
of the President, 1984-1988, made the headline, this month
because it revealed that Administration officials actually discussed
relieving President Reagan of his duties on the grounds of
incompetence. But the not-so-surprising news about Reagan's ineptitude
is just the prologue to Landslide, which actually
focuses more broadly on the Iran-Contra affair. Among other things,
the authors conclude that George Bush had "laid before him in clear,
unsparing terms" the Iran arms-for-hostages swap as early as July
1986, and that he did absolutely nothing about it. Bush has vigorously
denied any knowledge of the initiative.
          In such a state of affairs, when the agencies of government cannot
be depended on to uphold the Constitution and when candidates for
president are willing to lie repeatedly, any efforts to shed light on
the shadow government--including the indirect efforts of the Christic
Institute--deserve recognition and support.
          
            Eric Guthey is a student in the Graduate Institute of
Liberal Arts at Emory University.
          
        
        
          A Letter from Lillian Smith
          Edited by Gladney, RoseRose Gladney
          Vol. 10, No. 5, 1988, pp. 22-23
          
          This is the final letter in a series published over the last year
by Southern Changes exploring the correspondence of
Lillian Smith. The selection for this issue was written in the fall of
1955 after Smith had spent a month as writer-in-residence at Vassar
College. While there she learned that her book The
Journey had been selected by the Georgia Writers' Association
to receive an award for the best book of nonfiction with the most
literary value written by a Georgian in 1954 In late November, shortly
before her time at Vassar was scheduled to end, she also learned that
her home in Clayton had been burglarized by two young boys and that a
fire, resulting from their activities, had destroyed her bedroom and
study. Almost all of her personal belongings, unpublished manuscripts,
notes, and thousands of letters were lost.
          The following paragraphs are taken from a thank-you letter to
Helen Lockwood, who was head of the English Department at Vassar and
responsible for Smith's visit there. The selected passages reveal much
that epitomizes Smith's response to the circumstances which shaped her
life and, in many cases, determined her perceived status as a
writer. Lockwood and Smith had become good friends during their month
of working together, and Lockwood knew of the Georgia Writers' award
as well as the terrible shock of the fire. With such a friend Smith
shared the sense of humor and awareness of life's absurdities that
fueled Smith's profound critiques of Southern culture.
           This sixth and final selection in the Series of Lillian Smith
letters was taken from a carbon copy of the original in the Lillian
Smith Collection at the Hargrett Rare Book and Manuscript Library,
University of Georgia, Athens.
          Clayton, Ga.
          Dec. 2, 1955
          Dear Helen:
          The award was an absurd occasion--full of the grotesque, the
stupid, the sweet, the good in other words: it was "the South" giving
Lillian Smith an award with a trembling hand. I laughed until I was
weak; I wanted to cry and didn't; and I suddenly felt proud, proud
that these people had found somewhere the courage to do it. I did not
attend the first day of the conference but came in the second day and
attended the luncheon where Flannery O'Conner spoke; also attended a
fantastic round-table discussion of booksellers who were telling
writers "what the public wanted." It was so bizarre that it was
unbelievable, this talk. The high point was reached when the
booksellers agreed most gravely that what the public really wanted was
a book about "how to meet sorrow." "A big book or a little book?" some
one asked. They conferred about this, then the chairman said she
believed that what the public wanted was "a dollar book on how to meet
sorrow." Paula was in the back of the audience; I was midway in the
crowd; but I could not restrain myself from turning and looking at
her. It was altogether wonderful. I wouldn't have missed it.
          The night I received the award there was a big crowd at the
dinner. I had not been asked to speak; they feared I might drop a bomb
of some kind, I suppose. I don't know. Anyway, I had not been
asked. Hyman (No Time for Sergeants) who is a Georgia
boy had been asked to speak. But when they met me Thursday morning
they said to each other and even to me "Oh, she's nice; such a
lady, isn't she? Oh my, and dressed like Park Avenue; let's ask her to
speak; she must speak to us." Well, I must admit I had on my
Sunday beat and my Paris hat (the only one not burned) and my mother's
manners. Well, I spoke (without preparation) and I melted most of them
down. Not all, by any means; but MOST. Fully two-thirds of them came
up after the dinner and shook hands with me. A Baptist minister said
he was going to use some of my talk for his Sunday sermon.... A young
doctor said he had never read one thing I had written but now he was
going to read everything. An old lady said I was so sweet and well
bred, she knew I had the beat intentions in the world, no matter what
I said in my books. It went on and on. Afterward, I went to a friend's
house (I don't have but two or three houses in Atlanta now that I am
welcome in, but I went to one of them) sank into a chair and weakly
asked for the biggest drink she could get in one glass. It was truly a
whale of an experience. Flannery's talk was one of the funniest things
I ever listened to. Do you know--I don't believe she had the vaguest
notion how she shocked the crowd. She told em off; told Georgia off;
told the South off; told would-be writers off. She is a little on the
grim side in personality and not personally very attractive but she
gave a hell of a good speech. There were about thirty of us
there--they might not feel I should be so cozy as to include myself in
the number--who enjoyed every word of it. But the stuffed shirts and
the would-be writer (the place was full of them) began listening and
smilingly because they had heard she was "literary" and "talented" and
nothing she wrote threatened anybody, certainly not on the conscious
levels of their life. But after about two paragraphs they realized
that a nice little snake was sinking her fangs deep into their little
complacency and they began to look at each other and shake their
coiffeured heads and whisper, "Well....what do you know...."
          Next morning, Friday, the WSB-TV actually asked me to be on the
noon news spot. I dashed down and did it. First time, since Strange
Fruit that my presence in Atlanta has ever been
acknowledged. Everybody said everywhere, "Why, you nice person,
have you kept yourself hidden away all these years, making us miss
knowing you?" Honest to God, they said it.
          I smiled and said nothing during the first twenty times it was said
to me (a new myth in this myth-making South is being created and that
is that nobody knows me in the South because I have deliberately kept
people away from me) but the twenty-first time it was said, I said
"I'll tell you why. It is because you have never invited me
before. And Ill tell you why you have never invited me: it was because
I write highly controversial books and you feared to do so. But now
that you have, let's forget why and enjoy each other." The South
cannot bear the truth--not even a teeny-weepy 

truth, if there is any
lie, any fantasy, any myth they can grab hold of instead. When I said
the truth, in a very soft voice, the person's eyes bugged out. She was
as shocked as if I had said two dozen four letter words.
          Well, it was fun. And I must admit it helped me get over the shock
of the fire.
          Affectionately,
          Lillian
          
            Rose Gladney is an assistant professor of American
Studies at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa.
          
        
        
          U.S. Community Organizer Wounded by Contras
          By Garber, CarterCarter Garber
          Vol. 10, No.5, 1988, p. 8
          
          The Rev. Lucius Walker, of the Interreligious Foundation for
Community Organization was wounded in August while leading a study
tour to Nicaragua. Walker is the founding director of IFCO, a
national, ecumenical, social justice agency.
          Walker and nine other tour members were on a civilian ferry from
the Atlantic coast to the inland town of Rama when the boat wee hit by
gunfire and mortars. Of the 197 people on board, two Nicaraguan
civilians were killed and twenty-nine others were wounded including
Walker. He was fortunate only to have been grazed by a bullet.
          Walker said the attack was deliberately aimed at civilians and was
an attempt to sink the ferry. Contras have attacked the express boat
three times in the past, but have not previously denied responsibility
as they did in the August 2 incident. Walker suggested the denials for
the recent attack were due to the presence on the ferry of
U.S. citizens. Walker said Nicaraguan civilians continue to be
"wounded and terrorized in contra attacks," despite ceasefire
agreements.
          This study tour was one of many that have taken North American
community and church leaders to Central America. An estimated 70,000
U.S. citizens have traveled to Nicaragua in the past decade. The IFCO
study tour lost no time in communicating what they had experienced,
holding press conferences in Managua, Miami, New York, and
Washington. Walker urged concerned citizens to ask their
representatives to reject all further aid to the contract, and to
encourage the Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere Affairs to hold
hearings on destabilization of the peace process by the U.S. State
Department and the increased attacks by the contras on civilian
targets (Contact: Rep. George Crokett, Chair, 2235 Rayburn Bldg.,
Washington, DC 20015; 2022252261).
          The majority of IFCO's work is in the U.S. where the
twenty-two-year-old group fosters church support for community
organizing. IFCO provides technical assistance and training in
proposal writing, program planning, and organizing. It serves as a
fiscal agent and is initiating a fellowship program so that Third
World organizers can take a sabbatical to improve their work.
          Walker said organizers need a broader world view to understand the
context of problems they face locally. "Fine basic issues on which
communities organize--poverty, unemployment, homelessness--are similar
in both North and Central America," states Walker. IFCO study
tours are intended to help North Americans learn why and how Central
Americans are organizing and changing their communities. IFCO also
sponsors Central American Information Weeks during which speakers are
made available throughout a state. Such events were held recently in
South Carolina and Kentucky. For information, contact IFCO, 402
W. 145th St., New York, NY 10031; 212-926-6757.
        
        
          A Holiday Shopper's Guide to Alternative Giving
          By Dowe, KellyKelly Dowe
          Vol. 10, No. 5, 1988, pp. 18-20
          
          When my mother was a little girl in Centreville, Alabama, she
received the gift of an apple--not a real apple, but a wooden one with
a tiny wooden tea set inside. The cups were no bigger than the tips of
her fingers.
          I loved hearing about that apple tea set as a child. For me it
represented pure romance as I knew it, and it somehow captured the
sweet mystery of my mother's life before me. When I was about ten, I
found in my Christmas stocking an apple tea set of my own. The apple
was a rich enamel red. It was the size of a real apple, at least the
big one in my Christmas stocking, and the dishes inside were no bigger
than my fingertips.
          Which was better, the apple tea set of my mother's stories or the
real thing? Who cares? I now tell my own daughters, aged five and
nine, about both apples and they berate me for not saving my apple for
them.
          As Christmas and Hannukah approach, all of this brings to mind the
choosing of gifts and the work we want our gifts to do. We want each
gift to complete ourselves or the recipient (preferably both); we want
to give joy, warmth, pleasure and romance. What we often do instead,
as depressing memories remind us, is the reverse. Succumbing to the
pressures of last-minute shopping, local supply and personal finances,
we present a child we love with another molded plastic toy. We regale
people we care about with boxes of powder. Uninspired shirts and ties,
best-selling trash in hardcover, and gift-wrapped, waxy candy...and
all after we have promised ourselves, "This year, I won't."
          Happy chance!
          A shopping helper has arrived in the form of "alternative" mail
order companies. These businesses have mushroomed in the last five to
ten years, and sell generally good quality, hard to find items, often
at modest prices. Such companies are "alternative" because they are
usually connected to a social cause organization, such as UNICEF, the
Fellowship of Reconciliation, or Koinonia Partners, into which they
pour excessive earnings. Most, though not all, are non-profit.
          Other, profit-making, businesses in the "alternative" category
dedicate themselves to a particular purpose or philosophy. The Earth
Care Paper Company of Madison, Wisconsin, for example, sells mostly
recycled paper products. A number of toy and book companies, such as
Hearth-Song: A Catalog for Families; Tryon Toymakers; Animal Town Game
Co.; and Chinaberry Book Service, are dedicated to the idea of
teaching kindness and good values to children through healthy
play. Each sells beautifully made toys and books in luscious, natural
materials. Customers shop by catalog, which are obtained by writing or
calling the company. (Even heavy users of mainstream catalogs are not
on many alternative catalog mailing riots.)
          Imagine these among your holiday gifts to loved
	       ones:
Beautiful, handmade quilts, in patterns such as Bear's Paw,
Coat of Many Colors, and Grandmother's Dream, made by the Freedom
Quilting Bee, a women's sewing 

cooperative, in Alberta, Ala. Quilts
cost from $395 for single bed size to $695 for king size. FQB also
makes butcher-style aprons for $9 and potholders for $3, among other
items (prices are approximate). For a catalog write: The Freedom
Quilting Bee, Route 1, Box 72, Alberta, AL 36720.A solar-powered re-charger for a car battery. Just set it on
the dashboard and plug its adapter into a car or RV cigarette
lighter. Cost: $39.95. Sold through the Renew America Catalog, which
supports renewable energy. Other solar powered products include a
calculator ($19.95), music box ($19.50), refrigerator ($1,560) and
child's construction kit ($14.95). The catalog offers many other
energy-saving products. Renew America Project, 1001 Connecticut Avenue
NW, Suite 638, Washington, DC 20036.A child-sized, handmade wooden carpenter's box, and a small
hammer, ax and saw to use with it. Tryon Toymakers of Campobello,
S.C. The carpenter's box is $12 and the tools $12 per set. Other toys,
all hand-crafted and painted, include: a Noah's Ark with animals ($35,
small, and $65, large), a magic wand ($4), puzzles ($6 to $30) and a
rocking horse ($80). Tryon Toymakers, Route 3, Box 148, Campobello, SC
29322.A delightful book for a child is Paper By Kids
by Arnold E. Grummer, a treatise on how to make paper at home by
recycling your junk mail. For fifth graders and up. $10.95. Earth Care
Paper Co., 100 S. Baldwin, Madison, WI 53703.To organize the sizable alternative holiday catalog offerings a
different way, one might look for:Food Items--Koinonia Partners, of Americus, Ga., a Christian
farm community which provides low-cost housing and other services to
its neighbors, sells gift-boxed fresh pecan products noted for their
high quality. They include: shelled and unshelled pecans, pecan dates,
pecan bark, fruitcake and granola. Koinonia Partners, Route 2,
Americus, GA 31709-9986.Music--Appalshop, Highlander Collections and Flying Fish sell
acclaimed music selections on records, tapes and compact discs:
               --An arts and education center in Kentucky, Appalshop has Lee
Sexton's bluegrass banjo "Whoa, Mule Whoa" on LP and cassette, and
"Blues For My Kentucky Home" by the Buzzard Rock String Band, cassette
only. Both are $8. Appalshop Sales, 306 Madison St., Whitesburg, KY
41858, or call 1-800-545-7467.--Highlander Center sells a selection of records and tapes
celebrating social activism through the years, including "Come All You
Coal Miners," produced by Guy Carawan, and "Sing for Freedom,"
featuring Bessie Jones and Doc 

Reese. Most are $7. Highlander Center,
Route 3, Box 370, New Market, TN 37820.--Flying Fish sells records, tapes and compact discs including
"Carry It On," an anthology of union songs sung by Pete Seeger, Jane
Sapp and Si Kahn. Flying Fish, 1 304 W. Schubert, Chicago, IL
60614.Clothing--Amish work pants, with button-drop and buttons for
suspenders if desired. $24. A favorite with customers of Co-op
America, a nonprofit association of businesses which share a
commitment to peace. Other offerings: Peace Fleece--Soviet and
American wools blended into knitting yarn, a range of craft items, and
home products. Coop America, 2100 M Street, N.W., Suite 310,
Washington, DC 20063.Another source of distinctive imported clothing is One World
Trading Co., which functions as a direct link between you and Mayan
producers living in Guatemala. By eliminating a middle agent, it
offers consumers good prices for high quality items, while insuring
the Mayans a fair return. Goods include blazers, belts, shirts and
other handmade garments of lovely, all-cotton fabric. Write to One
World Trading Co., c/o Plenty, P.O. Box 310, Summertown, TN
38483-0310.Cards, stationery and calendars--Although these are stock
items of many catalogs, special mention should go to:
--The National Wildlife Federation for its line of holiday cards
with wildlife artwork. From portraits of a dramatic snow owl to
impressions of a flock of Canadian geese, its offerings are rich and
captivating. Its cards cost from $12 to about $20 for most boxes.--UNICEF, which works to ease the high mortality rate among
children in the developing world, offers a wide range of note cards
and stationery in its catalog. These include no-occasion cards
illustrated with seventeenth century Ching Dynasty depictions of
spring flowers ($5.50 for ten cards and envelopes) and stationery with
delicate bird illustrations by Tran Phuc Dyen of Viet Nam ($9 for ten
note cards, fifteen writing sheets and twenty-five envelopes). Write
to UNICEF, One Children's Boulevard, Ridgely, MD 21685, or call
1-800-553-1200.--The Fellowship of Reconciliation, which helps finance work for
peace and social justice worldwide, offers a line of cards, posters
and calenders which are stark testimonials to the cause of
peace. A package of plain white stationery with the words "Practice
Nonviolence" in dark blue and cherry at the top costs $6 for thirty
sheets with plain envelopes. Greeting cards with "Peace" in both
Hebrew and Arabic on the cover and the message, "Peace is our hope"
inside, cost $5 for ten folded cards with envelopes. Fellowship of
Reconciliation, Box 271, Nyack, NY 10960.
          
            Writer and editor Kelly Dowe lives in Tuscaloosa,
Ala.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 10, No. 5, 1988, pp. 24, 23
          
          In the fall and winter of 1984, fifty
white FBI agents came bustling into five west Alabama black-majority
counties. The feds visited more than 1,000 black voters, often late at
night, and many of them elderly. Alabama State Troopers later joined
the feds, and it was once again a time of rotten infamy in Alabama
[Southern Changes, July-September 1985].
          I have been black in Alabama for almost sixty years and I wee
outraged. The feds announced they were investigating vote fraud in
regards to absentee ballots. For twenty years, the feds had refused to
investigate a single complaint by black voters of intimidation. I
announced that the feds were frauds themselves and using federal
criminal law to help the racist Republican administration in
Washington.
          As usual, I was accused by hypocritical whites and know-nothing
blacks of overstating the case and seeing racism everywhere. As usual,
some people felt the authorities were correct because they were the
authorities--classic, circular logic. Also, there is another group who
automatically supports the activities of the FBI.
          I knew that from 1979 to 1981, federal agents had prowled almost
daily through records of the Federation of Southern Cooperatives in
Sumter County. The Federation was a training base for black political
leaders in the Black Belt. For that reason, a really sad bunch in
Alabama and Washington was upset with the Federation.
          The feds, of course, found no wrong-doing, but they crippled the
Federation and severely hampered fundraising for a very long
time. That was the intent at the outset. U.S. Sen. Richard Shelby
(D-Ala.), then a Congressman, was a key force behind the bogus
investigation. He knows I know. He was representing a few white, local
political leaders and ignoring blacks.
          As to the vote fraud probe, eight blacks and one white were
indicted on 210 bogus charges that could have meant more than 1,000
years in prison. Elderly black people were saying, "I'll never vote
again." Certain blacks, as always, were claiming the investigation was
not racial and just a matter of enforcing the voting laws. I listened
quietly and wondered how much of this black nonsense was ignorance,
fear or opportunism. I still don't know.
          The federal election in 1984 was crucial in Alabama and
Washington. At the time it was felt that black voters might make the
difference in the re-election or defeat of U.S. Sen. Jeremiah Denton
(R-Ala.), and Republican control of the Senate might hinge on whether
Denton was successful (Demon was defeated in 1986 by Shelby). In
addition, Ed Meese had a long history of helping his friends.
          Not one of the 210 vote fraud charges held up in court. Recently, I
filed a motion to vacate the remaining charges and a guilty verdict by
an all-white jury against voting rights activist Spiver Gordon. The
government eagerly joined the motion and the motion was granted on
September 9, 1988.
          The federal Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals had said,
"...Gordon has sufficiently established the essential elements of
the selective prosecution test..." Thus, Gordon is entitled to
"discovery of the relevant government documents relating to the
local voting fraud cases the government has prosecuted and any voting
fraud complaints which they have decided not to pursue."
          Rather than provide that information to defense lawyers and the
public, the U.S. Attorney called and said if I filed a motion to
dismiss all charges against Gordon, the govern-

ment would join the
motion. How about that for vote fraud? Was there racism here?
          The appellate court took note that Gordon had "informed the
district court that in two similar voting fraud prosecutions, the
government had used five of six peremptory challenges to strike black
jurors in one case and four of six to strike black jurors in the
other. This proffer was sufficient under the circumstances to entitle
Gordon to a hearing..." on that issue.
          In the interim, however, Clarence Mitchell III, black legislator
from Maryland who came to Alabama and helped us in the vote fraud
mess, has been convicted in a bribery case investigated by the FBI and
prosecuted by the Justice Department. In 1984, Clarence went around
the nation saying, "The Ku Klux Klan and White Citizens Council can
close up shop, because the Justice Department is doing their work for
them."
          Earlier this year, U.S. Rep. Mervyn Dymally placed in the
Congressional record an affidavit by former FBI informant Hirah
Friedman. In his sworn affidavit, Friedman stated that a program
within the FBI named "Fruhmenachen" (German for "primitive man") has
been established to investigate black public officials without
probable cause.  Friedman said the FBI assumed "that black
officials were intellectually and socially incapable of
governing..."
          I made a similar assumption about the FBI and the current
Republican administration way back in 1984.
          Recently, black FBI agent Donald Rochan charged white FBI agents
with a constant campaign of racist harassment against him and other
black agents. He said much more. The John Edgar Hoover legacy together
with White House racism impact heavily on the FBI.
          Black voters are not the only people harassed by that motley crowd
in Washington. Activists in the peace, labor and civil liberties
movements have had their problems. Two Congressional committees have
documented the outrageous, unconstitutional activities of the FBI
regarding people who oppose the Reagan-Bush Yankee nonsense in Central
America.
          Lord help us.
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
      
    
  