
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 10, Number 3,
	       1988
        
          A Letter from Lillian Smith
          Edited by Gladney, RoseRose Gladney
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, pp. 16-17
          
          The letter below, written to the editors of the ATLANTA
CONSTITUTION though it was never published there, is the
fourth in a series from the correspondence of Lillian Smith. The
letter did appear in the NEW YORK TIMES, June 6,
1954.
          Smith's strong position against racial segregation had been clearly
established for more than a decade prior to the Supreme Court's
historic 1954 ruling. What is significant about her stand against
segregation, however, is not only her timing--that she spoke out as
early as she did--but her perspective and depth of
understanding. Because she saw racial segregation as symbolic and
symptomatic of many other aspects of human nature and society, it is
not surprising that her first public response to the BROWN decision
would contain broad and far-reaching interpretations of the new
law.
          Her passing reference to the ruling as a "powerful political
instrument against communism" was not a new argument for Smith or for
many others who for years had 

pointed to the hypocrisy of America's
willingness to defend freedom abroad while blatantly denying the
rights of citizenship to black Americans. At the same time, her use of
anti-communist language reveals a certain blindness in Smith's
otherwise clear vision of the relationship between means and ends in
any struggle for social change. Although she clearly intended to
defuse the red-baiting tactics of those who called "communists" the
Supreme Court and all others who worked to end racial segregation, her
willingness to use the anti-communist rhetoric--even against
itself--leaves her vulnerable to charges of feeding the very
red-baiting she would otherwise deplore.
          In the remainder of the letter, Smith's strategy was brilliant. To
call the Brown decision "every child's Magna Carta" was at once to
move the subject out of the realm of black versus white or federal
government versus state and local school boards and to place it in the
tradition of freedom for the individual that even the most staunchly
Celtic descendant would have to revere. Simultaneously, she pushed
beyond the stereotype of race by renaming skin color an "artificial
disability" compared to "real disabilities" of physically or mentally
disabled children.
          Smith's knowledge of the legal, social, and educational plight of
differently abled Americans was grounded in extensive research. At the
time of this letter, she and Paula Snelling were compiling materials
for an anthology on the subject. Although never completed, the
proposed book as outlined in correspondence with her publisher
included autobiographical experiences of a number of differently abled
people, a bibliography of resources, and a list of relevant state and
federal laws.
          Her perception that the BROWN decision would affect differently
abled children as well as children of color was truly prophetic. Few,
if any, of its defendants or opponents were even considering such
far-reaching implications in 1954, yet educational historians now look
to that decision as a major precedent for the extension of educational
access to all children, culminating in the 1975 enactment of Public
Law 94-142, the Education for All Handicapped Children Act.
          Smith's confidence that "millions of other southerners" would
"wholeheartedly" accept the challenge of the Brown decision reflected
her basic educational strategy for social change. She believed that
people would rise to the vision of their leaders; and she herself
always tried to embody the vision she held for the South. She would
develop this appeal and outline specific creative responses to
court-ordered desegregation in her 1955 book NOW IS THE
TIME.
          Unfortunately, voices like Lillian Smith's did not receive the
media coverage given those who dissented loudly or even moderately, as
did William Faulkner when he pleaded for the white South to be given a
little more time. If in hindsight we wonder at Smith's optimism in
1954, we must also acknowledge that her vision is being realized, that
her prophecy came true.
          To the Editors,*
          The Atlanta Constitution
          Atlanta,
Georgia
          Dear Sirs:
          May 31, 1954
          I have read, again, the recent decision of the Supreme Court. It
bears rereading. For it is a great historic document--not only because
its timing turns it into the most powerful political instrument
against communism that the United States has, as yet, devised, but
because of its profound meaning for children.
          It is every child's Magna Carta. All are protected by the
magnificent statement that no artificial barriers, such as laws, can
be set up in our land against a child's right to learn and to mature
as a human being.
          There are, perhaps, 5 million children in the U.S.A. who are
colored. There are close to 5 million other children who would be
directly affected by this decision. I am not speaking, now, of "white
children"-many of whom have undoubtedly been injured spiritually by
the philosophy of segregation. I am speaking of disabled children:
          Children who are "different," not because of color but because of
blindness, deafness; because they are crippled, or have cerebral
palsy; because they have speech defects, or epilepsy, or are what we
call "retarded." These children we have also segregated.
          There are more than 40 states with laws forbidding a child with
epilepsy to attend public school--even though most children's
convulsions can now be controlled with modern drugs. Little blind
children are segregated in schools from sighted children; our deaf
from the hearing. Many cerebral palsy children are kept out of school
not because they are unable to attend but because there are teachers
who do not want to teach them. And yet, a basic principle of
rehabilitation is that acceptance and a natural relationship with his
human world is necessary for the disabled child, if he is to make a
good life for himself.
          All these children--some with real disabilities, others with the
artificial disability of color--are affected by this great
decision. Then why are so few politicians protesting so angrily?
Perhaps because they feel THEY will now be handicapped if the old
crutch of "race" is snatched away from them.
          It is true: this decision may shackle a few politicians. But it
frees so many of our children. I, for one, am glad. And I believe
millions of other southerners are glad, also; and will accept
wholeheartedly the challenge of making a harmonious, tactful
change-over from one kind of school to another. It will be an ordeal
only if our attitude makes it so; there are creative, practical ways
of bringing about this change. And in the doing of it, we adults may
grow, too, in wisdom and gentleness.
          Sincerely yours,
          Lillian Smith
          
            *From a carbon copy in the Lillian Smith Papers,
Special Collections, University of Georgia Libraries
          
          
            Rose Gladney is an assistant professor of American
Studies at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa.
          
        
        
          The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Started
It by Jo Ann Gibson Robinson. (Knoxville: University of
Tennessee Press, 1987. 190 pp. $12.95.)
          By Barak, GreggGregg Barak
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, pp. 18, 20
          
          The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the Women Who Started
It is a historically significant contribution to the study of
the civil rights movement. The book establishes the essential
background information on the events leading up to the bus boycott of
1955-56, and also provides an examination of black activism in
Montgomery prior to and during the boycott. [See "Origins of the
Montgomery Bus Boycott" by David Garrow, SOUTHERN
CHANGES, Oct.-Dec. 1985].
          In retelling the story, Jo Ann Gibson Robinson--one of the female
activists who instigated the boycott--takes the reader through the
joys and sorrows of some 50,000 blacks who refused to ride public city
buses until the demeaning, humiliating, and intolerable conditions of
segregation were removed.
          Robinson's memoir provides documentary evidence that it was black
women of the Women's Political Council (WPC), a group of mostly
professionally-trained educators, social workers, nurses, and other
community workers, who actually initiated and set into motion the
Montgomery bus boycott, rather than Rosa Parks, E.D. Nixon, Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr., or other ministers and black civic leaders. While
many people were well aware of the debilitating effects of segregation
on blacks and whites alike, it was these women who formed the WPC for
the "purpose of inspiring Negroes to live above mediocrity, to
elevate their thinking, to fight juvenile and adult delinquency, to
register to vote, and in general to improve their status as a
group." And when the time was right and the black population of
Montgomery was ready to stand up against segregation, the WPC was
prepared to act.
          Perhaps more importantly, Robinson's story provides a personal
narrative on the human situation and on the various racial struggles
against injustice, oppression, hatred and violence as these relate to
both the individual and the collective condition.
          In successfully integrating the private and public aspects of a
political struggle, Robinson reveals how she and her associates of the
WPC were conscious that they were "laying their all on the line in
organizing themselves to defeat segregation in the heart of the
Confederacy."
          These women fully understood that by publicly challenging the codes
of segregation exemplified by Montgomery's laws on riding municipal
buses, they were opening themselves up to public ridicule and private
ruin. They also understood that the "double double standard" implicit
in the patriarchal and racial relations of the Old South afforded
black women more opportunities to come forward with their protest than
were available to their more threatening male counterparts. Robinson
declares, "We were 'women power,' organized to cope with any
injustice, no matter what, against the darker sect."
          Robinson's manuscript is as much a sociological and psychological
treatise on race relations and human wills as it is an important
historical work. In offering a first-hand account of racial inequality
under siege, Robinson gets inside the pained psyches of black men,
women, and children who were constantly under all forms of physical,
verbal, and emotional assault at the hands of the dominant white
culture. With ease and passion, she communicates the calm as well as
the exhilaration of well-organized Southern blacks who, with
determination, self-sacrifice, and discipline--and with the assistance
of people attracted to their cause throughout the nation and the
world--were able to turn back the legalized bigotry of the South.
          Robinson demonstrates her profound insight into the human condition
when she is able to relate the personal ambivalence of both blacks and
whites toward the struggle. But what I found particularly impressive
was her ability to avoid vilifying her adversaries. She evokes a
sympathetic, even empathetic appreciation of the plights of the
seemingly unlikely coalition of Southern white gentlemen, illiterates,
"ne'er-do-wells," and others "disappointed in life" who came together
to form the White Citizens' Council. The text vividly depicts the
feelings and attitudes of the black experience while also exploring
the varied white reactions.
          Among the many interesting reflections in THE MONTGOMERY BUS
BOYCOTT, there are three that particularly illustrate Robinson's
perceptive analysis of race and social change. First is her discussion
of how a lack of social self-esteem caused by racism may increase the
incidences of intraspecific crime and deviance, especially those acts
involved in domestic violence. On the other hand, she points out how
the humiliating experiences of racism and the associated deviant
behavior may actually be reduced through organized community action
for civil rights. Not only are these astute observations on the
relationships between crime and racism similar to those made by Franz
Fanon in his classic analysis of race and colonialism in The Wretched
of the Earth, but they have also been verified in social science
literature as far back as 1965.
          Second is Robinson's portrayal of the politically sensitive covert
role played by Alabama State College in the movement to end busing
discrimination. As a predominantly black institution--the only
four-year public college or university in Montgomery before the
sixties--Alabama State had to maintain a low public profile while
actively participating in the boycott.
          In the sixties, when integration was court-ordered in Alabama's
public universities and colleges, branch campuses of Auburn University
and Troy State University were established in Montgomery to provide
the city with "white campuses" and to circumvent racial integration on
any terms other than white majority. Today, Alabama State remains
almost exclusively black, and the three university 

systems along with
others have been involved for several years in a federal lawsuit over
charges that Alabama maintains a racially segregated system of higher
education. Until such time as the several public university systems
are integrated into a statewide university system, and until such time
as the legacies of institutional segregation are eliminated, the
political roles played by members of the ASU community will remain
highly sensitive ones.
          Third is Robinson's treatment of the contradictory legal battles of
the boycott, in which white and black leaders found themselves to be
both accused and accusing. In describing the get-tough policies of the
city administration, the harassment of the boycotters, and the
indictments and arrests of 115 black leaders for committing the
misdemeanor crime of "conspiring to boycott" which resulted in the
lone prosecution and conviction of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.,
Robinson reveals how boycotters' consciousness of the political and
constitutional implications of their actions contributed to the
dialectic that enabled the "powerless" to prevail, in this instance,
over the "powers that be."
          Robinson has written a truly remarkable book that will be cited by
historians for generations to come. But more important, her story
about love and hate deserves the attention of all people. Especially
in today's racially tense America, this book should not only be widely
adopted in high schools and colleges, but it should be made into a
film or video production. For this story needs constant telling, not
for the purpose of condemning the discriminators per se, but to remind
people that the struggles for justice--racial, economic, and
political--continue.
          
            Gregg Barak is chair of the Department of Criminal
Justice at Alabama State University. He also serves as book review
editor for CRIME AND SOCIAL JUSTICE and is the author
of IN DEFENSE OF WHOM? A CRITIQUE OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE
REFORM.
          
        
        
          How To Make $100,000 Farming 25 Acres by Booker
T. Whatley. (Emmaus, Pa.: Rodale Press, 1987. 180 Pages. $24.95
cloth. $17.95 paper.)
          By Frazer, LynLyn Frazer
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, pp. 22-23
          
          As a book title, "How To Make $100,000 Farming 25 Acres" is not
exactly a modest proposal, especially in these times in the farm
economy. Booker T. Whatley, a former horticulture professor at
Tuskegee University, has a plan for the small farmer, and in this
book, with assistance from the editors of NEW FARMmagazine, he tells it.
          Whatley is a nationally known expert on the small farm who may be
familiar to readers of MOTHER EARTH NEWS and
ORGANIC GARDENING. In retirement now, he travels the
country giving as many as fifty seminars a year to share the ideas he
has developed for turning the small farm into a profitable
enterprise. Whatley's monthly "Small Farm Technical Newsletter" has
20,000 subscribers in fifty states and twenty-five foreign
countries.
          The heart of the book is "The Guru's Ten Commandments"--the
complete model of the successful small farm according to Whatley. He
adopted the nickname after initial amusement over being
being designated a alone guru in Alabama" in a
WASHINGTON POST article several years ago. Indeed, the
parts of the book written by Whatley do exhibit a quality of religious
exhortation, along with sly humor most often directed at government
"experts," and a vast fund of hard-headed common sense and wisdom in
the quirks of human nature.
          Whatley's model for the small farm (which he defines as between ten
and 200 acres) is based on crop diversification, careful management,
and aggressive marketing. Whatley says it is impossible for the small
farmer to concentrate on soybeans or cotton on the same basis as
farmers working a thousand acres or more. He suggests that the small
farmer turn instead to a variety of high-value crops, which might
include strawberries, blueberries, grapes, honey, rabbits, lambs, and
quail. The diversification plan should include at least ten different
products, with something available for sale in every month of the
year.
          Equally important to Whatley's concept is setting up the small farm
as a "pick your own" operation with a "clientele membership club" of
at least a thousand members; the club provides a guaranteed supply of
customers and a guaranteed annual membership fee in exchange for the
right to buy produce for 60 percent of supermarket prices. To ensure
this membership pool, the farm must be located on a paved road within
forty miles of a population center of at least 50,000 l
persons. Whatley believes that the customers must come to the farm and
he is confident that the availability of homegrown, contaminant-free,
high-quality produce will attract them there.
          According to Whatley, the traditional farmers' market is of little
value to the small farmer because too much time and money are tied up
in picking and transporting crops to market. When Whatley talks about
a profitable small farm, he means much more than just subsistence
living. "I see farming as a business, not a lifestyle. I'm talking
about a good living for the farmer, maybe even a Caribbean vacation
once in a while."
          The clientele membership club idea is the most controversial of
Whatley's rules and the least frequently tried by farmers who are
adopting some of his ideas, but to Whatley it is an integral and
indispensable part of the model. "The CMC is literally the
lifeblood of your diversified farm... People say it would be so hard
to get 1,000 of these people. My reply to that is, well, everything's
hard. Life is hard."
          Whatley's answer is to go after people who share a desire for
healthful produce and are willing to put time into picking and putting
up good food for their families, people who "have the same philosophy
as the ant--they believe in preparing for winter." According to
Whatley, it is the farmer who selects his clientele, and he has only
himself to blame if he does not put enough effort into choosing the
right kind of members.
          For the Whatley-style farm to be successful, the farmer must also
be a good salesperson, and the farm should come to play a role in the
lives of its club members. Whatley thinks the farm should be made a
place of beauty which city people can visit with their families to
enjoy a little since of country life. Going out to the farm to pick
vegetables can become a family outing or even a mini-vacation. He
suggests promoting this aspect with such sidelines as picnic areas,
refreshments, and even a petting zoo for the children.
          Whatley wants the farmer to foster a sense of ownership among his
club members end to develop a persona! relationship with each of
them. "This whole approach to farming is extremely
people-oriented. You have to like people to do well at it," says
Whatley.
          HOW TO MAKE $100,000 actually offers more of a
starting point for small farmers to begin farming successfully than a
step-by-step blueprint. Whatley realizes that it is unlikely that any
farmer will be able or willing to follow all of his "commandments,"
but he believes that many combinations of ideas and plans can come
from his book. Almost half of the book is made up of essays by or
about small farmers who have taken Whatley's basic ideas and tailored
them to fit their particular needs. These farmers are raising kiwi
fruit, shiitake mushrooms, herbs, watercress, trees for
furniture-making, and soybeans for tofu. They are raising sheep for
wool and making cider and goat cheese. They are setting up game
preserves, running gourmet farm restaurants, and renting out bungalows
for country vacations. Whatley seems to enjoy this creative aspect of
his farm model. No detail which might make the farm more profitable is
too small for his attention.

          The most visible and extensive Whatley-style farm came about as the
result of an article about Whatley which appeared in the Wall Street
Journal in 1984. The day after the article was published, Whatley
received a call from Tom Monaghan, president of Domino's Pizza. The
friendship which developed with Monaghan led to the creation of the
Booker T. Whatley Farm at the corporate headquarters of Domino's Pizza
near Detroit. The farm, which was recently completed, will grow
vegetables to be used on the pizzas as well as serve as a
demonstration project for Whatley's ideas. Monaghan and Whatley also
hope to initiate a summer training program for high school students
interested in becoming farmers.
          One segment of the population which Whatley has not been able to
reach satisfactorily so far is the black small farmer. He says that he
has more Canadian subscribers to his newsletter than he has black
subscribers in Alabama. Whatley believes that this is because young
blacks in the South who were children of farmers watched their
families struggle in vain to live off the land and have therefore
looked elsewhere for economic opportunities. Whatley knows of only one
young black farmer who has attempted to set up a farm following his
principles.
          While Whatley blames government policy for disinheriting and
ignoring the small farmer, he places much of the responsibility for
success on the farmer himself.
          The government needs to get out of agriculture, he says, but the
farmer must learn to be a good manager. "It is my position that the
farm problems of this country will be solved when and only when
mismanagement is made a federal crime....Farmers need to spend less
time on their air-conditioned tractors. What they really need is an
air-conditioned office where they can do their planning, thinking, and
managing." A more valuable machine for the farmer may be the
computer, where he can keep careful records of his customers, crops,
and sales. Whatley has no patience with farmers who "take an
amateurish approach to a serious business."
          Whatley truly believes, and many readers will end up believing with
him, that hard work, common sense, creative thinking, and the Guru's
Commandments can't help but produce a profitable small farm. Whatley's
personal goal is no more modest than the title of his book. "I want
to save 100,000 small farms, make them productive and economically
viable. Then I'll be satisfied."
          
            Lyn Frazer is an amateur horticulturist and a bookseller
in Montgomery, Ala.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, p. 24
          
          Phillip Henry Pitts is one helluva trial lawyer. The man is
skilled, creative and deadly spontaneous. I have been aware of Henry's
trial abilities for years. He and I have battled almost from the day
he was admitted to the Bar.
          When Henry first joined his father's law firm, the elder Pitts and
I were locked in monumental legal struggles all over the Black Belt. I
was trying to change every at-large elected government in the
area. McLean Pitts was determined nothing would or should ever
change. He was an unabashed segregationist and bragged about it.
          McLean Pitts was a large, determined and physically powerful man
whose influence permeated the Black Belt and reached into the State
Capitol in Montgomery. In the early years Henry was a minor player but
as much a segregationist as his father. In many ways, however, Henry
was the classic example of the "good old boy." His father would never
have been mistaken for such.
          In 1965, just before the tragic march across the Edmund Pettus
Bridge, a young Henry Pitts was assigned the difficult task of
cross-examining Martin Luther King Jr. in federal court in
Montgomery. That is one measure of what the elder Pitts thought of his
son's trial skills. Henry's risk-taking style and spontaneous insights
served him well. Both King and I were amused but wary of this brash,
young segregationist.
          Years later in a case where I was the opposing counsel, an older
but still brash and risk-taking Henry Pitts said the following to a
Perry County jury of eleven blacks and one white: "J. L. is not one
of you. He is an outsider who teaches at Harvard. He is only
interested in money and more money. My father and I have been coming
over here for years protecting your interests. In the name of Martin
Luther King, the Good Holy Book and all that is fair, don't give
J.L. and his client one red cent in damages. They don't deserve
it."
          I followed with the observation that Henry Pitts calling on the
name of Martin Luther King was akin to my invoking the Confederate
memory of Robert E. Lee. The jury returned a verdict of $75,000
against Henry's client. Before the trial started, I had offered to
settle the case with Henry for $75,000. The lone white juror later
claimed she had been coerced by the eleven black jurors.
          Henry later sent a check for the judgment and said, "You caught
hell earning it!" Indeed, I had.
          Like many white Southerners, Henry and his father were close to
several blacks who worked for them for years. Walter Chambers, who is
quite a character himself in black Selma, grew up following Henry
around. It tickles the hell out of me that Walter calls Henry's wife
"Sister" because that is what Henry and everyone else calls her, but
Walter always says "Mr. Henry."
          One day recently, Henry and I had to go by the District Attorney's
office. Henry gave Walter his briefcase and told him to take it over
to the office. Walter grabbed my briefcase and carried it along
also. He had a big grin on his face. He understood and I
understood. Even Henry understood.
          Over the years, Henry's thinking has evolved in the manner the
South is evolving. He remains Southern, proud of it, but more
open-minded. He has been a television producer, business agent and
lawyer for a superstar football player. He has negotiated for,
socialized with and knows personally a number of major figures in
American life.
          Yet he remains essentially a "good old boy." More importantly, he
is one of the better trial lawyers anywhere.
          I look forward to working with him again. I do not look forward to
working against him.
          Peace.
          
            J.L. Chestnut, Jr., is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
        
          A Time to Cast Away Stones
          By Waller, Kathryn J.Kathryn J. Waller
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, pp. 10-11
          
          It seemed an unlikely situation. I was driving to a farmer's rally
in Conway, S.C., to hear speeches from local politicians, mostly
white, building up to the keynote address by political activist Jesse
Jackson. It was spring of 1986, and no one yet (except Jesse) was
thinking of the presidential race. The farmers were thinking of
survival: meeting daily the threat of failure and destitution. But
anyone who really farms, who wakes up in darkness and labors hard
until after the sun is gone, is not apt to lie down and become an easy
victim, not if there's any way to stay on your feet. These "at risk"
farmers were standing up, standing together, and plowing new
ground-not in their fields, but in kitchens and church basements, and
in the halls of legislatures and the U.S. Congress.
          For most urban Americans the greatest impact of the farm crisis, so
far, has been exposure to a lot more Willie Nelson music than they
might have ordinarily heard. Many people do not yet see the larger
implications of land loss for the nation's economy, and for democracy
itself. Most have never had any direct contact with grassroots
farmers, the ones facing the wrong edge of the scythe.
          In the crowded parking lot of Conway's National Guard Armory I
found Betty Bailey. She'd given up an overdue vacation to help this
fledgling group, the United Farmers Organization (UFO), pull the rally
together. It showed in her face. Exhausted, the large turnout kept her
smiling, and last minute details kept her moving. Inside the armory
were hundreds of farmers--men and women, black and white, mostly older
but some in their twenties and thirties, and more filing in the door
all the time. At a table inside, Linda Clapp, a dairy farmer and
former UFO president, was greeting friends, and selling hats and
T-shirts.
          I was apprehensive. Not about the T-shirts but about how the rally
would go over. Eight years of working in the rural South had taught me
that attitudes hadn't changed much since the volatile heyday of the
civil rights movement. I couldn't help but wonder how these grizzled
white Carolina farmers would respond when Jesse Jackson took the
stage.
          And take the stage he did. Took the whole room. Took the audience
in the palm of his hand. "Let's be sure we understand each
other," Jesse said. "It's not black loss or white loss. We all
have a stake in holding on to the land. If the black farmer goes out
in the morning, the white farmer follows in the afternoon!" Black
and white men and women were on their feet cheering and holding hands
in song and prayer. In that room I could see old walls beginning to
fall. Family farmers are discovering that no matter what their skin
color, they are together a new kind of American minority--an economic
minority.
          The small part I've played in helping the United Farmers
Organization grow has since shown me that what I saw at that rally
goes far beyond a South Carolina armory. All farmers have problems,
but all farmers' problems are not the same. Black farmers, for
instance, have struggled for generations with the issues of land loss
and access to credit that many white farmers have only seen since the
start of this decade.
          The divisions are more than black and white. Row crop farmers have
interests separate from dairy farmers. Peach growers don't really have
time to worry about the needs of poultry producers; people with
tobacco allotment and a small hog operation are not overly concerned
about the beef industry.
          But by focusing first on the common needs of family farmers as an
economic minority, the diverse needs of these various groups become a
common agenda, breaching barriers rather reinforcing them. This is
what is happening among Carolina farmers in the UFO. Row crop farmers
call their legislators advocating a bill to protect poultry growers'
rights. White farmers support a lawsuit alleging racial discrimination
in FmHA lending practices. When UFO tobacco farmers won a court
decision allowing access to their co-op's books it was a victory for
all commodity growers.
          A year later and another farmers' meeting: George Ammons, a black
North Carolina turkey farmer who was 1987 UFO vice president, is at
the podium. "Black farmers have been in a continuous crisis for the
past fifty years. Blacks are losing land at an annual rate of 500,000
acres. There are only 181 black farmers under the age of twenty-five
in the United States. If this current trend continues, blacks will be
a landless people within the next ten years." It is not news. The
statistics have been reported before. What is different is that here
white farmers share the stage, and these views. When George leaves the
microphone, Tom Trantham, a white South Carolina dairy farmer and
current UFO president, steps up and says "I've been working with
George in the UFO for over two years now and I am proud to call him my
brother."
          Time after time the UFO has sent delegations of black and white
farmers to meet with political officials, to show the strength of
unity. Each time the UFO has presented testimony about farm problems
and recommended remedies, the particular problems of discrimination
and the startling rate of black land loss has been stressed. Often a
UFO spokesperson who is white raises the issue of black land loss, and
the UFO's proposed solutions. Other times a UFO spokesperson who is
black will list that issue among 

the many pressing concerns shared by all farmers.
          It's a pattern that's repeating and growing stronger in the
Carolinas, as the UFO grows. Now with some 1,500 members, the UFO
counts a rising number of victories, small and large, all the result
of cooperative effort between traditionally independent people, people
of different ethnic backgrounds and different farming
backgrounds. From advocacy--including major input to the farmers'
rights portion of the new farm credit legislation--to the start-up of
purchasing co-ops, to halting foreclosure sales, farmers are
discovering that united they have a fighting chance to stand their
ground.
          A black farmer, Leon Spaulding, stands at the edge of a crowd
gathered for the court-ordered auction of his land, his house, and his
farm equipment. UFO members, black and white, distribute one-page
leaflets among the crowd telling Leon's story. Bold print at the top
of the page urges "Don't Bid On Your Neighbor's Farm." The result: few
bids are offered; one small piece of land is sold. The buyer is so
ashamed he later offers to sell the land back to Spaulding, financing
it himself at low interest.
          When drought, the worst on record, struck the Southeast in l986
thousands of farmers learned the value of the UFO's solidarity.
          What began as an offer of help from one farmer in Iowa to one South
Carolina farmer grew into a massive relief program, bringing many tons
of hay and thousands of bushels of seed for replanting to financially
strapped Southeastern farmers. North Carolina agriculture officials
were derisive of the idea that farmers could initiate and implement
distribution, but working side-by-side farmers of the UFO got the job
done. When the dust cleared over 3,500 farmers, most with small
holdings, had received substantial aid. The program was more timely,
and of greater benefit to small farmers, than any drought-relief
effort of the government.
          
            Kathryn J. Waller is executive director of the Rural
Advancement Fund.
          
        
        
          Dollars and Schools: Resource Development
          By Rosenfeld, Stuart A.Stuart. Rosenfeld
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, pp. 12-14
          
          Today, attitudes toward education have changed--though not
necessarily for altruistic or philosophical reasons--from the
traditional view that human resource development meant higher
priorities for training than for education. Education still responds
to the needs of the private sector and economics. The difference now
is that the educational demands of jobs have risen and require more
conceptual skills. It's competitiveness that's pushing interest in
education today, despite debate about whether work is going to require
greater or less skill and knowledge, whether technology will skill or
de-skill jobs. But the reality of the impact of technology doesn't
affect education in the South as long as the accepted view of
educators and employers is that more skills and knowledge, not less,
will be needed.
          Four key education issues in the South are: adult literacy;
elementary and secondary school expenditures; vocational education;
and blacks in graduate education.
          
            Adult Literacy
          
          The strongest and most specific recommendation of the Commission on
the Future of the South was to reduce rates of adult literacy
significantly by 1992.
          FIGURE 1 reflects education in the past, the rates of adult
illiteracy in the South. The measure is of the number of adults who
had not completed eight years of education at the time of the 1980
census. Nonmetro rates are nearly twice the metro rates in many
states. And if you think that it doesn't affect jobs, look at FIGURE
2, the relation to unemployment rates. Those counties with the highest
rates of functional illiteracy had the highest unemployment and those
with the lowest, the lowest unemployment rates.
          It would seem that there is an all-out war on illiteracy. Every
Southern state except Alabama has a special task force or commission
on literacy. But much of what is happening is still a war of
words. The level of resources, is not nearly at the level of
attention. It's a good start but only a start. The federal government
spends only $100 million on all adult education, or $3 for every adult
with less than nine years of education. States are increasing their
funding. But in most states, the total annual funding is still less
than the average annual expenditures in just one medium-sized,
medium-wealth school district.
          
            Resources
          
          It's true that more money won't necessarily improve education, but
its hard to have good schools with insufficient resources, and its not
fair when some children get much more enriched educational
environments than others. There are two issues here.
          One is interstate disparities. Some states spend less than others
either because they are poorer or because they place less value on
education. Historically, Southern states' spending was at the bottom
nationally for both reasons--they were poorer and made less effort.
          As FIGURE 3 shows, Southern states still spend less for education
than most other states, about 20 percent less in 1985. It's only that
high because Florida, the most populous of Southern states, is above
the national average. Alabama, Arkansas, Mississippi, and Tennessee
all spent at least 30 percent below the national average.
          But there's more to those numbers than meet the eye. They consist
of revenues from local, state, and federal sources. Federal funds,
however, are mostly targeted to special needs and are not available
for the core educational program such as teachers' salaries, supplies,
or facilities.

          Southern states have more children from low-income households and
with special needs and thus get more federal money than states in
other regions. Removing the federal resources brings the Southern
states even farther from the average of the non-South.
          The Commission on the Future of the South recommended a 25 percent
spending increase in 1986. Low taxes are no longer a major inducement
to industry if the result is poor schools. The fastest growing states
today are the highest taxing states. George Bragg, president and CEO
of Telex Computer Products in Oklahoma, told the annual meeting of
Southern Legislators last summer, "Many states make the mistake of
assuming that a low tax base will encourage companies to come and
stay. You get what you pay for, and I would encourage you to think
more about the quality of services--which may mean higher
taxes."
          The other issue is intrastate disaparities. Beginning in
the late 1960s, families of students who were getting shortchanged by
the education system--getting poorer quality education--went to the
courts claiming that the state owed all of its students roughly
equivalent educational opportunities.
          FIGURE 4 examines ten Tennessee districts to show the extent to
which disparities still exist. Here are last year's per pupil
expenditures in the five districts that spent the most and the five
districts that spent the least. The high spending district is nearly
twice the low spending district. The per capita incomes of these ten
school districts are just what you'd expect. The differences are not
extreme, but there is an obvious relationship between wealth and
educational revenues. The 1986 Commission on the Future of the South
made recommendations here, too, suggesting state equalization formulas
to balance the disparities among districts.
          Bear in mind that these per pupil expenditures include federal
funds. The federal share is about twice as high in the poorer
districts, but those funds are earmarked for special purposes, not for
the normal costs of education. Remove the federal share and the ratio
of spending is much more than two to one.
          But federal spending for education is declining in real
dollars. Between 1980 and 1986, federal spending for Chapter 1,
compensatory education, the largest program, decreased by 23 percent
and served 500,000 fewer students. Bilingual education decreased by 47
percent and education for the handicapped decreased by 11
percent. Moreover, in all the states improving education in the past
few years, there were almost no major reforms addressing special
needs. The Committee for Economic Development, in its report Children
in Need, stated that a dollar spent today to prevent educational
failure will save $4.75 in future costs to society.
          
            Vocational Education
          
          For two decades, vocational education has been the accepted link
between education and economic development, the aspect of education
that was included in the old business climate indices. States have
played to industry and subsidized training to recruit industry. In a
case study of a new plant site in rural Kentucky I asked the CEO
whether the many training subsidies were a factor. He said, "Not at
all. I can get them anywhere. The form may vary a bit from state to
state, but everyone is doing the same thing." In other words, the
subsidy no longer matters unless you don't provide it. But a good
vocational education program that combines technical and occupational
skills with sound basic education is an important part of public
education, both to the student and to the community.
          One effect of the link between vocational education and economic
development in the 60s and 70s was that the Economic Development
Administration and the Appalachian Regional Commission stepped in to
support vocational education facilities. It's a little known fact that
the two agencies invested well over a billion dollars in vocational
education facilities, much of it in depressed rural parts of the
South.
          Vocational education in the South has great opportunities and room
for exciting and positive changes. States are rethinking their high
school programs and making them more academically challenging and less
occupationally specific. And the two-year technical colleges are
upgrading and improving their degree programs and becoming more
imaginative in supporting technology transfer to existing
manufacturers, small businesses, and local development in general
while also providing community services including literacy
programs. The community and technical college no longer simply
recuits factories and provides subsidized, customized
training. It has become a community focal point 

for retraining and for economic development.
          The federal government plays a small but crucial role in vocational
edudcation. Federal funds are just under 10 percent of the
total, but their uses are important. Most are targeted, 22.5 percent
to disadvantaged students, 10 percent to handicapped, and smaller
amounts to women reentering the labor force, displaced workers, and
others. Many would not get the special services they need without the
earmarked funds. The rest must be used for program improvements, in
some ways that make voc ed better than it was before, and can't go
into the operating budget. The federal voc ed funding is the oldest
support for elementary and secondary voc ed, going back to 1917. In
1986, the Reagan administration recommended zero funding.
          The Commission on the Future of the South was quite specific in its
desire to support vocational education but to revamp high school
vocational education and to transfer much of the responsibility for
job-specific education to the two-year colleges.
          
            Higher Education
          
          A critical issue is the inability to improve black enrollment in
graduate schools, especially in the sciences and engineering. Blacks
are no longer increasing their enrollments in higher education and are
still very unrepresented in graduate schools. Only a limited number of
universities contribute to the small pool of black degree recipients
in the sciences.
          FIGURE 5 shows the change in the percent of blacks enrolled in
Bachelors, Masters, and PhD programs in the South. The percentages of
Bachelors and PhDs are down slightly from ten years ago, but the
percent of Masters degrees is way down. FIGURE 6 shows black and
female enrollments in the sciences. About 45 percent of the advanced
degrees of blacks in the sciences are from the traditionally black
colleges in the South.
          These trends are important because technology playing a bigger and
bigger role in the economy and it's the scientists who are becoming
the entrepreneurs and controlling more of the capital. The latest
occupational demand projections by the Bureau of Labor Statistics
shows a large anticipated increase for technicians, engineers, and
scientists, while the programs into which minorities have been going,
the social sciences and human services fields, are declining.
          Much of the cause is attributed to the quality and quantity of high
school math and science preparation. Fewer blacks are taking four
years of math and science. That relates to the quality of inner city
schools and to the counseling and curriculum advice blacks get in
school. Later the admissions practices at colleges and availability of
financial aid affect enrollments.
          It's not hard to find the federal responsibility in all this. It
goes back to support for compensatory education, to providing access
to better schools, end to sufficient financial aid for higher
education.
          The Commission on the Future of the South recommends that the
states assume some responsibility by expanding scholarships for
minorities, disadvantaged, and rural students and providing more
remedial education to college-bound students. The committee on
technology and innovation was even more specific, recommending that
each state create and fund a Top Scholars program for math, science,
and technology and identifying and selecting qualified women and
minorities.
          
            Summary
          
          It's not enough to raise averages of measures of educational
quality. Equal opportunities are equally important, and the pot of
federal dollars, as small as it has been, has been directed at equity
and is far more important than its size indicates.
          
            Stuart Rosenfeld is director of the Southern Technology
Council of the Southern Growth Policies Board This article is adapted
from remarks he made at the annual meeting of the Southern Regional
Council in November 1987.
          
        
        
          'Time to Revitalize' Southern Labor
          By Trifiro, Paul         McLennanPaul McLennan and Trifiro, VickiVicki Trifiro
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, pp. 15-16
          
          For William Winpisinger, the message to corporate America from the
5,000 workers gathered in an Atlanta parking lot on April 30 wee to
remind corporate America that "workers are mad as hell."
          Winpisinger, president of the International Association of
Machinists, wee master of ceremonies of a spirited "Jobs with Justice"
rally that coincided with the conclusion of the Southern Christian
Leadership Conference's "Martin Luther King Memorial March for Jobs
with Justice," which had set out from Memphis on April 4 and traveled
through Mississippi and Alabama before ending in Atlanta.
          Airline workers and janitors, taxi drivers and electrical workers,
homeless workers and community organizers--all rubbed shoulders and
lifted their voices in labor songs led by folksingers Peter, Paul and
Mary. SCLC's Dr. Joseph Lowery spoke, as did Texas agriculture
commissioner Jim Hightower, Bernice King (daughter of Martin Luther
King Jr.), and Maxine Green of the National Tenants
Association. Testimony about today's economic climate was given by
workers and homeless people.
          Calling attention to the conditions of workers in the 1980s and
fighting current attacks on workers' rights is the mission of the Jobs
for Justice national campaign. The coalition demands the following:
               the right to a decent standard of living rather than wage cuts
and the elimination of jobs with decent wages;the right to job security rather than growing insecurity in an
economy that ses two million jobs permanently lost to plant
and facilities closures every year; and,the right to organize a union and bargain collectively, which
underpins all other worker rights.
          Jobs with Justice wee launched July 29, 1987, in Miami when more
than 11,000 workers attended the biggest labor rally in Florida
history. In an emotion-filled moment, the Miami Beach Convention
Center rocked with chants of "Jobs with Justice!" The thousands
present recited and signed the Jobs with Justice pledge: "During
the next year, 'I'll be there' at least five times for someone else's
fight as well as my own. If enough of us are there, well start
winning."
          In conjunction with the Miami rally, the House Education and Labor
Committee conducted a rare field hearing to get first-hand statements
about worker abuse. Workers, union representatives and community
leaders testified about the devastating effects on working people of
deregulation of the airline and communications industry and
subcontracting of public sector jobs.
          In November 1987, 8,000 rallied in Nashville in support of paper,
mine and electronic workers as well as in support of tenants'
rights. James Motlatsi, president of the National Union of Mineworkers
of South Africa, drew cheers from the Tennesee crowd when
he labeled as "destructive engagement" the Reagan administration's
refusal to impose economic sanctions on South Africa. A month later,
3,000 marched in Texas in support of a union contract fight for food
service and nursing home workers.
          "The strength of the Jobs with Justice campaign has been its
ability to mobilize union members to fight in the battles of other
workers--workers maybe not in their own union, and maybe in no union
at all--and to build coalitions not only among the labor movement but
between the labor movement and its natural allies in the broader
community--the churches, the civil rights and women's groups, the
tenants' unions and the farmers, and all the organizations who
understand that the defense of workers' rights is essential to their
own fight for social justice," said Howard Samuel, president of
the Industrial Union Department.
          In more than twenty U.S. cities, the Jobs with Justice movement is
taking root, building these bridges between labor and its natural
allies. In the South, the time has come again to revitalize such a
movement.
          Southern Labor Institute director Ken Johnson believes that "in
the deep South, the interests, concerns, and wellbeing of working men
and women have been kept silent and invisible by political and
economic leadership which promotes an environment of cheap land, low
taxes and low wages. Jobs with Justice represents a gigantic step for
those 

who understand that the South and indeed the nation's wellbeing
is best measured by how workers themselves benefit from economic
activity. Increasing worker participation in policy making and in the
workplace is vital to economic growth."
          Awareness grows that social justice and economic justice cannot
exist independently of one another. Jobs with Justice seeks to tear
down walls between groups who have common interests but who may not
have worked together before. In Atlanta, for example, this movement is
taking shape in support of the Service Employees International Union's
Justice for Janitors campaign and with the Teamsters' help for the
homeless.
          "Community-wide problems call for community-wide solutions,"
said Linda Riggins of SEIU Local 679.
          
            Paul McLennan is president of the Southern Labor Press
Association Vicki Trifiro is campaign director for the Public
Assistance Coalition.
          
        
        
          Just a Little Guy Who Got Hit by the Arms Truck
          By Guthey, EricEric Guthey
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, p. 3
          
          I RAISED MY children according to the principle that if you see
something that's not right," you report it, says Bob Fletcher, the
former Marietta, Ga., toymaker who says his company was taken over by
arms merchants with ties to the secret team.
          Fletcher's story begins in 1985, a full year and a half before the
Iran contra story became public knowledge. "There's no way that I
could have dreamed this stuff up and and have it come true
a year and a half later," he now insists.
          Fletcher recounts how Gary Best bought out his toy company and kept
him on to run the business. Soon Fletcher started to notice Telex
messages from locations like Angola and Pakistan. His new associate
was forever flying to Geneva, Switzerland, and to other countries and
never seemed to spend any time on the toy business. Eventually
Fletcher confronted Best and asked how he made his money. "Without
batting an eye, he said, 'I sell armaments,'" Fletcher recalls.
          Fletcher now believes that Best let him in on many of his dealing
activities with the intent to recruit him. "All of these different
covert actions--Angola, Pakistan, Nicaragua, POW/MIA missions, the
Rambo-type stuff--all of this was being coordinated out of my company
by Gary Best."
          At a certain point, retired Maj. Gen. John Singlaub, who has since
been indicted in the Iran-Contra affair, became a consultant to the
company. Bill Kenney, an associate of Oliver North, also came in and
out frequently.
          Finally, Best asked Fletcher to run courier missions to Angola--at
a salary of $2,000 per trip. Fletcher says Best told him if he talked
to the wrong people about the operation he would be killed. Fletcher
declined the offer and Best forced him out of the company after he
complained about the shady goings-on.
          Fletcher eventually contacted the Congressional Iran-Contra
committees to tell them about what he knew. But two of the committees'
investigators, Thomas Polgar and Bob Bermingham, seemed to have no
interest in Fletcher's story or in its relation to the Iran-Contra
affair. "Polgar and Bermingham are old-time employees of (Thomas)
Clines and (Edmund) Wilson, and of Singlaub and (Theodore) Shackley
[all alleged members of the Secret Team and defendants in Christic's
lawsuit]," Fletcher points out.
          Fletcher is committed to making his story heard. "I'm not a
radical--I'm just a little guy that got run over by these
bastards," he says. "But people have to understand what is
going on here. They lied to the Senate, they lied to the public, and
they're still doing whatever they please."
        
        
          Contras in Dixie
          By Guthey, EricEric Guthey
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, pp. 1-6
          
          In 1984 an assassin's bomb intended for Contra leader Eden Pastora
killed eight people, including an American journalist, at the Contra
outpost of La Penca on the southern front of the U.S.-sponsored war
against Nicaragua.
          Four years later, the shock waves of that explosion still
reverberate along the southern front of another, even more secret war
being waged against the democratic principles of the U.S. Constitution
and the will of the American people.
          Revelations of illegal activities in support of the U.S.-backed
Contras continue to crop up in local communities around the South. The
revelations contribute to the case that the Christic Institute, a
Washington-based public interest law firm and policy center, has
mounted in a Miami federal court against members of the criminal
conspiracy it believes was behind the La Penca bombing, behind an
extensive guns-for-drugs campaign, and behind the rest of the untold
story surrounding the Iran-Contra affair.
          * In Miami in 1986, convicted drug pilot Michael Tolliver landed a
plane carrying 25,000 pounds of marijuana at the Homestead U.S. Air
Force Base. Tolliver has testified before Congress that his action was
part of a massive guns-for-drugs operation to resupply the U.S.-backed
Contras.
          * In Mena, Ark., local law enforcement officials are trying to shed
light on a drug smuggling and Contra supply airstrip which they were
told not to investigate because it was an official covert operation of
the CIA.
          * In Marietta, Ga., alleged arms merchant Gary Best continued until
very recently to run the company he took over from local toymaker
Robert Fletcher to use as a front for his illicit dealings. Fletcher
says that Best, who has close ties to former major general and
indicted Iran-Contra co-conspirator John Singlaub, threatened
his 

(Fletcher's) life and forced him out of the company after he
refused to become involved in arms smuggling to Angola.
          * And in nearby Atlanta, Fulton County Chief of Detectives
E.E. Nixon testified in early May concerning his aborted 1984
investigation into a warehouse allegedly containing C-4, the same type
of plastic explosive that killed American journalist Linda Frazier at
La Penca in the spring of that year. According to the Chicago-based
weekly IN THESE TIMES, Nixon called off his
investigation at the request of former Marine Lt. Col. Oliver
North.
          These and many other equally lurid goings-on point to the extent of
the Iran-Contra affair--corruption which has penetrated local
communities across the South and around the nation with drastic and
lasting consequences. Largely glossed over by the President's Tower
Commission, by the Congressional Iran-Contra Committees, and even by
special prosecutor Lawrence Walsh, the pattern of subversion and
illegal activity that resulted in "Contragate" has been reduced in the
public eye to little more than a problem of executive management
style, an aberration on the part of otherwise well-intentioned
"national heros."
          
            Christic Institute Challenges the Whitewash
          
          Although still ignored for the most part by the mainstream press,
the Christic Institute has been digging up the real story behind the
Iran-Contra affair for over three years. Christic filed its federal
civil lawsuit against several of the key figures in the scandal a full
six months before Attorney General Ed Meese reluctantly released the
story to the public.
          The Christic Institute's staff has since swelled from fifteen to
over sixty members, all of whom work for no more than $15,000 per
year. Christic's main office in Washington, with a budget of more than
$80,000 per week, now works exclusively on the Contragate
suit. Christic funds its operations through private donations, through
support from national church and peace groups, and through national
foundation grants.
          "When we filed the suit in May of 1986, a lot of people thought
we were crazy," says Sara Nelson, the Institute's executive
director. "They didn't know these names, and they couldn't imagine
that there was this massive illegal military supply operation to the
Contras."
          "Six months later the [Eugene] Hasenfus plane went down in
Nicaragua," Nelson recalls. "Our defendants' names surfaced in
Hasenfus's business cards and telephone records. The press came to our
office to find out what we knew. Then the Iran-Contra scandal broke,
and there were more of our defendants--Albert Hakim, Richard
Secord--in the middle of the Iran weapons sale."
          Christic has discovered that all of the principals in the
Iran-Contra scandal also worked for the "Secret Team" or "Enterprise,"
a covert, privately-funded, anti-communist organization made up of
present and former U.S. military and CIA officials. According to
Christic, members of the Secret Team, "acting both officially and
on their own, have waged secret wars, toppled governments, trafficked
in drugs, assassinated political enemies, stolen from the U.S.
government, and subverted the will of the Constitution, the Congress,
and the American people" for the past twenty five years.
          "These are people who believe that they are above the 

law, who
are perfectly willing to lie to protect their programs, who think that
their agenda is so important that our representatives do not matter
and neither do we," says Nelson. "We never voted for death
squads. We never thought that this is what they were doing in our
name. We believed them when they said 'We are spreading democracy. We
are fighting for freedom.' But that is not what has been going
on."
          
            La Penca and the Contragate Lawsuit
          
          Christic filed its $17 million civil lawsuit against twenty-nine
members of the Secret Team on behalf of American journalist Tony
Avirgan and his wife and fellow journalist, Martha Honey. In 1984,
Avirgan had been covering Eden Pastora's La Penca press conference for
ABC News when he was severely injured by the failed attempt to
assassinate the Contra leader. On a recent, nationally televised
episode of the PBS series, FRONTLINE, Avirgan recounted how the
wounded Pastora was spirited away in the only boat available at the
remote river outpost, and how the rest of the victims of the attack
lay on the floor for a full nine hours before help arrived. That same
night, the U.S. Embassy in San Jose, Costa Rica, falsely reported that
no Americans had been injured in the bombing, and refused to offer any
assistance. FRONTLINE quoted George Jones, the deputy in charge of the
embassy, as elating at the time, "We are not in the rescue
business."
          After Avirgan recovered from his injuries, he and Honey began to
investigate the bombing, fully expecting to find that it had been
carried out by the Sandinistas. But every piece of information they
uncovered led them to believe that the operation had been launched
from the Costa Rican ranch of American millionaire John Hull, an
alleged member of the Secret Team and now a defendant in the Christic
lawsuit. Honey and Avirgan discovered that the Secret Team had decided
to eliminate Pastora because he refused to follow CIA directives or to
associate himself with other Contras who had been part of Anastasio
Somoza's National Guard, members of which had murdered Pastora'a
father.
          Honey and Avirgan also uncovered substantial evidence that Hull's
ranch was being used as a trans-shipment point for cocaine entering
the U.S. and arms coming back to the Contras.
          In 1985, after Honey and Avirgan published their findings, Hull
sued them for criminal libel in a Costa Rican court. According to a
sworn affadavit from Christic Institute general counsel
Daniel Sheehan, who defended Honey and Avirgan, several witnesses for
the defense were kid-

napped and tortured on Hull's ranch. According to
a member of the Costa Rican Rural Guard, one of their key witnesses
wee executed there as well. A Costa Rican judge threw Hull's case out
of court.
          The allegations by Honey and Avirgan about Hull's drug smuggling
and arms dealing activities in support of the Contras have recently
received independent confirmation from Senator John Kerry (D-Mass.)
during hearings on the Contra-drug connection. On Frontline, Hull
still denied any wrongdoing but said, "If it were within my power,
people like [Senator Ted] Kennedy and Kerry would be lined up and shot
tomorrow."
          Other defendants in the Christic lawsuit include retired general
Richard Secord; Robert Owen, Oliver North's private courier; Contra
leader Adolfo Calero; and Thomas Posey, head of Civilian Materiel
Assistance (formerly "Civilian Military Assistance"), an ultra-right
wing group involved in supplying the Contras out of Decatur,
Ala. Christic asserts that the Secret Team is headed by defendant
Theodore Shackley, who served as CIA Deputy Director in charge of
worldwide covert operations under the agency's former director, George
Bush.
          Christic has refrained from naming any present members of the
U.S. government in its suit in order not to bring the Justice
Department into the case on the aide of the defendants.
          In testimony before the Iran-Contra committees, Robert Owen called
the charges against him "scurrilous." In an article in the
ATLANTA JOURNAL-CONSTITUTION, Shackley called members
of the Christic Institute "practitioners of character assassination
through legal terrorism" whose charges amounted to "rubbish."
          But defendants in the Christic lawsuit participate in character
assassination of their own. During the Iran-Contra hearings, former
CIA operative Glenn Robinette testified that Richard Secord paid him
more than $60,000 in funds diverted from the Iranian arms sales to
carry out a smear campaign against the Christic Institute.
          In the December 1987 issue of Soldier of Fortune
magazine, retired major general John Singlaub said in a funding
appeal, "If I were back in Vietnam in a firefight, then I'd ask for
an airstrike to blow the bastards away. But to win this fight we need
money. To fight the damned Christic Institute lawsuit takes money."
          Christic's lawsuit charges the twenty-nine defendants with
violating the federal Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations, or RICO Act. Under the statute, Christic's lawyers must
prove that each defendant committed two offenses contributing to the
conspiracy within a ten-year period. But Christic asserts that the
Secret Team has been committing terrorist acts from positions both
within and outside the government for the last twenty-five years.
          
            Christic Focuses on the South
          
          Although the Christic Institute wants to see the members of the
Secret Team brought to justice, it also views the lawsuit as an
opportunity to inform the American people of the crimes being
committed in the name of their country. "If we don't speak out and
say we want to know about all this--as long as they can keep these
things covert--then we can't begin to correct the injustice and the
immorality that is going on under our noses," says Sara
Nelson. For this reason the Christic Institute devotee half of its
efforts to getting out the word about their lawsuit and about the
illegal dealings of the Secret Team.
          We can uncover the facts and conclude them in a court of law and
resolve the debate about what is true and what is not," Nelson
says. "But it is going to take a massive public education and
organizing campaign if we are going to develop a groundswell of
pressure on our institutions to get them to do their part in solving
these problems."
          Recently, Christic has stepped up its public education and
organizing campaign in the South. "We hope that we can bring out
some of this information here 

and that other groups will continue to
work with it," says Christic's Director of Southern Outreach,
Tennessee native Jenny Yancey.
          "The biggest issue here in the South is moving people to feel
that they have the power to do something," says Yancey. "And
this information is power."
          The Christic Institute has a strong history of legal action on
behalf of local communities and individuals in the South. Dr. Joseph
Lowery of the Southern Christian Leadership Council sits on the
Christic board of advisors. Christic conducted the investigation and
successful lawsuit against the Kerr-McGee nuclear power plant in
Oklahoma on behalf of Karen Silkwood, who died mysteriously while
trying to go public about her massive exposure to radiation at the
plant. In 1985, Christic won a verdict against four Klansmen, two
members of the American Nazi Party and two members of the Greensboro,
N. C., Police Department for the murder of five anti-Klan
demonstrators.
          Christic also successfully defended Stacey Lynn Merkt of
Brownsville, Texas, the first Sanctuary Movement worker arrested for
harboring Savadoran refugees, and Eddie Carthan, the first black mayor
elected in the Mississippi Delta since the Reconstruction, who had
been falsely accused of murder.  Christic attorneys worked on behalf
of defendants in the Reagan Justice Department's unsuccessful
prosecution of civil rights activists in the Alabama Black Belt [see
SOUTHERN CHANGES, May/June, 1985]. Most recently,
Christic South's office in Durham, N.C., provided legal and organizing
services to the residents of Keyesville, Ga., where a fifty-year ban
on self-government had left black residents with out such basic
services as plumbing, sewers, a fire department or a school. In
elections held last January, Keyesville residents elected their own
town council and installed Emma Gresham, a black retired school
teacher, as mayor.
          In April, Nelson and Yancey traveled to Atlanta for four days of
speaking engagements and organizing meetings. On Wednesday, April 21,
Nelson spoke at a service at the Cathedral of Faith, a black
Pentecostal church in south Atlanta. A few weeks before a six-year-old
child had been shot in both legs in south Atlanta, caught in the
crossfire of a crack-related shootout. Nelson emphasized that the
Reagan administration's obsession with the Contras has severely
aggravated the drug problem in America's inner cities, because
administration officials have been at the very least looking the other
way so that drug money could be used to fund the Contras. Dr. Jonathan
Greer, pastor at the Cathedral of Faith, drove the point home in a
rousing sermon.
          "It's not the folks out here that are the problem," Greer
said of the increased drug-related crime in Atlanta and other
cities. "It's the folks in Washington. They speak out against
drugs, but they're just playing a game. They tell us 'Just Say
No'--but they say 'yes' behind the scene because the money's
right!
          "All the politicians come in here saying 'We're going to beef up
our protection and round up the dealers.' Well, I say start downtown!
START IN WASHINGTON! Because if you can get that cleaned up, you won't
have to worry about down here!"
          Nelson also spoke at a conference on theology, peace and politics
held at Emory University and the Carter Presidential Center, and
participated in a panel at the conference of the National Alliance of
Third World Journalists at Clark College. She and her husband,
Christic's general counsel Daniel Sheehan, met with television
executive Ted Turner to discuss the progress of their lawsuit and its
coverage in the media.
          Meanwhile, Yancey discussed with local organizers strategies for
spreading the message about the Christic lawsuit. Yancey, fellow
Christic staffer Eva Berkham, and the small group of organizers, which
included representatives from area churches, a student Central America
network, Pledge of Resistance, and Clergy and Laity Concerned,
discussed advertisements, petition, leaflet and letter-writing
campaigns, contacting local politicians for support, and a possible
vigil in front of the Federal Building. Christic and the various
Atlanta groups will try to coordinate their activities around the week
of May 30, the fourth anniversary of the La Penca bombing.
          Christic efforts come at a crucial time. Judge Lawrence King in
Miami has placed certain severe restrictions on Christic's lawyers,
setting an early June 29 trial date and stipulating that Christic must
prove ten years of illegal activity on the basis of only a four-year
discovery period.
          An obvious reason for Christic's interest in Atlanta is the
upcoming Democratic National Convention. Christic's members see the
election year as an opportunity to encourage voters to press for the
kinds of change that might put an end to the state-sanctioned
terrorism carried out by the Secret Team. "We want to keep working
with people between now and the elections to raise these questions and
get them into the debates so that the candidates are forced to come to
grips with this," says Nelson. 
          "It's important that we don't blow this year," says Georgia
Robeson, one of the Atlanta organizers working with Christic. "It's
essential that George Bush does not become the leader of this
country--because he does know more about all of this than he has
admitted." Indeed, press reports continue to indicate that Bush's
chief advisers met with members of the Secret Team on several
occasions. These reports, along with all of the other evidence that
has come out about the Iran-Contra scandal, push the "plausible
deniablity" of Bush, Reagan, and other top administration officials
ever further into the realm of fiction.
          Local groups in New Orleans also plan to make the Christic message
heard during the Republican National 

Convention later this
summer. "There are many things in the planning stage--including
major demonstrations--and certainly the Iran-Contra drug connection
will be an important part of the issues raised," says Ted Quant of
the Institute of Human Relations at Loyola University in New
Orleans. Quant is particularly concerned about the Christic
Institute's evidence that the Secret Team and the CIA have been
involved in drug running to benefit the Contras.
          There's been a tremendous drug problem, particularly among the
young people in our community," says Quant. "Then we learn
through Christic that a tremendous amount of the drugs in our
community were actually flown in by the CIA. That means our kids are
being used as cannon fodder for the Administration policy of trying to
overthrow another country that is trying to establish a decent life
for its children as well."
          The South presents "fertile ground" for "the type of
paramilitary program that you see with the Iran-Contra affair,"
Quant says. "The South has a history of support for this sort of
paramilitary behavior going back at least to the Ku Klux Klan--and the
role of extra-legal terror has continued until recent times. We know
for example that the Klan has often traded its white robes for
paramilitary garb to allign itself with the fight against
Communism."
          Quant has witnessed first-hand the disastrous effects that the
successful exploitation of this right-wing brand of Southern
nationalism has had in the New Orleans community. "In a way the
South has been treated as sort of a second-rate colony by these
people--a place where they can dump these drugs to finance this
war."
          
            The Scandal of the Eighties
          
          The Iran-Contra Committees brushed aside a horrifying story of
state-sponsored terrorism by focusing on the question of whether the
president knew what was going on. But as Noam Chomsky writes in his
book THE CULTURE OF TERRORISM, Reagan is "largely a
creation of the Public Relations Industry," and the question of
what he knew retains significance only "in the world of imagery and
illusion in which ideologists must labor to maintain the pretense that
the public determines policy guidelines by voting for the chief
executive." The scores of conflicting and erroneous statements
that have come out of Ronald Reagan's mouth about the Iran-Contra
scandal serve to confirm his irrelevance to real issues in the real
world. Whether or not Reagan knew what went on, it happened--a secret
government waged wars, murdered at least one American citizen and many
others abroad, flooded the country with drugs, and flouted the will of
the American people. A president with any degree of competence would
have to be held responsible.
          The defense of choice around the White House these days adheres to
the revised slogan "Just say I don't know"--a defense in which
Administration officials are proud of the fact that they kept
themselves uninformed or, better still, that they haven't been
indicted yet. George Bush's continued assertions that he stayed "out
of the loop" as far as the Iran-Contra affair was concerned illustrate
just how far the Reagan gang will go to insult the intelligence of the
American people. Recent press reports indicate that Bush may try to
manipulate the debates before the election in order to avoid being
confronted with his complicity in the Iran-Contra scandal and the
operations of the Secret Team. He must not be allowed to do so. And
the Democratic candidates must be carefully questioned as well--to
make sure that, if elected, they will put an end to such threats to
the Constitution and to the people's right to know how their country
is being governed.
          On May 2, Oliver North addressed the graduating class at Jerry
Falwell's Liberty University in Lynchburg, Va. Falwell likened North's
current legal trials to the sufferings of Christ, and the teary-eyed
patriot said that he wore the accusations against him as "a badge of
honor." The heart of the Iran-Contra scandal is that very perversion
of the American dream, where a U.S. marine can become a terrorist, and
a terrorist can become a national hero of Christ-like
proportions. Such a display of misplaced values thrives on
ignorance--ignorance of what North did, ignorance of what those like
him have been doing for years. By insisting that they just didn't
know, Reagan and Bush proudly uphold this ignorance as an example for
the American people.
          If Americans need to ask themselves whether patriotism means
remaining ignorant of what goes on in their names, Southerners need to
wonder why a figure like Oliver North receives such a sunny reception
in Dixie. Capitalizing on traditional Southern support for
quasi-religious nationalism and militarism, North depends upon
Southerners to remain unaware of the facts, to buy into the slogans of
gung-ho symbolism, to look the other way while right-wing ideologues
conduct paramilitary operations in our own back yard.
          For More Information
          "Contragate Affidavit" by Daniel Sheehan, $10;
LA PENCA REPORT by Avirgan and Honey, $8; Contragate
Video: "The Shadow Government," $20. Order from
Christic Institute, 1324 N. Capitol St., NW., Washington, DC 20002.
          
            Eric Guthey is a student in the Graduate Institute of
Liberal Arts at Emory University.
          
        
        
          Cubans in Limbo
          By Dolman, JoeJoe Dolman
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, pp. 8-9
          
          The Atlanta Federal Penitentiary was weirdly luminous in the bleak
November dusk. U.S. Army floodlights, hauled in on long flatbed
trailers, bathed its granite walls and gray cellhouses. Hovering
helicopters played thin beams of light into the prison's
courtyard. Yellow flames from the remains of the industrial building
flickered over rooftops and walls. And across McDonough Boulevard,
with this scene as a backdrop, dozens of television reporters stood
before their own spotlights, nervously waiting to do 6 o'clock
"live shots."
          The Cuban detainees had finally won our attention. In Oakdale, La.,
one federal lockup already lay in smouldering ruins as a hostage
standoff there entered its third day. In Atlanta, inmates held more
than a hundred prison workers captive. They were making a point: They
would not be permanently separated from their families and deported to
an uncertain future in Cuba without a fight.
          It would be eleven more days before every hostage was freed
unharmed. The riots were harrowing, destructive and wrong-but in the
end, they did force the government to acknowledge one of the strangest
lapses of justice in our history.
          Since the 1980 Mariel boatlift, the Justice Department has
imprisoned thousands of "excludable aliens" arbitrarily and
indefinitely. Some were classified as dangerous and locked up soon
after they landed here. Most were "paroled" into society but then ran
afoul of police or immigration officials. Because Castro had forbid
their return to Cuba, the feds held them without sentences in prisons
and jails across the country. By November, six thousand waited in this
limbo.
          A few were dangerous: murderers, rapists and the like. Others had
been convicted (or merely accused) of crimes as minor as marijuana
possession. Some had done nothing more than violate technical parole
rules. Many had family members in the United States. They were a
collection of good people and bad, hardened criminals and victims of
circumstance, hopeful strivers and chronic misfits.
          Yet the government made no distinctions among them. As excludables,
all were in effect legal nonpersons. Despite their years in the United
States, they had no constitutional rights in the rule of the federal
courts. They were thrown together in squalid lockups to be held until
the Justice Department decided that freedom was appropriate, or until
the day that Castro might allow their deportation to Cuba.
          If this travesty is unique in our history, it does have an ugly
cousin: the internment of 120,000 Japanese-Americans during World War
II. The similarities are instructive. In both instances, the
government-faced with an unfolding crisis-summarily took action
against a specific ethnic group for reasons that seemed to make sense
at the time. In neither instance did Congress, the Supreme Court or
most citizens lift a hand to protest such un-American denials of
freedom. On both occasions, the nation let its apprehensions overwhelm
its ideals.
          In 1980, crime was our great fear. It was not wholly
imagined. Castro had sprinkled a small number of criminals (as well as
mental patients) among the 125,000 refugees who left through the port
of Mariel. Other refugees, accustomed to life in a totalitarian
society, hadn't a clue how to provide for themselves in a free
society. Some turned to crime.
          In 1942, subversion was the great fear. This was not an irrational
worry, either. America was still reeling from the surprise attack on
Pearl Harbor. Our West Coast might easily have been the next
target. Anything was possible. Moreover, many Japanese-Americans did
maintain close ties with the old country. Where did their loyalties
lie? On signal, could a group of saboteurs mine our harbors? Bomb our
oil pipelines? Destroy our shipyards? It was not beyond question.
          The problem is: We panicked. In both cases, we decided the Bill of
Rights was not up to the challenge at hand. The peculiarities of each
case gave officials a way to wiggle out of their constitutional
obligations, and they did.
          On Feb. 19,1942, President Roosevelt acceded to a military request
and authorized the Army to exclude, when necessary, any citizen or
alien from any area on the West Coast. Instead of using due process of
law to determine who was safe and who was not, the government simply
rounded up all Japanese-Americans-indiscriminately-and packed them off
to relocation camps.
          A military officer criticized the internments in the October 1942
issue of HARPER'S. "The entire 'Japanese Problem' has been
magnified out of its true proportion," he wrote, "largely because
of the physical characteristics of the people. It should be handled on
the basis of the individual, regardless of citizenship, and not on a
racial basis." Yet two years later, the Supreme Court ruled that
wartime necessity indeed justified this mass detention.
          The Cubans face a different predicament. Excludable aliens have no
constitutional rights because the United States can't logically be
expected to open its court system to any foreigner who shows up at its
borders. But what happens when the government is unable to deport the
people it wishes to exclude? There is only one reasonable
approach. After a certain length of time, the government must trust
the efficiency of its Bill of Rights. That is, it must prove its case
against each person and, if successful, must ask a judge for an
appropriate sentence. Yet forty years later, the Cubans fared no
better before the Supreme Court than did the Japanese-Americans. The
court upheld the denial of due process for Mariel detainees.

          As with the Japanese-Americans, prejudice is surely an underlying
cause for such treatment. Gary Leshaw, lawyer for detainees in the
Atlanta penitentiary, observed that if his clients were Scandinavians,
say, instead of Cubans (many of them black), the government would
never think of locking them away for years on end without due
process.
          With time, Americans have grown ashamed of the wartime
internment. Last September, the House voted to appropriate $1.25
billion in reparations [In April, the Senate also approved
reparations] to 62,000 surviving internees. The vote came after
U.S. Rep. Norman Mineta of California read aloud a letter from his
father, which recounted the family's experience in a relocation camp:
"We lost our homes, we lost our businesses, we lost our farms, but
worst of all, we lost our most basic human rights."
          The Marielitos may also wait a long time for a public
apology. Nevertheless, in an odd way, the November riots did help turn
public opinion more to their favor.
          The disruptions began when the government announced it had reached
a deportation agreement with Cuba. Typically, no one had thought to
brief the inmates. Only 2,500 Cubans may be deported, which means most
detainees will stay here. But the inmates didn't know that. All they
knew was that they could be separated forever from their families (who
would stay here) and returned to a place where they would have no
guarantees of safety.
          So they fought. Suddenly, the older exile community of Miami,
fiercely anti-communist, embraced their cause. With that, the Justice
Department began to show a new flexibility. And a revisionist line on
the Marielitos emerged: Any group that preferred American imprisonment
to a life in Castro's Cuba perhaps deserved the benefit of the
doubt.
          Today, the government has established a review process to determine
who should be deported, who should remain behind bars here, and who
should go free. It isn't due process, and it is still inadequate-but
it is the government's best attempt yet to deal fairly with the
Cubans. Many prisoners are now scheduled for release. Meanwhile,
congressmen Pat Swindall of Georgia (a religious right conservative),
Romano Mazzoli of Kentucky and Bob Kastenmeier of Wisconsin have
introduced a bill that would give the Mariel detainees certain due
process rights. The measure is their best chance yet for fairness.
          When World War II came to a close, not a single Japanese-American
had been convicted of a crime against the United States. When the
prison riots of 1987 ended, not a single hostage had been harmed. In
retrospect, neither the Japanese-Americans nor the Cubans were as
dangerous as we had imagined. But hindsight isn't good enough. At a
recent symposium on the detainees, Ira Glasser, executive director of
the American Civil Liberties Union, put it this way: "The only true
test of morality is when it counts. The only true test of morality is
to take the fair position during the time that the victims are
suffering, and not afterward, because there is no way to repair what
happened."
          How can we recognize the fair position when it counts? We can start
by adhering to constitutional principles-even when our instincts tell
us to panic. 
          
            Joe Dolman writes editorials for the ATLANTA CONSTITUTION. His observations on the Cubans in federal prisons earned a nomination for the Pulitzer Prize.
          
        
        
          Matewan
          By DAVID, JOHN P.John P. David
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1986, pp. 20-22
          
          Matewan (Written and directed by John
Sayles. Filmed by Haskell Wexler. Music by Mason Daring. With James
Earl Jones, Chris Cooper, Mary McDonnell, Will Oldham.)
          Many people know that working people in the United States were not
Federally protected in their right to organize and bargain
collectively in the private sector through representatives of their
own choosing until passage of the National Industrial Recovery Act
(Blue Eagle Act) of 1933.
          When the Blue Eagle Act was declared unconstitutional in 1935, it
was replaced in part by the National Labor Relations Act (Wagner Act)
of 1935, which the labor movement labeled as its "Magna Carta."
          The history of working people and the labor movement prior to 1933
is poorly documented. It comes to us in vignettes about courageous
individuals such as Harriet Tubman, Mother Jones, Eugene Debs, Big
Bill Haywood, William Silvis, Samuel Gompers, Sojourner Truth, and
Elizabeth Gurley Flynn, and major news events such as Haymarket
Square, Ludlow, the Molly McGuires, Patterson Silk, and textile
strikes in Lawrence, Massachusetts.
          Perhaps no state witnessed a bigger collision between capital and
labor than did West Virginia prior to 1933. West Virginia, born out of
the struggle of the Civil War, went into the Union with ties to wage
labor and northern industrial 

labor unionism, while Virginia went into
the Confederacy with ties to slave labor that later became the
so-called "right-to-work" South. The Civil War
division, however, did not resolve the question of which economic
interests would "develop" the state's coal
resources, and two primary forces emerged.
          One came from the industrial north and the other from Richmond and
Roanoke, Va. This activity was accompanied by various efforts to
unionize the coalfields, first by the Knights of Labor, and later by
the United Mine Workers, West Virginia Miners Union, National Miners
Union, and others. The need to organize in West Virginia was clear to
the leadership of UMWA. The UMWA could not maintain contracts in
Pennsylvania and Illinois and build an ongoing union structure while
coal-rich West Virginia was basically non-union. The same problem also
occurred locally within West Virginia; as various miner unions began
to establish toeholds in the Fairmont, Kanahwa, and New River fields,
it was apparent that contracts could not be maintained as long as
southern West Virginia and the Pocahontas Fields developed by the
Norfolk and Western were non-union.
          Thus, southern West Virginia became the battleground for some of
the fiercest and bloodiest labor-management fighting in the world. In
the past few years, a number of efforts have documented worker
struggles, including films (MOLLY McGUIREs; JOE HILL; HARLAN COUNTY
USA), books (Storming Heaven by Denise Giardina and BLOODLETTING IN
APPALACHIA by Howard Lee, and TV/video ("And Even Heaven Wept" by West
Virginia Public Television and the Humanities Foundation of West
Virginia). The latest effort is John Sayles's film, MATEWAN, which is
about a massacre in Mingo County.
          Sayles does an incredible job in portraying one of the best-known
struggles that occurred in the early 1920s during the Mine War
period. What may be difficult for the viewer to comprehend is that the
Matewan Massacre actually occurred. It was only one of many inhuman,
unbelievable, bloody events that occurred during the Mine Wars as
miners and their families struggled for dignity and economic
survival. The context for the struggle needs to be understood. The
post-World War I period was a difficult time for workers and fledgling
labor organizations. President Coolidge canceled child labor laws,
union contracts were laughed at and thrown on the scrap heap, groups
of workers were pitted against one another in order to wring
concessions and prevent unionization, and the "yellow dog" contract, a
company document that workers had to sign that stated one would not
join a union or talk to an organizer, was upheld as legal by the
U.S. Supreme Court in 1919.
          One coal company in the Matewan vicinity of Mingo County, the Red
Jacket Coal Company, began utilizing the "yellow
dog" contract extensively in 1920, in response to efforts
by the UMWA to stop wage cuts in the non-union southern
coalfields. Thus, the conditions of the Matewan Massacre were
established.
          Interestingly, MATEWAN was not made in Matewan but in Thurman,
Fayette County. Thurman was actually along the competing C&O
Railroad and was the center of the New River coal fields, which,
ironically, had a strong union presence since the 1880s. In fact,
black miners, who were stereotyped as strikebreakers imported from the
South in MATEWAN, were the leading force for early unions in the
Thurman area, perhaps because the area had more of a connection with
the Kanawha fields and the industrial north than the McDowell and
Mingo County areas. Perceptive viewers may notice in the film various
markings that pertain to the C&O and Thurman, but for the most
part Sayles did an excellent job in re-creating the town of Matewan
within the constraints of an extremely low budget. He had the help of
excellent cinematography by Haskell Wexler and the beautiful scenery
of the New River Gorge, which is now under development by the National
Park Service.
          The viewer of MATEWAN is quickly drawn into the struggle against
the coal company and its private army, the Baldwin-Felts Detective
Agency headquartered in Bluefield, W.Va. The hatred against the
company and the "hired thugs" is accurately
portrayed and is typical of the experiences of coal miners in many
places in southern West Virginia such as Paint Creek (the Bull Moose
Special), Cabin Creek (Tent Towns), and Logan County (March over Blair
Mountain). Elsewhere, miners in eastern Kentucky struggled against the
Pinkerton Detective Agency, and miners in Colorado struggled in Ludlow
against the Rockefeller-owned Colorado Fuel and Iron Company and the
Pinkertons.
          MATEWAN is important because working people in this country have
been denied a full account of their struggles. Their struggles are an
untold story about people who overcame unbelievable obstacles as they
built this country's industrial base. While numerous books have been
written about the Mellons, Vanderbilts, Rockefellers, Carnegies, and
others, there is little question that working people resent the
impression that these Robber Barons built America. Local audiences
loved the film because they viewed it as "their
side" of the story, as well as a chance to view a flashback
of a period only talked about cautiously by their parents and
grandparents. Local residents who were extras in the film jumped at
the chance to play roles from their family scrapbooks. Furthermore,
the film clearly shows the people involved as the honest and
hardworking people that they really were as opposed to traditional
Hollywood stereotyping.
          The weakest character in the film is Joe Kenehan (Chris Cooper),
the union organizer. He was consistently portrayed as a pacifist and
an outsider, which was actually unlikely. His suggested relationship
with the Industrial Workers of the World was also curious, since the
UMWA Constitution states that members of the IWW, along with the
National Chamber of Commerce, National Association of Manufacturers,
and the Ku Klux Klan, "shall be expelled from the UMWA." Of
course, all of this must be weighed against the knowledge that Mother
Jones, who helped found the IWW in 1905 and was a major union
organizer in West Virginia, is still revered by older UMWA members,
and Ralph Chaplin, who wrote labor's best known song, "Solidarity
Forever," was an IWW organizer at Cabin Creek, W.Va.
          MATEWAN is a film with a message and one must be cautioned not to
view it as a historical aberration. The fight for a union and economic
dignity was not won in the final 

scene and is still being fought
today. One can view a modern-day version of the same struggle in the
same Mingo County in the Appalachian documentary on the A. T. Massey/
UMWA conflict titled, MINE WAR ON BLACKBERRY CREEK.
          
            John David is professor and chairman of
the social sciences department at West Virginia Institute of
Technology, Montgomery, West Virginia.
            EDITOR'S NOTE:
MATEWAN has for the most part concluded its theatrical
run but is available on videotape at most rental outlets and is
scheduled for cable distribution around the end of 1988.
          
        
        
          Labor, Environmental Coalition Wins Bill Passage
          By Acuff, StewartStewart Acuff
          Vol. 10, No. 3, 1988, p. 16
          
          It's not often that the environmental movement and the labor
movement can find enough common ground to work together in a mutually
beneficial effort. It is difficult for any coalition to hold itself
together long enough to make an impact, and that difficulty is even
greater without a history of cooperation.
          The labor movement and environmental movement wrote a little
history curing the 1988 Georgia legislative session.
          Led by the Georgia State Employees Union (Local 1985 of the Service
Employees International Union) and the Georgia Environmental Project,
the two often disparate movements joined forces in a dramatic and
exciting fight that led to the passage of HB 503, the Public Employees
Hazardous Protection and Right to Know Act of 1988.
          HB 503 requires that state employees be informed about chemicals on
the job, be trained in the safe use of those chemicals, that an
advisory council be formed to administer the bill, and that no state
employee be forced to work with any chemical she or he is not familiar
with.
          HB 503 was drafted four years ago by State Rep. George Brown of
Augusta, who is himself in a high risk category for bladder cancer
because of exposure to carcinogens at an Augusta chemical plant where
he worked as a teenager.
          Brown's original bill covered all Georgia workers and included
citizens' right to know. But that bill was made obsolete by federal
legislation designed to protect private sector manufacturing workers
and residents of neighborhoods close to chemical plants.
          A new proposal did not make it out of the House in 1987; its most
active and vocal opponent was the Georgia Department of
Transportation, whose maintenance workers and lab employees are
subject to the bill's provisions.
          Labor and environmentalists fought hard; more than 400 GSEU members
came to the Capitol on "State Employees Lobby Day." The Georgia
Environmental Project helped build support by making the effort "a
public policy fight rather than a wrestling match about working
conditions."
          When Gov. Joe Frank Harris signed HB 503 in an April ceremony
attended by union members, environmentalists, and legislators, it wee
the first time in his two terms that any AFL-CIO union had been in the
governor's office for a bill signing.
        
      
    
  