
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 10, Number 1,
	       1988
        
          Women and the '88 Elections
          By Hannon, SharronSharron Hannon
          Vol. 10, No. 1, 1988, pp. 1-3
          
          What role will women play in the '88 elections? Will the "gender
gap" resurface? Will it affect the outcome of the presidential
race?
          These are questions that candidates and political analysts might
well be pondering in the next several wasks, as Super Tuesday--the
March 8 date when primaries and caucuses will be held in twenty
states, mostly in the South--looms large on the horizon.
          To help focus their attention, the National Women's Political
Caucus gathered representatives from the presidential campaigns,
political consultants, pollsters and journalists for a day-long
conference in Atlanta in December.
          The purpose of the meeting, according to NWPC chair Irene
Natividad, was to "underscore the obvious"--the fact that women make
up a majority of voters in this country. In 1988, ten million more
women than men will be eligible to vote.
          Women's groups worry that these numbers are being either overlooked
or deliberately ignored by the candidates.
          "They act like they're afraid of the 'w' word--women," says
Natividad. "The omission of women from campaign rhetoric so far has
been the norm rather than the exception. Why don't they target the
largest clump of voters? Why is something so obvious being so
intensely ignored?"
          The silence is particularly evident in Super Tuesday states, she
notes, where candidates seem to be focusing instead on "Rhett
Butler--the white male in the South."
          This is not a winning strategy, according to participants at the
Atlanta meeting. They contend that the key to Super Tuesday is to find
a message that will resonate 

among women and minorities.
          To bolster the point, presenters at the conference deluged the
audience with statistics on voting patterns in the '80, '84 end '86
elections. For example:
In 1980, for the first time since women won the right to vote
in 1920, the same percentage of women voted as men (59
percent). Because more women than men are eligible to vote (since
women live longer and form a larger percentage of the population),
this meant that six million more women than men voted.Also in 1980, polling data revealed that women were thinking
and voting differently from men on a wide range of issues including
national security, the economy, the environment and education, as well
as women's rights issues. The "gender gap" was born, and has continued
to manifest itself during subsequent elections and polling on a
variety of issue areas.By 1984, leaders of seventy-six national women's organizations
had banded together for a registration, education and get-out-the-vote
drive. The Women's Vote Project aimed to register one and a half
million new women voters from among the thirty million eligible but
unregistered female population. The goal was exceeded, with more than
1.8 million women registered, and the post-election Census Bureau
report confirmed a significant increase: 61 percent of all eligible
women voted--a 2 percent increase from 1980 and 2 percent higher than
men, whose level remained at 59 percent. Seven million more women than
men voted.In 1986, women's votes (in combination with votes by
minorities in some cases) provided the winning edge in nine key Senate
races--five of these in Southern states. The beneficiaries were all
Democrats and include John Breaux (L Louisiana), Wyche Fowler
(Georgia), Bob Graham (Florida), Terry Sanford (North Carolina) and
Richard Shelby (Alabama). Women voted in greater numbers than men in
all twenty Super Tuesday states.
          While these statistics point to potential political clout for
women, the operative word here is potential. Some political pundits
are still inclined to write off the gender gap, pointing out that it
failed to defeat Ronald Reagan in '84.
          Activist women's groups acknowledge that the women's vote is not
monolithic. Race, age, income and education level are among the
factors other than sex that figure into voting patterns. Still, they
bristle at being labeled a "special interest" group.
          "We are here to remind the candidates that we are not a special
interest; we are more than half the population," said Missouri
Lt. Gov. Harriett Woods, echoing the sentiments of many at the NWPC
gathering in Atlanta.
          Woods attended the meeting both as an NWPC member and as a
representative of Democratic presidential candidate Richard Gephardt
(she is co-chair of the campaign for her fellow Missourian). All six
Democratic candidates sent stand-ins, though only Bob Dole was
represented on the Republican side. And each, in turn, was given an
opportunity to make a pitch for her candidate.
          In addition, the NWPC's Democratic and Republican task forces
released reports on the candidates, covering not only where they stand
on such issues as ERA, choice, child care and pay equity, but also
data on how many women are on their campaign staffs and what their
positions and I salaries are. "Equal opportunity cannot begin after
the election," said Ann Lewis, chair of the Democratic task force
and former executive director of Americans for Democratic Action.
          Not surprisingly, the Democratic candidates all ranked considerably
better than their Republican counterparts on support of the issues,
with Jesse Jackson, Michael Dukakis and Paul Simon rated as the
strongest backers of women's rights in the task force reports.
          Perhaps surprisingly, women are well-represented on the campaign
and office staffs of nearly all the candidates (information on Pat
Robertson and Alexander Haig was not available for the reports). Women
hold close to half of the positions overall and their salaries are
competitive with men on the staffs.
          The highest ranking woman is Susan Estrich, Dukakis's campaign
manager. She is the first woman in history to run a major presidential
campaign. Women in the Dukakis campaign hold twenty-seven of the top
forty-nine paid positions.
          "We're running the darn thing," Deputy Political Director
Alice Travis, an active NWPC member, told her colleagues in
Atlanta. "We're in charge at last and how sweet it is."
          The Democratic task force report also notes endorsements from
prominent women. Again Dukakis fares particularly well, with support
from Gov. Madeleine Kunin of Vermont, Lt. Gov. Evelyn Murphy of
Massachusetts, Secretary of State Elaine Baxter of Iowa, former New
York City' councilperson Carol Bellamy, and more than one hundred

female state legislators from twenty-two states.
          While endorsements and the placement of women on their staffs may
help candidates attract women to their campaigns, neither is
necessarily enough in itself
          "It'a great to have women in high positions, but what about the
rest of us?" asked a Florida NWPC member who had recently attended
her state Democratic convention. "I went to each candidate there
and not one had a piece of literature with them that spoke to women's
issues."
          Harriett Woods, co-chair for Gephardt, defends the candidates from
the charge that they are not speaking to women.
          "In the debates so far, no one has asked the right
questions," she says. "The dialogue has been controlled by the
interviewers."
          Still, she acknowledges a need to get the candidates to put forth
such issues as child care--which polls show to be an overwhelming
concern among women.
          The candidates will receive more than a little nudge in this
direction in January. First, U.S. Rep. Pat Schroeder will launch a
"Great American Family Tour" on the 1 7th with funds raised during her
exploratory campaign for president. Along with pediatrician-author
T. Berry Brazelton and "Family Ties" producer Gary David Goldberg, she
will travel to Portsmouth, N.H., four Southern cities, and Iowa to
talk about the parental leave bill which she is currently sponsoring
in Congress.
          Schroeder's aim is to get this and other "family issues" into the
forefront of political debate.
          "Everything we used to call women's issues are really family
issues," she notes. "If you're shortchanging women, you're
shortchanging everybody."
          Next, from Jan. 22-24, more than thirty women's organizations will
sponsor a "Women's Agenda Conference" in Des Moines, two weeks before
the Iowa caucuses. The presidential candidates have been invited to
speak on child care, pay equity and other issues. The conference was
initiated by the National Federation of Business and Professional
Women's Clubs (BPW), a group that has rarely been involved in national
politics.
          Executive director Linda C. Dorian describes BPW as "a sleeping
elephant that's getting roused up"--an interesting metaphor since
54 percent of the group's members identify themselves as
Republicans.
          Another road show--the "Feminization of Power Campaign" run by
Eleanor Smeal, former president of the National Organization for
Women--will continue on its nationwide tour with stops in Georgia and
Florida planned for early '88. Launched last October, the tour has
already traveled to Los Angeles, Dallas, Houston, Cincinnati,
Cleveland, Pittsburgh and Raleigh, drumming up feminist candidates to
run for office at all levels.
          A special feature of the tour's rallies is a request for each
person in attendance to take a pledge "not to work for, nor support
with my vote, money or time, any candidate who does not support and
work for women's rights and feminist principles."
          To help evaluate candidates, the Fund for the Feminist Majority,
which is sponsoring the Feminization of Power tour, has created a
pamphlet outlining "The National Feminist Agenda." The agenda is an
updated and condensed form of the "Plan of Action" drawn up at the
1977 National Women's Conference held in Houston.
          At the NWPC meeting in Atlanta there was also talk of putting
together a women's agenda to submit to the Democratic National
Committee in response to Chairman Paul Kirk's proposal for a shortened
party platform for '88.
          Women at the meeting viewed the proposal as yet another attempt to
sidestep issues.
          "It's the same thing he has been doing all along, which is to
dance away from what he considers the special interest issues that
have hurt the Democratic Party," said Irene Natividad. "It's
unfortunate because I think this election is the Democrats' to win or
lose."
          Various polls show that the Democratic Party holds a slight edge
among women. According to a "Southern Primary Poll" conducted for the
Atlanta Journal-Constitution, 56 percent of those
intending to vote in the Democratic primary are women.
          But polls also show that women, in greater numbers than men, are
still window-shopping when it comes to the presidential race.
          "If the candidates' melanges are on the mark," asks
Natividad, "why are most women voters voting for a candidate called
'undecided'?"
          
            Sharron Hannon is a Georgia-based freelance writer, whose
work has appeared in numerous publications. For the past four years,
she has edited Southern Feminist, a newspaper covering
women's rights issues.
          
        
        
          In South Africa--The Politics of an Inquiry for Change
          By Wilson, FrancisFrancis Wilson
          Vol. 10, No. 1, 1988, pp. 4, 6-8
          
          It is very difficult to be balanced when one talks about South
Africa On the one hand one can make it too horrendous for words. On
the other hand one can oversimplify and say, 'Well, you know it's not
so bad.' The difficult thing to convey about South Africa is that it
is both realities are true. South Africa is horrible beyond belief in
terms of the destruction of the rule of law, yet it remains an
extraordinarily vibrant society, a beautiful place to live, with a lot
of laughter and humor.
          I find I can communicate something about the ambiguities of living
in South Africa to people from Eastern Europe very easily. They
understand. I suspect that Americans who have lived in the South and
have been through the exhilarating and scary days of the civil rights
movement also will understand, in a way that the rest of the United
States does not.
          Our problem is simple to frame, but incredibly difficult to
answer. It is this: What can one do to contribute effectively to
meaningful change in South Africa?
          Coming of age in the sixties as I did, when we compared the African
South with the American South we shared a shameful history of slavery
and racism. But by 1964 you were on the move. The Brown decision of 1954 had put the law firmly on your
side. Membership in the wider Union usually put the federal government
on your side, resulting in the Civil Rights Act and voter registration
drives. You also had press freedom and the power of
television.
          I have been fascinated reading in a new biography of Martin Luther
King of the strategies that were being used--the enormous importance
of using television, using the federal government. In South Africa we
do not have that. It is a very different ball game.
          In South Africa at the same time there was the massive crackdown of
1960 and the Rivonia trial of 1964 which effectively closed down moat
political activity for a decade. African leaders were all jailed or
exiled. Govan Mbeki emerged recently--twenty-three years later--an old
man. Nelson Mandela and the other political leaders of the ANC, the
PAC and other organizations are still incarcerated. The rule of law
has been systematically abrogated--detention without trial, literally
dozens of people killed in jail, widespread reports of torture,
television and radio under the total control of the state, press
freedom systematically eroded.
          So many people feel that the only thing to do is to leave the
country and join the liberation army. That strategy is certainly
pursued by many South Africans, particularly black South Africans. I
make no judgment about that; I am simply reporting it. I live in South
Africa and I am simply telling you what I perceive. We also need to
note as we struggle with strategies that no strategy of the last
twenty-five years has been effective; change has not taken place. We
have to live with this. We are all wrestling--those in exile and those
who live inside the country--with 'What do we do? How does change come
about?'
          It is in that context that I want to look at the Carnegie
Inquiry. I don't see it as the answer--far from it--to change in South
Africa, but it does contribute.
          As we started thinking about this inquiry into poverty in South
Africa the realities of state power hit us immediately--the state
could bar all access to information.
          They could simply say, 'Look nobody is going to move around and get
that information. 'They could have cut off all funds from the United
States. They could have banned the organizers, and banning is a very
effective weapon; there simply is a decree by the Minister, who signs
a little piece of paper that says for the next five years you may not
meet more than one other person at any time of the day or night;
nothing that you say may be published; you may attend no meetings; and
you may not move outside a certain rigid geographical boundary. That
has happened to lots of friends of mine. Research workers can be
harassed. Informants, those who talk, can be harassed by the state. Of
course, the state can refuse all radio and television dissemination of
the inquiry's results. Those are the realities of state power when one
starts talking about a research program.
          At the same time, the integrity of the inquiry required that those
who were poor and their leaders, and that means primarily black South
Africans, did not perceive this inquiry to be by a bunch of strange,
hostile outsiders. We needed an inquiry that was independent, yes, but
not an inquiry that was on the side of the rich. So we had a lot of
hard questions to answer. How will this inquiry actually benefit the
poor? Why all this American money? What are the motives behind that?
What are the political credentials of the inquiry? On whose authority
is it being conducted?
          With these two sets of pressures 

you can see that the inquiry was
going to have a tough time. That process took us something like two
years. It all began with a conversation which happened to take place
in my office in January 1980 when the International Director of the
Carnegie Corporation of New York breezed in and we started talking
about research in South Africa, that maybe the time was ripe for
another inquiry into poverty. Why another inquiry? When old Andrew
Carnegie died he decreed in his will that 10 percent of the income of
the Carnegie Corporation of New York should be spent in what was, when
he died, the British Empire because, as you know, he was a
Scot. Lawyers studied this will and decided that no matter what had
happened subsequently to South Africa it was still part of the British
Empire as far as the Carnegie Corporation or the will was
concerned. So Carnegie down the years has spent money in South Africa
on libraries and other philanthropies, including the Carnegie
Commission, a study on poverty in 1928-32. Being South Africa and
being in 1930, this commission managed an inquiry into poverty that
focused entirely and exclusively on whites. Poverty among whites was,
of course, a major problem. Large numbers of white, primarily
Afrikaans-speaking South Africans had been pushed off the land by
drought and--a picture you're familiar with--and were coming into the
cities. The Carnegie Corporation put up the money and there was a
famous inquiry which is still a model of social inquiry into
poverty.
          That inquiry made a major impact. But the very fact of excluding
the blacks, quite apart from immorality, had distorted the
consequences of that inquiry. The commission thought about anything
that could be done to raise whites out of poverty. There was never any
thought that the steps being proposed might be at the expense of
people who were even poorer but who happened to be black. One aspect
of apartheid that you must understand is that there is a strong
working-class component--white South Africans just emerging out of
poverty, using the state to protect and get themselves out of poverty,
at the expense of black South Africans.
          However, we could use the fact of the first Carnegie inquiry
because that name had cachet with the government. As an Afrikaaner,
you could not bash a Carnegie inquiry into poverty. It was like
bashing motherhood. That inquiry had been very important in the
emergence of white South Africans from poverty with the vehicle of the
National party.
          While looking at the possibility of an inquiry, I started talking
to people in the highways and byways of South Africa. By and large
white South Africans responded that an inquiry into poverty was a
great idea, and they patted me on the head and sent me on my way. When
I tried this out on black South Africans, they looked at me very sadly
and said, 'Listen chum, if you are going to spend one single dollar
discovering that there is poverty in South Africa, forget it. Well
tell you now for free. There is poverty. It's bad. What we are
interested in is action. Unless there is going to be action out of
this thing it's a waste of time.' That is tough thinking for
academics, that we are not just doing research to write nice books,
that the poor are going to say, 'That is worthwhile. We are prepared
that you spend all those dollars if this is going to be helpful to
us.'
          Then there came this subtle political process of insuring that the
inquiry--and I am not saying we succeeded--was not a bunch of rich,
white, urban-based liberals looking at a problem, saying how serious
and sad it is, and writing analytical reports about it. The inquiry
had to be scientific and objective, but it needed empathy with the
poor themselves and they with it. That is a more subtle process. The
poverty is essentially experienced by blacks. It was important to
create an inquiry that had a black center of gravity.
          That is a tough and tall order in the South African context of the
1980s.
          It took us a long time. I am summarizing two years in an
instant. The model we used was not a commission. We were going to
involve as many people as we possibily could. We based it
at one of the open universities--open in the sense of nonracial. The
Univeraity of Cape Town is such. Twenty percent of our student body is
black. It should be eighty percent but twenty percent is a lot better
than naught which is what it used to be. We also tried to involve all
the other universities, however, the university communities also tend
to be a bunch of urban white liberals.
          To try and get around that problem we established working groups of
professional people. We invited people like Fikile Bam, a lawyer in
the eastern cape who was on Robben Island for ten years. We asked him
to head a working group of lawyers to think as lawyers about the
problem of poverty. Take the facts as given: we know there is poverty;
start thinking about strategies and what you as lawyers need to do
about it. We also asked educationists; John Samuel, one of the senior
black educationists in South Africa, chaired that working
committee. And Allan Boesak chaired the working party on church and
poverty.
          To those small working groups, we said, 'Spend these two years
wrestling with strategies. How do we do something about the issue of
poverty in the South Africa in which we live?'
          It was also important to go beyond the boundaries of South
Africa. The first commission drew the boundary around the white skin,
as it were. There is a danger in South Africa in drawing the boundary
around the nation-state. It is a great temptatation, of
course. It makes a lot of sense. The way in which the South African
economy has developed is that when the gold mines emerged in the 1880s
labor was recruited from all over southern Africa. By the 1890s
three-fifths of the labor for the gold mines on the Witswatersrand
came from Mozambique. In the 1970s a third of a much bigger labor
force still came from Mozambique. Those workers come a year or two
years at a time and then go back. They are not allowed to bring their
wives and children. In the course of a hundred years of developing the
society on that basis, Mozambique moved from the production of food 

to
the production of gold. They then imported their food. The difficulty
is that Mozambicans are producing that gold outside the borders of
Mozambique. They were building up the wealth of the southern African
economy in which they participated but to which they did not have the
right of access. There was a great danger that if we focused on
poverty only inside South Africa itself we would make proposals that
would be good for black South Africans but bad for Mozembicans.
          The politics of this was incredibly delicate but important to get
hold of. Over the last three years in southern Africa when Frelimo
took Mozambique to independence, the South Africans unilaterally cut
the number of migrant workers from 100,000 down to 45,000. Overnight
those 55,000 jobs went to Transkeians. That was good strategy in terms
of poverty inside South Africa but at the expense of people who are
even poorer. It is enormously important as we think about poverty that
we think about all the poor and not simply a chauvinistic version of
'our' poor, which could be poor whites although we laugh at that
now. It is just as wrong to think about 'our' poor as just within our
political boundary, particularly if the wealth within that boundary
has been built up by people outside it.
          We did not define poverty in advance. We wanted to find what
poverty means for the poor themselves. We found things that I had
never thought about.
          For example, women in the rural areas will spend seven hours at a
time two or three times a week carrying a hundred-pound bundle of wood
five miles. On the way home they will walk under a power line. There
you have poverty in a nutshell in South Africa--an old lady carrying a
hundred-pound bundle of wood beneath a power line. South Africa
produces sixty percent of the electricity in Africa. We have no
shortage of energy. But over half of South Africa households have no
access to electricity. If you are rural and have no money you must
look for wood. As population grows the dead wood is cut down, then
live trees are harvested, then the bushes. You walk further and
further. The ecological consequences are devastating. Thus one of the
things that poverty means in South Africa is that nobody has thought
of energy distribution. We spend millions on unnecessary nuclear power
plants and do nothing in terms of reforestation, solar energy and
appropriate energy for those who really need it.
          Poverty has many faces, and it is a great mistake to reduce poverty
to a single number.
          The second aspect of the inquiry was analysis, because you need
understanding if you are to develop strategies. Also, the politics was
important. People have different perceptions as to why there is
poverty. Some blame apartheid, some capitalism, some socialism. Some
will say it is because the poor have too many babies, some that the
poor are too lazy. Some will say it is all of the above. People have
their own favorite headline reasons for poverty.
          We wanted to make people argue their case. Is population growth a
problem? If so, how? People say, 'Oh yes if only the poor people just
wouldn't have so many babies.' That is a victim-blaming approach which
the rich use because it removes them from responsibility. But the
facts show that South African population growth is not terrible.
          We felt that to have a big, open debate on the causes of poverty
would ensure that nobody could accuse us of not listening to what the
government thought were the reasons of poverty.
          After that two-year process of thinking through and discussing with
everybody how this should come together, we launched the inquiry in
April 1982. We launched it very publicly because the moment we tried
to do anything clandestine the state would have known instantly and
would have shut us down. We made it an open thing in which everybody
must be involved. We went to all the Sunday newspapers and even had a
thirty-second appearance on the television news just after a snake
bite in some small town. One of us was allowed to say something about
the inquiry. This was the one and only time we were allowed near the
television screen.
          There were two years of research and writing, filming and
photography, working groups and discussions. It was brought together
in a conference in April of 1984 where we had far more participation
than we ever expected. Three hundred papers were presented from all
around southern Africa on poverty. Some were microstudies on what
poverty wee in a little town in the middle of the Karoo. We had
macrostudies about housing. We had political studies about many
things. It was an astonishing range of papers. All those who had
written papers came. We allowed no one else. We said, 'no gawkers.'
          We had a conference including a photographic exhibition. One of the
nice things that had happened as a result of the public launching was
that an old friend, Omar Badsha, read about it and phoned up from
Durban. He said, 'Listen man you can't just do all of this stuff with
words. Who ever reads words? What we need is some photographers.' He
took a little bit of money and got the beat photographers in South
Africa and told them to come back with photographic essays about what
poverty means. The striking thing wee that there was not one starving
baby, not because we do not have starving babies in South Africa, but
because the photographers were saying that the essence of poverty in
South Africa is human dignity. That is the kind of thing I never would
have thought about in advance. It came out of listening to people as
to what they wanted to say.
          We also produced twelve video films for the total of forty thousand
rend, that is twenty thousand dollars. I think that is a world record
when you know how much films cost to produce. We gave tiny sums of
money to people who were interested in filming and said, 'If you can
make us a movie, that's great but we can't give you more than this
amount of money.' they went off end they did it.
          Part of the politics of that was that in South Africa you may not
produce movies without the permission of the censors. The way we were
able to work through that was to bring all these videos to a workshop
as unfinished productions, in order to have feedback so that the video
producers could go and make their films better before they were
finalized, so they could then go to the censors. I do not think they
have ever been finalized.
          We had a film festival from around the world on signs of hope
including one on the TVA, "The Electric Valley." [Southern
Changes, August-September 1984] We looked at 

experiments and
ideas in different parts of the world. This was important.
          There was massive press coverage including the Afrikaans papers but
not a second on television. Although we had a reporter from the
broadcasting corporation who got very excited about the whole business
and wrote up a long report and did interviews, she was spiked. Nothing
appeared on the radio or television except one little controversy
where somebody had said that they thought actually blacks in the
homelands and reserves had been doing very well over the last ten
years. That went on but nothing else.
          We had a number of post-conference papers to fill gape and think
about strategies. A book of photographs, The Cordoned Heart, was
published. A couple of us wrote a report for Unicef on children in
South Africa. We have four books coming out with edited papers and an
about book. And there are two films.
          Is that adequate? Where do we go from there? The real question
concerns strategies. We learned that in South Africa we must think
about strategies in a short-run and in a long-run way.
          In the long run we assume political change. What do we then do in
terms of poverty? Once we assume that there is a democratic non-racial
society in South Africa we then say, 'and then?' Do you want to
nationalize the gold mines? What kind of land reform do you want? Do
you want Israeli kibbutzim? How do we go on insuring that food is
produced and yet maximize employment? How do we generate employment
for everybody? How do we humanize the workplace? How do we democratize
the economy? Those are the long range questions.
          The short range questions are what can we do in the present that
will make a difference right now, but is consistent with the long
range? I am not so naive as to think that our strategies will bring
change. I am talking about anticipating change and helping to prepare
for change.
          We find ourselves really talking about non-governmental
organizations like the trade union movement and education bodies. We
need to think through the whole process of structure building, which
includes a good deal of luck (let us not underestimate the importance
of luck in a society like South Africa--luck that you survive). We
need strategic thinking where you say, 'There does seem to be some
space here that we can quietly can get together. It's a gray area in
terms of the law but we think we can move.' In this way
non-governmental bodies do begin to grow.
          The trade unions are a superb example. Until 1973 the trade union
movement had been smashed in South Africa by eighty years of state
repression. In the last fourteen years the trade unions, playing
superb politics, have been able to negotiate and work their way into a
position where I do not think they can now be destroyed. That is part
of the significance of this last strike of the mineworkers. It was, if
you like, a dry run just to test the limits. The fact that the
National Union of Mine Workers is alive--has not been smashed and is
able to exist--is a major advance and a major shift in the political
balance of power in South Africa.
          We have to recognize the strategic importance of the trade unions
and find out what can be done to support them. One simply cannot leave
Cyril Ramaphosa standing alone. It is necessary to ask whether there
is a second or a third level of leadership with the technical
education and training to run a huge trade union under the political
pressures that exist in South Africa.
          At a personal level this is all very challenging. At first one
might regret having been born in this generation of South
Africana. "If only I had been born some years later after the
political change, then I could get on with creative work," a
person might say. But then one may suddenly recognize that the
foundations of the future have to be laid now. This is a very good
time to be working. Although there is not a great deal of apace, the
apace that exists is crucially important and one can use it. There is
less apace now than there was two years ago but there is more space
now than there was in 1965.  It comes and goes.
          We find ourselves at the end of an inquiry like this seeing that it
is very important for South Africans to consider the long view. We
need to think about the antipoverty strategies that will work once
politics is not the problem that it now is. How do we overcome the
legacy of three hundred years of conquest, a hundred years of this
appallingly biased industrialization with the migrant labor system,
and fifty years of apartheid? Those are tough questions in a society
that does not have untold wealth. How do we bring about economic
equality in what is the most unequal society in the world?
          So we think about the long run, but also about the short run. We
see that we could get this organization going, or that this
organization needs strengthening. What about a children's institute?
That is the approach.
          To conclude, Ed Elson in his introduction of John Lewis and Ray
Marshall today made two points I think are important. First, he quoted
Robert Kennedy, that when an individual stands up he may send forth
ripples which will join with a million other ripples which ultimately
will change everything. That famous statement by Kennedy was first
made at the University of Cape Town. We all share the same dream. It
is a common struggle in different ways. The second point that Ed Elson
made when he was talking about Ray Marshall was that he plants
trees. I thought that was a wonderful analogy. I can remember visiting
Germany a year or two ago and standing in the forests where only a
generation previously the Nazi bullets had been flying. To see this
marvelous forest standing there and hear a friend of mine saying that,
'Yea, we can cut these down now but we are going to need to replant
because in Germany we think in terms of 150-year cycles. We plant for
150 years in Germany.' That took me a little bit beyond planting wheat
for next year.
          Is that not exactly what we are doing? We may not live to harvest
our trees but we certainly need to plant them now, to provide fruit
and shelter for our children and our children's children all over the
world, but certainly in the two Souths.
          
            Dr. Francis Wilson was the banquet speaker at the 1987
SRC annual meeting. A South African economist, Dr. Wilson is currently
directing the Carnegie Inquiry into Poverty and Development in
Southern Africa, a study involving scores of participants. The Inquiry
aims to give voice and leverage to South Africa's "unheard voices,"
the dispossessed black majority. Dr. Wilson's edited and condensed
remarks follow.
          
        
        
          A Letter from Lillian Smith
          Edited by Gladney, RoseRose Gladney
          Vol. 10, No. 1, 1988, pp. 11-12
          
          The following is the second of a series of letters selected from the
correspondence of Lillian Smith to appear in Southern
Changes. This issue's selection is from one of her letters to
Glenn Rainey, retired English professor at Georgia Tech, and was
copied from the original in the Glenn Rainey Collection at Emory
University. Mr. Rainey and his wife Dorothy were close friends of
Lillian Smith and Paula Snelling. He was one of the initial sponsors
of and a frequent contributor to their magazine.
          Despite the often conflicting demands Smith faced as camp director,
magazine editor, and novelist, correspondence from the late 1930s and
early '40s indicates a great deal of creative interaction between
these seemingly different interests in her life. Her Laurel Falls Camp
was an extraordinarily creative educational institution, known for its
instruction in the arts, music, dramatics, and modern
psychology. Through conversation and creative play, Smith helped
campers and counselors question the world they lived in and begin to
envision the possibility of change in that world The camp was also a
laboratory for many of the ideas informing her analysis of political
and cultural events in her published writing. It is not surprising
that camp activities often reflected concerns similar to those
expressed in her magazine. For example, one of the plays, "Behind the
Drums," written by Smith for her campers, explored 300 years of
Afro-American history through music and dance and was published in the
1939 fall issue of North Georgia Review.
          The following account of another camp play in the summer of 1940
demonstrates even more explicitly how current political events,
specifically the anticipation of war, affected the creative activities
of the camp and Smith's perspective on her work as writer as well as
camp director. She knew then that war, like other forms of human
segregation, is most destructive to our minds and hearts.
          September 19, 1940
          We had a good summer, smooth as far as the mechanics of camp were
concerned. Less encouraging to me as I watched War creep into our
midst and twist feeling and thought. Our girls talked more about God,
about hell, about believing every word of the Bible than in all my
camp experience I have heard before. They were less tolerant of the
Negro this summer (some holding bravely to their decency but others
wavering) more inclined to defend the 

South...America...to hate Hitler
and Germans...Even so, we had good talks, good evenings
together...until I wrote a little play called 1940, A Play for a Young
Girl. They wrote that play, not I,--I only put it down on paper. It
came out of evenings when together we did not discuss war and peace,
regimentation and death, but acted it out in singing and dance and
impromptu chanting. Gathered together as we have done before in the
library we spent several evenings doing this...first playing on the
drums then beginning to talk about today, this year, what it meant to
us,--election year--child refugees-Finland-propaganda--
regimentation--then suddenly some one would get up and chant their
feelings or dance them out. You would have felt the same thrill that I
did, I believe, in seeing them express through their bodies, their
feelings. And then one night, some girl spoke of conscription, of
regimented youth camps and to my astonishment their feelings of fear
and panic poured out. Then I wrote the play. We were to give it--the
girls were thrilled--we went to its first reading and rough "walking
through" of the scenes. And suddenly my counselors turned against
me. The play was unpatriotic they told me. Furthermore, it was not the
kind of thing young girls should hear about. A first-year callow young
counselor told me that "it wasn't good for children to hear about such
things...they were too young." In all of my experience I have never
felt so much resentment against me, such a refusal to work with me on
a project. I bowed my head to the storm and stopped work on the
play. Not because I was afraid to give that play but because I was
afraid of seeing all the other values of summer destroyed by
dissension and suspicion. But I gathered my children up one night and
we went to the library and Esther read it to them. [Esther Smith,
Lillian Smith's younger sister, taught dramatic arts at Western
Maryland College, and was in charge of the camp's theatrical
productions for many summers.] In all her life she must not have read
so beautifully and so movingly. The children were deeply touched and
profoundly impressed. A few counselors had straggled in--I had
invited none of them--and some told me afterward that they regretted
that we had given up the idea of producing the play...But that was
Esther's magic, and they did not really believe what they said.
          Well... I confess that I was awed by the incident. It has always
been so simple and easy to hold the group in the "hollow of one's
hand," so to speak, to win them over to almost any kind of
project. But War's beat me. I had no more influence during that brief
dissension when my loyal staff turned into a war mob than if I had
been the cook.
          But...I quickly got our minds on fun again--on the banquet and the
barbecue and the children's surprise for the counselors--and so the
summer ended in peace. I suppose you'd call it my appeasement
policy. The children went home saying it was their happiest and best
summer; the counselors went home saying the same. And believing
it. But the director saw them all off feeling sadder than ever in her
life she had felt about a summer...
          Sometimes I feel so distressed, so perturbed about what is ahead of
us that it is difficult to hold on to those values one cherishes. It
is not the physical part of war that sickens me as it is what is
happening to our minds and feelings.
          
            Rose Gladney is Assistant Professor of American Studies
at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa.
          
        
        
          Remembering 'Bud' Garrett
          By Rankin, TomTom Rankin and Peterson,  Elizabeth Elizabeth Peterson
          Vol. 10, No. 1, 1988, pp. 12, 14-15
          
          Robert "Bud" Garrett died on November 24,1987. Perhaps
appropriately, he suffered a heart attack during his third game of the
folk marble game "rolley hole" the day before Thanksgiving.
          Rolley hole has been a tradition in Garrett's home of Clay County,
Tennessee, and the adjoining counties of the Eastern Highland Rim for
over a century. Through his love of the competition and the fellowship
of the game Garrett encouraged its cultural survival. Like many males
in his community of Free Hill, a rural black community whose families
have been free and landowning since before the Civil War, Garrett
learned to play rolley hole as a boy. His involvement in the game
continued into his seventy-first year, when he collapsed on the marble
yard he had built next to his house in Free Hill.
          Characteristic of Clay County is an 

abundance of flint, easily
gathered in stream banks and road cuts. Garrett and young men like him
gathered chunks of this stone, filed the chunks into rough, ball-like
shapes, and placed them beneath water falls so the constant water
motion could smooth the flint into round spheres for marble
playing. Although effective, this method took weeks--even if one were
lucky and didn't lose the marbles to the current. Imagining an easier
way, Bud Garrett built a portable machine which could turn out
perfectly round marbles in a short time. Unlike the marbles of old,
Garrett's could be produced quickly. He offered them for sale with a
guarantee: "If your marble breaks, send me the pieces and I'll send
you a brand new one free of charge."
          For many serious players in and around Clay County, Garrett's
beautiful spheres became the marble of choice for play in the many
marble yards which dot the landscape. For all the marbles he sold to
players, Garrett probably sold more to his admirers at the folklife
festivals he was invited to attend, including the Smithsonian
Institution's Festival of American Folklife in 1986.
          Marble making was just one of Garrett's specialties. Some will
remember him for his guitar playing and singing, others for his gifts
as a raconteur, or his ability to resurrect dead cars. Bud Garrett did
a little of everything.
          Born in 1916 in Free Hill near Celina, Tenn., he was known to many
in the area through his junkyard business, but his occupational
history is as extensive and varied as the stories and anecdotes he
told. At various times, he ran his own taxi service, carrying
passengers from Free Hill to Louisville and Indianapolis, where many
Free Hill natives migrated. He also delivered ice, drove a school bus,
operated a cafe and juke joint, ran a record store, worked for a live
bait company and served as a notary public. In recent years, he spent
most of his time working on cars, making marbles, trading, and
entertaining customers and visitors with his music and stories.
          Music was a very large part of Bud Garrett's life. The son of a
fiddle player, Garrett began playing guitar as a young boy. He recalls
Blind Lemon Jefferson's "Black Snake Moan" and the common fiddle tune
"Boil That Cabbage Down" as two of the first songs he heard as a
child. Both songs are emblematic of his musical influences: he
absorbed as much from the fiddle and banjo tunes and minstrel songs
played at square dances for blacks and whites in the area as he did
from the blues he heard in juke joints and on the radio. He performed
solo most of his life, usually at parties or at the cafe he once owned
in Free Hill. In the mid-fifties he cut a 45-rpm record for the
Excello record label in Nashville ("Quit My Drinking" b/w "Do
Remember").
          Garrett came to favor many post-war blues standards by bluesmen
such as T-Bone Walker and Little Milton, and 

white country standards
by Merle Haggard and Don Williams, which he often reworked into a slow
twelve or sixteen bar blues. His "I Got a Little Place in Free Hill,"
an original talking blues improvisation about his homeplace and life
in Free Hill, appears on the Tennessee Folklore Society LP,
Free Hill: A Sound Portrait of a Rural Afro-American
Community (available from the Tennessee Folklore Society, Box
201 Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro, TN
37212). Garrett performed at such festivals as the Grassroots Festival
in Nashville, the 1982 World's Fair in Knoxville, the Brandywine
Festival in Delaware, and the Smithsonian Festival of American
Folklife in Washington, D.C.
          Bud Garrett will be missed.
          
            Tom Rankin is a folklorist and photographer and currently
teaches photography at Emory University. Elizabeth Peterson works with
the Texas Folklife Resources in Austin, Texas. Bob Fulcher of the
Tennessee State' Parks also contributed to this piece.
          
        
        
          When 'Justice Rose Like Water'
          By Clark, Septima PoinsetteSeptima Poinsette Clark
          Vol. 10, No. 1, 1988, p. 15
          
          Educator and activist Septima Clark, whose long,
productive career placed her in the front lines of civil rights
activities for six decades, died on December 15, 1987, in a nursing
home on Johns Island, S.C. The next issue of Southern Changes will
include excerpts from a lengthy 1983 interview conducted with Clark by
the Southern Regional Council. Meanwhile, as ceremonies nationwide
during January honor Martin Luther King, Jr., here is the text of a
speech Clark gave at a King birthday celebration in Charleston in
1980:
          I was born in 1898, and as a girl in Charleston, South Carolina,
the church was very powerful. In the sanctuaries, Christians
rejoiced. There they were deemed worthy to suffer for what they
believed. The church is often the arch supporter of the status quo. If
it does not recapture that sacrificial spirit, it will forfeit the
loyalty of millions and be dismissed as an irrelevant social club with
no meaning for the 20th Century.
          My thanks to Martin Luther King, Jr. for recapturing that
sacrificial spirit and giving his life for what he believed. He also
recaptured the American Dream. Not that he lived by the Bible, he also
called his country to live by the Constitution. When he preached, the
prophets came alive, and justice rose like water. When he walked, the
feet of millions of Americans fell in line and followed across the
country and into the nation's capitol.
          His was no middle-class campaign for civil rights. It was a
Movement that took the people into the streets to confront clubs,
hoses, horses and dogs...to face the oppressors while armed only with
the almighty power of love. To turn the cheek, not to avoid the
present pain. But to see the true nation, and new order of the future
that God was already making.
          His peace was not any cozy rally, but in reordering of our national
priorities, from military power to that of human empowerment. He did
not stop with the right to vote, and eat with white folk. Already
living in God's Kingdom, where all people live in dignity and
love. The Nobel Peace Prize maker spoke out against the war in Asia
because its bombs took breads from the tables of the poor in
America.
          Born in an economic depression in 1929, he died in a time of
spiritual depression in 1968. He was killed, like his Lord, ahead of
his time. Some say his dream died on a motel balcony. I think I speak
for many Americans when I say that he is the greatest American of our
century, and his Lord is our greatest hope for the next
century. Racism, poverty and warfare remain, yet our hearts retain the
righteous dream of God's revolutionary kingdom.
          You have a dual citizenry. You live both in time and eternity. Your
highest loyalty is to God and not to the nation. If any earthly
institution or custom conflicts with God's will, it is your Christian
duty to oppose it. Preserve the values of the faith for children yet
unborn. The end of life is not to be happy, nor to achieve pleasure
and avoid pain, but to do the will of God, come what may.
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 10, No. 1, 1988, p. 16
          
          A powerful white Southern politician who for years has helped many
black people, including this writer, sought last week to end an
outrageous debate with a brother-in-law by asking me if I thought he
(the politician) was racist. My prompt response was, "Yes."
          The politician was flabbergasted.
          Years ago, this same fella said to me, "Look, everyone knows
this is a democracy and all people are supposed to be created equal,
created by God and all that jazz, but do you blacks have to go around
believing all that pie-in-the-sky? You're pushing too hard for your
equality and it will backlash. Knock it off before we are forced to
really get rough with you."
          My politician friend reminded me that it was twenty-five years ago
when he uttered that statement. I reminded him that twenty-five years
ago he claimed he was not racist.
          I did add, however, that my friend's racism has always been more of
the northern variety. In the North, there were almost no lynchings,
church bombings and legalized segregation. Thus, northerners suffered
from the delusion that they were less racist than the white South.
          But, with the advent of the civil rights movement and blacks
aggressively challenging white power, northern whites suddenly
realized they didn't like blacks any more than their white southern
brothers.
          Northern whites, however, had to find a convenient rationalization
for their newly discovered bigotry. And, along came Governor George
C. Wallace speaking forcefully and deliberately to what was really on
white hearts in Milwaukee, Chicago, Indianapolis and other northern
cities.
          In effect, Wallace's message was, "Look, I'm a white man and
you're white folks and if there is one thing on which we can agree, it
is that we have to get together and atop these blacks before they take
over our neighborhoods and marry our daughters."
          Thousands of northern whites said to each other: "Now here's one
white man who makes sense. Let's go with Wallace and maybe he'll stop
these black radicals."
          Northern editorial writers wanted to say Wallace was right, but did
not want to admit that northern whites were no different than their
counterparts in the South. They s arched for a gimmick which would
expiate long-hidden guilt feelings but permit them to openly indulge
in racist politics.
          The gimmick they invented was the 'backlash." By claiming a
backlash they were saying they had never really disliked blacks and
were simply reacting--or 'recoiling'--to blacks being so pushy. If
blacks stopped being so pushy, northern whites would atop reacting and
voting for Wallace or Barry Goldwater.
          Of course, that was not a backlash. It was a frontlash. The racism
had been there all the time.
          My politician friend is quite northern in his racism. I have always
known that.
          He fooled himself; not me.
          Peace.
          
            J.L. Chestnut Jr. is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
        
          Scenes from the Office: I. "The Pitfalls Facing Management"
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 10, No. 1, 1988, p. 9
          
          Editor's note: The following memo was circulated by the
corporate legal department of a large Atlanta business through all
levels of management in 1987. The employee who provided Southern Changes a copy of this memo requested that
neither his/her name nor that of the company be
mentioned.
          Procedure Where Labor Union Official Contacts Management
Representative of [Company Name] for Recognition or Negotiation
          Over the past several years, unions have made unsuccessful efforts
to organize employees in several of our offices. Under the provisions
of the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947 (Taft-Hartley),
employees have a legal right to organize if they wish, however, an
employer is also guaranteed certain rights in connection with union
organization attempts. In order to insure that our Company does not
forfeit established legal rights, it is necessary and desirable that
the following procedure be followed in the event a union
representative or anyone claiming to speak for employees contacts one
of our offices relative to recognition of a union, a group of
employees, or for any other purpose.
          1. As soon as you become aware of the slightest organizational
activity among your employees, promptly leave your office and go where
you can phone your Division Vice President privately who will then
make immediate telephone contact with his officer in the Home
Office. After consultation with the proper people, you will be advised
of what you should and should not do.
          2. If a union representative contacts you by telephone or personal
visit, carefully listen to what he has to say and be able to report
the conversation in detail, together with the name of the union
representative and the organization which he purports to represent. Do
not allow yourself to be drawn into any discussion of union
representation, grievances, or any other phase of employee
relations. Simply advise the union representative that you do not have
authority to discuss these matters with him and that you will have to
pass along his statements to higher authority in the Company and will
communicate with him later. The conversation should be kept as brief
as possible, and no agreements or commitments should be made with the
union representative. Your attitude should be polite and businesslike,
without being overly friendly or hostile. Report such calls at once so
that the matter can be immediately brought to the attention of the
Home Office.
          A. Caution: A special danger area exists where the union agent
offers to show Management cards allegedly signed by employees
designating the union as representative. Under no circumstances should
these cards be accepted, handled, examined, or counted by a Management
representative, nor should there be any agreement to examine or count
these cards at a later date. If the union agent proffers such cards,
you should decline to accept them and tell him that you do not have
any authority to examine the cards or to make any agreement for a card
check, but that you will advise your superiors and will contact him
within the next several days. (The Company has no sure way of knowing
whether the signatures on the cards are authentic, whether the cards
were legally obtained, or whether coercion or intimidation were used
in obtaining the signature, and if you fail to follow the instructions
above, your words or acts could deprive our employees and our Company
of the right to challenge the validity of these cards or to have an
election at a later date.)
          3. If the union representative contacts you by letter, discuss it
immediately with your Division Vice President who will immediately
telephone the contents of the letter to the Home Office. You will
receive instructions on how to handle the letter.
          4. If a representative of the National Labor Relations Board calls
by telephone or in person to state that a petition for representation
has been filed by the union, or for any other purpose, tell him you
have no authority in such matters and obtain his name, address, and
listen politely and carefully to his statements as to the purpose of
the call. Then advise him that you would appreciate his withholding
his questions until you can communicate with your superiors and
arrange for an appropriate person in the Company to communicate with
him. Then immediately report such conversation by telephone to your
Division Vice President and to the Home Office. If any written
communication is received from the National Labor Relations Board,
withhold a reply and promptly report the matter to your Division Vice
President and to the Home Office by telephone. In either case, the
Home Office will direct all responses to the NLRB representative.
          5. If you learn of union or organizational activity from an
employee, who comes to you to tell you about it, do a lot of listening
and avoid any conversation on the pros and cons of unionism. On the
other hand, if you are asked for your views, you must make a positive
response to the employee who asks you. Your response should simply be
that in your opinion a union is not needed in your office, that you
feel strongly that we can solve our own problems without outsiders
coming in, and that you feel a union would do far more harm than
good. Confine your remarks to the individual who asked for your
views. Do not make any speeches to any employee group. Remember, your
first step is to alert your Division Vice President and then wait for
advice and direction.
          A. Caution: If a group of employees (more than one) asks to meet
with you to discuss wages, hours, or working conditions decline to do
so. You can agree to meet with each employee individually and listen
to what each has to say. Afterwards, alert your Division Vice
President and then wait for advice and direction.
          There are many pitfalls facing members of Management during the
initial stages of a union campaign. It is necessary that you follow
the given instructions in order to insure that our handling of such
matters is consistent with the laws and Company policies and
procedures.
          -Corporate Legal Department
        
        
          Scenes from the Office: II. The Supervisor in the Computer
          Interview by Sharpless, RebeccaRebecca Sharpless
          Vol. 10, No. 1, 1988, pp. 10-11
          
          Susan Lowe, age twenty-seven, works with 200 co-workers in the
claims department of a large insurance firm in Atlanta. The claims
department occupies an entire floor of a downtown high-rise office
building. "Claims" employees pass their days
filling in forms on video display terminals. Unlike office workers of
the past, these workers' pace is set by the computer's capabilities as
programmed by management. The supervisor is in the computer. Data,
entered by workers at their terminal keyboards, must fit a
standardized, regularized format. Workers have little discretion in
performing the job, or in the speed with which they must move across
the keyboard. As Susan Lowe describes her work, she talks about the
monitoring of employees that is possible with computer supervision,
including the counting of keystrokes, errors, and time.
          SUSAN LOWE: The computer automatically checked the number of claims
processed. Every day your manager would get a printout of what you had
paid the previous day, and they would post that on a board so that
everybody could see what everyone else had done.
          About six months to a year after they installed the computer system
they had a management consulting firm come in and do a little
stopwatch timing on people for paying claims. Before that, you had
your quota of fifty claims a day. When they did this little stopwatch
study, they determined that certain claims were not really worth as
much as other claims. And so they put a value on the different kinds
of claims-for example, a drug bill. A drug bill is a pretty easy thing
to pay; you put in the code, the date, the amount, and you paid
it. And you always paid drug claims to the claimant, so it was a
pretty simple claim to pay. You got a .4 for that. If it was a
hospital bill, that could be a little bit more complicated because
there could be ten pages worth of charges, and you get maybe 1.2 for
that. So they had what they called work units.
          For the first six months to a year after they went on this work
unit thing, they didn't tell us what a work unit was. They didn't tell
us that a drug claim was only worth .4 and a hospital bill was worth
1.2. They just said, instead of being the number of claims per day
that we paid, the computer was now spitting out how many work units
per day you're doing. And there didn't seem to be any correlation-we
couldn't figure it out, at any rate-any correlation between the number
of claims you paid and the number that appeared on the sheet every day
saying how much you worked the day before. And that in itself was kind
of depressing, when you don't know what it is that you're doing or not
doing that's affecting your performance.
          They also, when they went to this work unit system, went to a
little different system of salary increases. Before, we were reviewed
once a year and given basically a merit raise, and we were also given
cost-of-living raises automatically. And on the new system they kind
of did away with these; well, they didn't do away completely with the
cost-of-living raises, but what it was, was that every six months they
would take your cumulative total of work units and determine how much
you would get paid for that six-month period. And then at the end of
six months you would be reviewed again and if your production went
down, your salary would drop. If your production went up, your salary
would increase.
          You kind of were walking a fine line all the time as to how much
you were going to get paid. You couldn't really count on a salary. If
you had to go out and buy a new car and you were making $425 a week,
you couldn't guarantee that in six months you'd still be making
that. You might drop down to $375 a week. That fifty bucks might
be-and some people live on the edge like that, too. So that was kind
of a hairy situation.
          A lot of people weren't real happy with that. I know I wasn't real
happy with that, because I was scared. I never went down; I stayed
exactly the same all the time. I was consistent. But to me it was real
stressful, worrying, and to me, I would have been embarrassed if my
salary dropped. To me, that would have been a horrible thing to have
to happen. It happened to a number of people; maybe about one quarter
of the people had that happen. You get pretty consistent; most people
would stay about the same.
          But some people would just knock themselves out for six months and
they'd get this huge salary increase. They paid very well for the
industry; we were the top-paid for the city of Atlanta in our
industry. So that part of it was good. But again, you had to deal with
this stress all the time of, okay, I did it for this six months, and
you'd kill yourself to do it for that six months, and you just can't
keep that up. I couldn't, and that's why I never really did that. I
never really tore into something and worked twice as long.
          A lot of people used to come in early and pre-process claims so
that when they started work for the day they'd just type. They'd be
just basically typing; they wouldn't be doing any decision-making
during the day. And they allowed you to do that. If you wanted to come
in early and sit at your desk and do whatever you wanted to do, you
could do it.
          [Piecework] is how I felt about it. I liked what I was doing; I
liked paying claims and everything. I thought it was interesting. But
I was just real stressed out in that kind of environment. And it set
up like this competition, I mean the fact that they posted these
things on the board every day; it set up this real cutthroat, to some
people, competition. They would dig through claims and look for all
the easy ones and shove this pile of crap back in the claims
drawer. People picked through stuff and put it back and things like
that. It affected the atmosphere of the office because of that.
          The quota with work units was still basically the same, I think. It
went up, but it went up to like sixty. You had to do sixty work units
a day, which, come to think of it, that would have translated to about
seventy, seventy-five claims a day. So it went up by half. So you did
have to process more claims in order to stay at the level you were
before.
          I don't think they ever fired anybody for not producing. Once they
went onto that salary based on your work units, people just either
left because they weren't doing real well-and normally that's what
happened, because if you weren't doing real well-the salary ranged
from like $210 to like $425. There was this huge range depending on
what your production was. And people who were in the lower ranges
making around two hundred dollars a week could go elsewhere. And so
they did. And so basically I don't think they ever really fired
anybody for not making their quota because they didn't make very much
money, and they left on their own.
          One thing that I did a lot when I worked on that job that I could
kick myself for doing, was that-and I think that it contributed worse
to my stress-out, really-was that I would come in-we were on flex hour
time [although the computer limited the amount of flex time]. And what
I started doing was, I'd be there at seven o'clock in the morning and
I'd stay there until five or after five at night. To me, when I
stretched it out a little bit, I was basically doing the same amount
of work, but I didn't feel as pressured in as short a period of
time. So to me, I'd come in and I'd pre-process a bunch of claims
before I'd actually get on the system in the mornings. And I'd do my
work and then at the end of the day I'd do that extra few more claims,
just put in a little bit more before the end of the day so that I'd be
sure that I'd have my quota for the day.
          Like I said, I didn't fluctuate wildly; I was consistent about the
number of claims that I paid per day or the number of work units that
I did per day so that at the end of the six- month period I didn't
have to try to play catch-up. I tried to consistently do the same
amount each day. So at the end of the day I'd throw in a few more, for
good measure, basically, just to make sure I wasn't going to lose my
salary when the six-month review came around.
          So that was one of my coping devices; like I said, I don't know if
it helped things at all. It just felt to me like I was relieved a
little bit more. But then again, I was spending an extra hour or more
a day in this stress-out situation. So I really don't think it helped,
although it seemed to psychologically make me feel a little bit better
that I wasn't so wired when I was there.
          
            Rebecca Sharpless is a student at Emory University's Graduate Institute of the Liberal Arts.
          
        
      
    
  
