
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 10, Number 6,
	       1988
        
          Principle, Conviction and Fate in the Remarkable Career of Judge
Elbert Tuttle
          By Steverson, BillBill Steverson
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, pp. 11-14
          
          One of Elbert Tuttle's earliest memories, aside from the
assassination of President McKinley in 1901, is of a black woman
standing at a trolley stop outside his parents' house in Washington,
D.C., near the turn of the century.
          While he and his mother watched from their window, several
trolleys, driven by white men, passed but failed to stop for the
woman, although she signaled for each one.
          Tuttle remembers that his mother became so angry that she finally
went out to the woman, stood with her on the curb and waited for the
next trolley. When it came, she signaled for it to stop, helped the
black woman on board, and with a few choice words to the driver, made
sure that the woman would be taken to her desired destination.
          Much has been written about the brilliant judicial career of Elbert
Tuttle, who with his fellow Fifth Circuit judges and a handful of
equally strong District Court judges, made the federal courts the
primary instrument of progress toward civil rights in the late 1950s
and 1960s. Less well-known are Tuttle's youth and his law career prior
to being appointed to the Fifth Circuit in 1954. Instances like those
mentioned above, together with the vivid stories his mother told him
about his grandfather's imprisonment in the infamous Andersonville
Prison while a Union soldier during the Civil War (a horror that broke
his grandfather's health and led to his early death), made a strong
impression on young Tuttle, and perhaps provide clues to his later
years as Senior Judge on the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals
(formerly the Fifth Circuit).
          Tuttle's is a career steeped in the post-Civil War ethic of the
Republican Party and one that had some strange and coincidental turns
of fate.
          For example, had not Tuttle and his brother-in-law, William
Sutherland, concluded that Atlanta was slightly cooler in the summer
than Dallas, the two probably would have established their law
practice in Texas rather than Georgia. And had Tuttle not lived
several years of his youth in Hawaii during a time when virtually
every white person in that future state embraced the Republican Party
and its tariff protection for sugar growers, he perhaps would have
never become a leader of the Republican Party in Georgia, thus setting
the stage for President Eisenhower to appoint him to the federal
bench.
          And, though he now laughs at the story, Tuttle came close-very
close-to going down in history as the person who first formally
suggested the name of Richard Nixon as the Republican vice
presidential nominee in 1952.
          At 91, Tuttle is still active on the Eleventh Circuit Court of
Appeals in Atlanta. Although his caseload has eased since he took
Senior Judge status, he still shows little sign of retiring, despite
the urgings of his wife, Sara, who has been at his side for almost
seven decades.
          Behind his desk are two autographed photographs of Dwight
Eisenhower, and he makes no secret of his long admiration of the
president who appointed him to the bench. "You know," he
volunteers, "It was during Eisenhower's administration that the
first Civil Rights bill was passed."
          Born in California on July 17, 1897, Tuttle moved with his parents
and older brother to Washington while still a small child. It was
there, he says, that he first remembers his Mother's stories about the
South, and of her father's inhumane treatment in a Confederate
prison. "She was very bitter towards the South. She had strong
feelings about it," he said.
          After several years in Washington, his family moved to Hawaii,
where his father worked for the Hawaii Sugar Planters' Association. He
and his brother attended the multi-racial Punaho School (founded by
missionaries). But aside from his contact with Hawaiian and Asian
children in school, Tuttle remembers that his family, like all white
families on the island, had little contact with the local
population.
          By the time he had finished high school, Tuttle had already decided
on a career in law. He also remembers that he had become entrenched in
the Republican Party.
          "It was just natural," he says. On his Mother's side, the
Republican Party was still the party of Lincoln and Emancipation. On
his Father's side, it was the party of the Hawaii business community,
and the fledgling statehood movement.
          Tuttle attended Cornell University, and as an undergraduate he met
William Sutherland, who was attending law school at Harvard. They
decided that once they both finished law school, they would establish
a practice together. Sutherland also became Tuttle's brother-in-law
around that time.
          After a short stint in the Army Air Force near the end of World War
I, Tuttle and Sutherland were ready to set up 

their practice.
          "We were looking for a city away from New York or Washington
that was going to grow," he said, "a city that would have
branch offices of the big Fortune 500 companies that would need legal
services."
          So they studied a map of the United States and narrowed their
choices to Atlanta and Dallas. "Those were the days before air
conditioning, and we decided that in the summer, Atlanta would
probably be a little bit cooler than Dallas," he said. "so we
chose Atlanta."
          "I had absorbed a lot of my mother's feelings about how wrong
the Southern states were to attempt to leave the Union and their
support of slavery. I had a rather strong feeling about the treatment
in the South of black people. That didn't cause me to feel that I
didn't want to live in the South. As a matter of fact, I started
fairly soon after I got there identifying myself with some efforts to
ameliorate the conditions of the black people I ran into."
          The first such experience, occurring soon after Tuttle's arrival in
Atlanta, was frightening. With his service as an officer in the Army
during World War I (and he would later have an heroic career in the
Army during World War II), Tuttle applied for a commission in the
Georgia National Guard, and was given the rank of major.
          One night in 1931 he was telephoned by the State's Adjutant General
about a "near riot" in Elbert County,
Georgia. "He wanted me to come by his office and pick up some
(tear) gas grenades and take them over there and see if I could stop
this riot."  He said, "I've called the Elbert County unit [of
the National Guard] on active duty and they are trying to protect
these people. The mob is overrunning the sheriff's house and thejail
is upstairs over the sheriff's house.' I said, 'I've never seen
a gas grenade.' He said, 'Well, you'll know how to handle
it.'
          "I came down (to the Atlanta Armory) and got a friend of
mine. We went tearing over to Elbert County, about sixty five miles
from here. We got in just at dusk, just as the sun went down. We
pulled up in front of the sheriff's house and here was a mob yelling
and hollering out in front of the cellar. Obviously they were trying
to get in...I pulled the plug out of the gas grenade and threw it over
from this automobile. I threw it in front of the mob and they backed
up a little bit from the gas."
          "We walked on into the house, my friend and I. I was in
uniform. I went on to the back of the house and ran into some concrete
stairs upstairs to the cell block. Just as I came up to it, there was
a burst of machine gun fire that came down the stairs. I realized that
one of our people was sitting up at the top of the stairs and he would
turn loose a burst of machine gun fire every few minutes to keep the
mob from coming.
          "He'd saved these two black prisoners. They were after two
prisoners. They didn't know which, if either of them, had committed
the crime [the charge was rape of a white woman]. So we gradually
tried to push the crowd out of the house. Finally I called for more
help from Atlanta and they sent another company of National Guardsmen
with rifles and bayonets attached. As we gradually pushed them out, we
put these black prisoners in National Guard uniforms and got them in
trucks and brought them back to Atlanta."
          Tuttle is convinced that had his National Guard troops not hurried
the two black prisoners away in the dark of the night, the mob would
have lynched them. "You can't stop a mob with a machine
gun. Everybody knows you are not going to turn a machine gun on the
mob. Those were the only arms we had. When I got the company up there
with rifles and bayonets on them, that was a whole lot different. No
one wants to get in front of that bayonet. They gradually got the
prisoners out. It was pretty violent."
          But Tuttle's involvement that strange night with John Downer, the
prisoner accused of rape, didn't end there. Downer was convicted and
sentenced to death, but one day while walking down an hallway at the
Fulton County Courthouse, Tuttle was approached by one of Downer's
defense lawyers who asked him to help in filing an appeal.

That appeal reached the Supreme Court and resulted in Downer being
retried.
          "I just recognized that this man had been convicted and
sentenced to death without due process of law," he said. "There
was no way you could justify it. As I say, in Georgia at that time if
a black person was ever charged by a white woman of rape, no grand
jury would ever fail to indict him. If he's indicted, no member of the
jury would ever think of voting to acquit him. As long as a white
woman was going to testify against him, he was as good as dead the
minute he was arrested." The appeal resulted in a second trial, in
which Downer was also found guilty. He was executed, although he
protested his innocence to the end.
          The appeal was based on the fact that the first trial had been
conducted under mob control. While the Supreme Court had ruled several
years earlier in the Leo Frank case that if a trial is held under the
threat of mob violence, the defendant is denied due process, the
Downer case was still viewed as an important step in the march towards
civil rights in the courts for blacks.
          Because of that trial, Tuttle says modestly, "I got a reputation
of sorts around here. The black community apparently took some notice
of it. Some of the black leaders recognized that here was a white
lawyer in Atlanta who would be willing to fight the battle of an
impoverished black field hand. Shortly after that I was asked to go on
the Board of Trustees at Spellman College and then Morehouse and
Atlanta University. I served on those boards somewhere in the middle
of the Thirties right on down for about twenty years."
          Two other cases also served notice that Elbert Tuttle wasn't afraid
to take on the legal and social establishment when basic human rights
were at stake.
          In a case involving a Marine accused of passing counterfeit money,
Tuttle filed an appeal that resulted in the Supreme Court ruling that
an indigent accused of a federal felony is entitled to legal
representation. That decision came more than a quarter century before
other Supreme Court rulings applied the same rights to defendants in
state courts.
          In another case, Tuttle played an important role in getting the
Supreme Court to uphold the First Amendment rights of a communist
activist, Angelo Herndon. "He was a black communist who came down
from New York to agitate in the South trying to persuade the
subordinated black people to join the Communist Party and separate
from the United States. He was making speeches around. He was reading
some literature off the courthouse steps when he was arrested.  He was
arrested and convicted under a Georgia statute that says any person
who directly or indirectly incites to insurrection shall be guilty
(and sentenced) to death or not more than twenty years. Fortunately he
wasn't sentenced to death, but he was sentenced to twenty years in a
Georgia chain gang."
          Two or three years later, Tuttle and his law partner, William
Sutherland, joined New York lawyer Whitney North Seymour in filing an
appeal to the Supreme Court, which ruled that the Georgia statute was
unconstitutional.
          "We got some adverse criticism for that," Tuttle
said. "People said, Well, if he's a communist he ought to be in
jail."
          "As a matter of fact, it wasn't a crime to be a communist in
those days. Congress tried to make it a crime, but they didn't
succeed."
          But even then, Tuttle said he didn't feel ostracized by Atlanta's
white community. "I guess part of that was due to the fact that I
was not a Southerner by birth or origin and I guess they didn't expect
anything better from me."
          Throughout his legal practice, Tuttle played increasingly important
roles in the Republican Party.
          "The Republican Party in those days consisted of three
groups. One group was the black citizens who wanted to be active in
politics, who could not participate in the Democratic Party because it
was the white Democratic Party. By statute it was a white Democratic
Party. They could not participate. Also they recognized the Republican
Party as the party of Lincoln."
          "Another group was those of us who had grown up in Republican
parts of the country and other Republican principals who had moved to
Atlanta. We continued to think that the Republican Party was certainly
best in the State of Georgia."
          "A third group was what we called the 'Post Office
Republicans.' That was the group that when the national
conventions were held would organize a group to go to the national
convention. If their man was nominated and elected, then they would
dispense with all the patronage. Those were the Post Office
Republicans."
          "I recognized the frailties of this kind of a situation because
really we were trying to carry water on both shoulders. We were trying
to create a new local party that was pure and undefiled in many
ways. We knew full well what had happened once the Post Office
Republicans prevailed. We knew that the great majority of the people
of Georgia were in favor of white supremacy forever and didn't want to
have anything to do with any black people who wanted to be active in
politics. Their whole social and political philosophy was to keep the
black people without a vote. That was what I came into."
          In 1948, Tuttle had risen high enough within the Georgia Republican
Party to be selected to attend the party's convention in Philadelphia,
at which Thomas Dewey was nominated. And in 1952, he attended the
Republican convention as chairman of the Fulton County delegation, and
was firmly in the Eisenhower camp.
          "While I didn't think that Eisenhower would be an ideal
president because I didn't think he had a sufficient knowledge of
American politics, I realized that most of his work as Supreme
Commander had been political rather than military. After all, his main
job was making people work together. I don't know if he ever heard a
gun fired during the Second World War. I guess he did, but that wasn't
his principal job."
          Tuttle's leadership of the Fulton County delegation was
instrumental in giving Eisenhower the majority of delegate votes from
Georgia, and that was important to his nomination. "As a result,
here I am as a federal judge," he laughs.
          His role at the convention also got him chosen to be part of a
small smoke-filled room crowd that selected Richard Nixon as
Eisenhower's running mate.
          "After Eisenhower was nominated, I think about twenty of us were
called on to go into the smoke-filled room to pick 

the vice-president,
and of course we all assumed that Eisenhower would make it known who
he wanted."
          "John Wisdom [a prominent Louisiana attorney who later served
with Tuttle on the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals, also playing a
pivotal role during the court's civil rights period] and I were both
included in that group of twenty because both of us had been leaders
of delegations that were responsible for Eisenhower's nomination on
the first ballot. As we went into the room General Lucius Clay, who
was General Eisenhower's closest friend in the military tapped me on
the shoulder and said, 'if nobody puts in the name of Richard Nixon,
will you put his name in?' I said, 'Yes, I'll be glad to.' But
fortunately I didn't have to. Someone else did."
          In the general election, Tuttle was responsible for arranging an
Eisenhower campaign visit to Atlanta. "Eisenhower made his first
campaign speech in Hurt Park here in Atlanta. We had to hold it there
because it would be against the law in Georgia for blacks and whites
in the convention hall. So we had to have it outdoors. That was still
a crime, a misdemeanor, for blacks and whites to meet together in
Georgia."
          "When Nixon ran for President, he sort of embraced the Southern
strategy which involved the George Wallace strategy. He alienated all
the blacks at that time. Some of the former Republicans have never
voted again for a Republican candidate for the Presidency. I won't
comment about my own position because I shouldn't. I, of course, took
the veil in politics when I went on the court."
          "The fact is that the New Deal was a great financial and
economic benefit to the underprivileged in our society. The black
communities in the South were large representatives in that
underprivileged community. They would have been ungrateful if they
hadn't recognized what the Democratic Party nationally had done for
them economically. In spite of the fact that they might well have
remembered that just a year or two or three before the Democratic
Party in this state had excluded them."
          After Eisenhower's election, Tuttle became general counsel for the
Treasury Department, and stayed in that post until August 1954 when he
joined the Fifth Circuit.
          Did he know at that time that the Fifth Circuit Court would play
such an important role in reshaping the civil and social structure of
the South? "I couldn't help but know that," he said. "Of
course, the Supreme Court had just decided the Brown case, the first
Brown decision, and when I told my colleagues up there (in Washington)
that I was going back to go on the Fifth Circuit they said, 'You
haven't seen what the Supreme Court did recently.'"
          "I said, 'Well, the Southern states will fall in line.' I
believed it because I was aware of the fact that the people of the
United States generally had accepted the Supreme Court's edicts as
being binding on everybody and there wasn't much use in fighting
against the odds. Once the Court had spoken, that was it."
          
            An Alabama native, Bill Steverson is a
writer and editor in Signal Mountain, Tenn.
          
        
        
          Southern Documentary to Air Nationally
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, pp. 21-22
          
          "A Singing Stream: A Black Family Chronicle"--the first film to
trace twentieth century African-American history through the musical
traditions of one family--will be shown nationally on public
television at 10 p.m. EST on Feb. 12, 1989. (Broadcast times may vary
from station to station; check local listings.)
          "A Singing Stream" presents the Landis family of rural Granville
County, North Carolina, and examines the cultural resources with which
this black family faced the enormous changes of the twentieth century
South. Co-produced by independent filmmaker Tom Davenport, Southern
Changes editor Allen Tullos, and Daniel W. Patterson of the Curriculum
in Folklore at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, "A
Singing Stream" is a feature presentation of Black History Month on
public television.
          In the lifetime of Bertha Landis (born in 1898), the woman who
becomes the film's central subject, her family has experienced small
farming (as tenants and as landholders), racial discrimination in the
Jim Crow era, northern migration, post-World War II industrialization
and the currents of modernization, the transformation of the
agricultural economy, the Civil Rights Movement, return migration, and
a grandchildren's generation of expectations.
          "A Singing Stream" features a wide variety of musical performances
by a family whose repertory includes black religious song styles
ranging from nineteenth century spirituals, to unaccompanied
shape-note singing, to "jubilee" style performances, to contemporary
gospel. Featured in the film are The Golden Echoes, a male gospel
group that includes three members of the Landis family. "A Singing
Stream" explores the relationship between the music the family creates
and the family's history.
          The hour-long documentary seeks to show how singing at church, in
gospel concerts, at the annual family reunion, and in their "home
house" has served four generations of Landises.
          In her eighties during the years in which "A Singing Stream" was in
production, Bertha Landis remained active and articulate,
participating in community, school, and church affairs, writing a
regular column of neighborhood news for the local paper, and offering
her musical observations to the newly-forming groups of her
grandchildren's generation.
          Mother to eleven children and grandmother to nineteen, Mrs. Landis
regards singing as a having been a powerful force in disciplining,
motivating, and uniting her family. Highly conscious of the musical
gifts of her family, she speaks of a "singing stream" which flowed
from her parents through her into her children and
grandchildren. Landis family singers have reached a high level of
musicianship in church and gospel singing, feeding a thriving
performance tradition in this part of the Carolinas that sits between
the Piedmont and the Coastal Plain.
          In San Francisco this past summer "A Singing Stream" won one of
television's highest awards, first place in the independent
productions category of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting Local
Programs Awards, winning over 

nominees from WGBH in Boston and WNET in
New York. For further information on the February showing of "A
Singing Stream," or to inquire about rental or purchase of video or
16mm copies of the film, contact Davenport Films, Rt. 1, Box 527,
Delaplane, VA 22025. Major support for "A Singing Stream" was provided
by grants from the National Endowment for the Arts, the American Film
Institute, and the North Carolina Arts Council. The Southern Regional
Council acted as fiscal agent for the production.
        
        
          Initiatives in Southern Education
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, pp. 15-18
          
          After almost a decade of reform, education in America remains a
significant state and national issue. The United States Department of
Education now releases a yearly report card comparing general
educational achievements for each of the states. Legions of private
national commissions and task forces continue to study education
problems, issuing a variety of recommendations. After adopting
education reforms, many states continue to implement them, with and
without changes in their original plans. New approaches, such as the
"effective school" movement and the "essential school" reforms have
entered our professional vocabulary and some schoolhouse doors.
          These reforms have been sustained by an enlarging awareness of the
central importance of education in the nation's future. For the first
time in decades, leaders of the public and private sectors throughout
the country understand that improving education--including the
education of the disadvantaged--is necessary to safeguarding our
national future. Through a variety of programs, community leaders,
business executives, and labor leaders have become more involved in
public schools because their institutions have a stake in the success
of the education system; they now realize that, without educated poor
and minority students, America cannot have an educated workforce in
the future.
          In the American South, especially, these cooperative efforts signal
a new era in the region's development. For almost 30 years after the
United States Supreme Court's 

decision in Brown
v. Board of Education, issues of school integration suspended
most meaningful, local collaboration on education. Throughout the
South, massive white resistance to integration and the accompanying
divisions between blacks and whites immobilized local cooperative
activities, leaving the design of policy and problem-solving in
education most often to the federal government and courts. Today, this
history of local inactivity and neglect in education is coming, at
long last, to an end.
          The local control of public schools, especially in the urban South,
is more democratic today than it has ever been in this century,
primarily due to the Voting Rights Act. As a result, minority and poor
voters have a real voice, often a controlling one, in determining who
sits on the school boards and who decided the local policies for
education.
          This change in local control of schools now allows minorities and
the poor in the region to engage others in real, local partnerships
for solving problems of education instead of depending almost
exclusively on the long enforcement arm of the federal government.
          Today, community leaders, including many business leaders, now see
more clearly than ever before both the community interest and their
own institutional selfinterest in a well educated future workforce
that includes minorities. Almost every community leaders in the
South's urban areas acknowledges the importance of addressing the
education of minority and disadvantaged students. Their own
willingness in recent years to become involved in local schools and
local partnerships in the schools is clear evidence of this changed
circumstance.
          State governments are also beginning to recognize that the needs of
disadvantaged students is the large unsolved issue of education. In
all Southern states dropout rates have alarmed even the most seasoned
educators and in some Southern states that require exit exams, teat
scores clearly evidence that those who are failing to achieve are
primarily poor and minorities. As a result, education departments in
most Southern states have begun to take their first serious steps in
establishing program and policies to face these issues. (See SLRC
Bulletin, 1988.) While their work and thinking continue
to take shape, the issues of education of the disadvantaged are
emerging as a major concern for Southern states.
          Finally, the role of the federal government is also changing. For
the first time in ten years the Congress passed and the President
signed legislation which returns attention and resources to the issues
of educating the disadvantaged. For example, the new education
legislation provides in 1988-1989 $50 million for dropout prevention;
$30 million in an "improvement fund" to encourage local schools to
develop new approaches to problems especially those involving parents
in the schools; a new basic skills program for high school students
has been authorized at $200 million; and states will be required to
use a portion of their block grants for education to help local school
districts develop measurable characteristics to make schools more
effective for all pupils.
          These are encouraging trends, but they ought not blur the fact that
the problems of education for poor and minority youth persist in the
South. Oversized rates for dropouts linger, primarily among minority,
poor youth; test scores for comprehension, reading, and math remain
dismally low for poor students. For example, more than 40 percent of
students receiving free lunches in Mississippi schools failed
state-mandated tests last year. Not surprising, many minority and poor
students continue to forego college and technical schools. At a time
when education is recognized as a national priority and when the
involvement of community and business leaders in schools have become
widespread, the performance of poor and minority children is
education's moat significant failure.
          While improving education is universally supported, improving the
public schools is not. In the South segregation academies and other
private schools are growing, too often at the expense of the children
in public schools. This trend not only frustrates the integration of
public schools in many places but also drains resources and support
from the need to educate well all our children.
          The problems in the South's public schools derive, in large part,
from social and economic factors that go far beyond the capacity of
any one individual school. The fact that poverty is the most reliable,
single predictor of poor academic performance underscores that schools
alone cannot remove all barriers for disadvantaged students. At the
same time, schools and community leaders are not helpless to do much
more in addressing these problems. In the past, many school boards and
city officials have failed to make the education of disadvantaged
children one of its highest priorities in the allocation of resources
and talent. Some local school systems have not targeted poor and
minority students for additional, available resources such as
counseling and tutoring. Many school systems have responded far more
urgently to the state standards of education reform than they have to
the local needs of disadvantaged students in each of their schools.
          By the same measure, many of the cooperative activities that
parents and community leaders have undertaken at the schools have
little to do with such fundamental problems. Far too often, local
leaders in business, labor, and community work have participated in
what the chairman of the board of Xerox Corporation described as "feel
good" partnerships. "Business and education have largely failed in
the their partnerships to improve the schools ... because they keep
shoring up a system that needs deep structural changes," he
stated. To be sure, the opportunity to solve locally in the South the
problems of educating an children is now re-emerging. What has not yet
appeared is a certain and sustained collective will to make
fundamental changes in the way we focus our resources and educate all
our children. That challenge is now before the South.
          
            Dropout Prevention Project
          
          In the summer of 1986, the Southern Regional Council conferred with
groups and school officials in a dozen urban areas across the region
to determine if their communities and school systems were interested
and capable of establishing local partnerships to develop and carry
out a plan for addressing the problems of students dropping out of the
public schools. By the end of 1986, community/school groups had been
formed in six cities: Atlanta; Baton Rouge Louisiana; Columbia, South
Carolina; Little Rock, Arkansas; Memphis, Tennessee; and Savannah,
Georgia. These 

local collaboratives received small grants from the
Ford Foundation for planning activities.
          During the last two years each of these local collaboratives has
sought to understand the causes and factors of dropouts in their own
communities as well as the available services--in the schools and in
the communities--currently offered to prevent and assist
dropouts. More recently, the local groups developed local plans which
describe their collective judgment about what needs to be done locally
to prevent dropouts in the future.
          Each collaborative has had some difficulty in making choices, in
establishing a sense of priority among the different possible
approaches. Although they came to a rather easy agreement on the local
factors of dropout, all of them were of more than one mind in deciding
exactly what changes will be most effective and most appropriate. The
process understandably developed a far greater sense of informed will
to act than of collective judgment on precisely how to act.
          The plans and analysis of each community are quite different, but
they do have similarities. At least four school systems--Atlanta,
Memphis, Columbia, and Savannah--revised their own definitions of
dropouts and the procedures by which they collect internal data as a
result of the collaboratives' deliberations. In these systems, the
changes represent substantial revisions in school policies and
practices. In a fifth school system, Baton Rouge, the collaborative
documented a very high rate of suspensions and expulsions as a result
of administrative practices.
          Not surprising, virtually all the collaboratives call for extensive
administrative changes in identifying, documenting, and tracking
dropouts and potential dropouts. In Columbia, the plan calls for the
development of an extensive internal database by which the school
system can locate students who are showing the early signs of dropping
out. Most collaboratives call for revising suspension, expulsion, or
attendance policies.
          Without exception, poor classroom performance and classroom boredom
were identified by the collaborative as one of the major reasons
students drop out of school. In Memphis, the collaborative found a
strong correlation between dropouts and a history of falling behind in
grades. In Savannah, the most cited factors for dropouts were failing
grades and boredom. The other collaboratives came to similar
conclusions. As a result, most of the collaboratives are encouraging
schools to revise curriculum or classroom activities in different
ways. Columbia, for example, proposes additional teacher assistance
and tutorials. Atlanta proposes an approach of "esteem building" and
new curricula. Memphis is suggesting a pilot program including new
teaching materials and a special curriculum.
          In-school training is also being planned by the
collaboratives. Memphis envisions an "awareness" campaign about
dropout problems within the schools. Columbia and Atlanta are looking
for additional counselors and social workers to be available for all
grades (an approach intimated for the future by the Memphis proposed
pilot program as well). Little Rock already has carried out a retreat
for school counselors on dropouts and intends to do more in this
direction.
          All the local collaboratives included improving, coordinating, or
starting out-of-school programs as part of their dropout prevention
plan. For instance, Savannah and Atlanta stressed parental
involvement; the Columbia and Memphis plans include publicity
campaigns for the general public; and all the collaboratives' plane
involve programs for jobs or pregnancy counseling.
          With the plane established, the Council's work nowadays is to
provide technical assistance to the collaboratives, particularly
assuring that community and parental representatives of blacks and the
poor maintain an active partnership in the work to implement the
plane. We are also assisting in developing and using tools of
assessment and evaluation for local efforts and aiding the
collaborative, its leadership, and staff in handling the ongoing
problems of structures and personalities.
          The importance of these local efforts is as much in their process
as in their products. The local collaboratives have been able to set
in motion developments within the school systems which probably would
not have taken place without their work. In this respect, the
collaboratives' future can be reflected only in part in their plane
and proposals. While their analysis and plane have merit, their
strength and their future role reside primarily in the process of
community involvement which they have already begun and hopefully will
continue.
          
            School Accountability Project
          
          The Southern Regional Council is also beginning a program to
promote school-based accountability for improving the education of all
students in the middle grades, in five or six other sites in the urban
South. In several carefully selected communities, the Council will
work with a local community-based organization (or coalition of such
organizations) to build partnerships of local business, community, and
labor leaders in association with local school officials, parents, and
teachers to assess how well the schools of the middle grades are
meeting the needs of its students who are falling behind. These local
partnerships will work to improve the quality of involvement in the
task of improving the performance of disadvantaged students in the
middle grades of local schools. Hopefully, they will establish a new
system of accountability by which local educational systems determine
how well each school is meeting the needs of its students at risk of
failure; and determine what changes in resources, activities, and
policies are needed to assist each school in meeting the needs of
these students.
          To help achieve these goals, the Council is establishing an
advisory board composed of educators, parents, and community leaders
active in the field of education. The board will help select the site
for local work; provide general advice and guidance to the project;
and assist in disseminating information about this approach to
improving accountability and performance in education for
disadvantaged 

students.
          The project focuses on the middle grades both because of the need
to limit the number of schools involved in the program (to assure a
manageable lot) and because of the importance of the adolescent years
in determining a student's success and ambitions. Any program designed
to effect systemic change in the way schools treat and educate
disadvantaged youth is well-served by concentrating on the middle
grades, and this program has such a focus.
          Like our dropout project, this program focuses on creating a local
coalition of concern and activity to help educate the students who are
falling behind. It differs by concentrating on the middle grades, and
particularly, local schools within an educational system. Both,
nonetheless, are attempts to find ways to mobilize local communities
to address the problems of educating well all of their children in the
public schools.
        
        
          Looking Back . . . SRC and the Nation
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, p. 15
          
          In 1919 the Commission on Interracial Cooperation was
started. Thirty-five years later the Commission was reorganized as the
Southern Regional Council. Over the past seven decades, Southerners of
good will have worked as one within these organizations to achieve a
better place to live.
          Some of the organization's most important accomplishments during
these decades include:
Helping to end lynchings in the South;The first network of biracial state councils in the South
providing the major support for public schools for all children;Documenting the need for the first federal executive order
barring racial discrimination;Documenting the need for the first federal civil rights act in
this century;Helping to register more than two million black voters in the
South;Research prompting federal intervention to protect the lives
and safety of civil rights workers in the 195Os and'60s;A Citizens' Board of Inquiry into poverty and hunger--work
credited with spurring the first national anti-hunger legislation;Planting the seeds of an integrated cooperative farmers
movement in the 1960s and 1970s;A Southwide governmental monitoring project that documented
the failures of the Nixon Administration's "New federalism;"A model demonstration project that successfully placed more
than 400 black women in managerial positions in the South. This
project later became a major initiative in the federal government
labor programs;A task force on Southern rural development offering a
blueprint for a national rural policy;Research in the 1970s that led to the adoption of the first
nationwide affirmative action plan in the U. S. courts;Helping to bring more democratic governments to almost a
thousand jurisdictions across the South.
        
        
          A 1988 Report from the Southern Regional Council
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, pp. 14-15
          
          EDITORS'NOTE: The following material is excerpted from
the 1988 Annual Report of the Southern Regional Council.  The report
outlines past and present activities of the SRC in five key areas:
voting rights, labor and the workplace, civil and criminal justice,
education, and information and the exchange of ideas. The report is
sent to SRC members and associate members. Others may obtain a copy by
writing to Steve Suitts, executive director, SRC, 60 Walton Street,
NW, Atlanta, GA 30303. Membership information for joining the Council
is found on page 23 of this issue of Southern
Changes.
          For more than four decades the Southern Regional Council has
promoted democracy and opportunity for all people of the South and
beyond. The Council's staff carries out research, provides technical
assistance, develops educational and experimental programs, and brings
together Southerners of good will to address important regional
issues. We seek to engage both public policy and personal
conscience.
          Through its 120 members and a small staff, the Council has become
perhaps the nation's premier regional organization. No group knows a
region better nor has been more consistently effective in it. The
Council is the South's oldest interracial organization. SRC members
usually include major public officials, college presidents and noted
educators, labor and business leaders, community organizers, civil
rights leaders, and others. As a Council of local, state, regional,
and national leaders--men and women, black, Hispanic and white--who
live across eleven Southern states, the organization keeps up-to-date
on changing problems and opportunities. Over time, SRC has developed
several institutional strengths accounting for its longevity and
effectiveness. These strengths emanate from:
          * our capacity for data collection and analysis, aided by
developing accessible technologies;
          * our network of diverse leaders and activists who help to identify
issues, opportunities, and trends and to understand practically how to
address these in the region;
          * our ability to focus public attention and media coverage in the
South on issues and developments;
          * our understanding of decision-making processes and how
information actually shapes and influences those decisions;
          * our institutional memory about the region, its people, and its
places.
          Before the Southern Regional Council moved from its former
headquarters at 5 Forsyth Street in Atlanta, Gunnar Myrdal revisited
some of the organizations then still occupying the old structure,
which was slated to be torn down. "This," Myrdal told a
New York Times reporter, "is where it all
began." "Where what began?" he was asked. "Why the New
South, young man," he replied, "the brand 

new American South."
          The opinions of others echoed the same sentiment. Newspaperman
Ralph McGill (one of SRC's founders) said, "I think of that old
wreck as a sanctuary for renegades who insist on telling the
truth."
          "Sooner or later," Julian Bond said, "the people who work
there figure in most of what is important to the South and much of
what is important to the nation."
          Of course, not everyone agreed: "The whole place is crawling
with subversives," charged former segregationist governor Lester
Maddox.
          "As a result of their efforts," the Times
concluded, "schools and a variety of other institutions have been
integrated, a million black people registered to vote, elections won
and lost, white politicians tempered, and popular racial traditions
challenged and changed."
          Many of the Council's original objectives have been achieved, but
its work continues to be vital to the South and the nation. Indeed,
the very achievement of many goals has had the ironic effect of
disguising new ways in which opportunities are blunted, the
disadvantaged abused, and democracy denied.
          Now, as in the past, the Council's teak is to provide research,
information, and technical assistance to individuals and groups who
are able to bring positive change, and to provide forums for
Southerners of good will to think and act together.
          In a new era aptly called the "Age of Information," the Council is
uniquely suited to help shape the region's future--and the
nation's--for the better.
        
        
          Radio Series Showcases Mississippi Blues
          By Nossiter, AdamAdam Nossiter
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, p. 20
          
          This is how Lee Andrew "Cotton" Howell, 72-year-old ex-sharecropper
and small-time bluesman from Holly Springs, Miss., describes the birth
of a blues song, in a new public radio series:
"Id just play. Make up something, and sing to it. Just the sound
with the music. That's the way they was made up, back in them
days."
          Howell is expressing in words what this new series graphically
demonstrates. For the blues musician of the country juke joint and the
fish fry like Howell, the line between everyday speech and the
sing-speech of the blues was a fine one. Rhythms and phrases of
everyday speech, with the help of harmonica and guitar, became
song.
          In "The Original Down Home Blues Show," a new series of radio
documentaries about the works and days of country blues singers, we
hear how close are the speech patterns of rural Southern blacks like
Howell to their music.
          The twenty-four shows consist of interviews with ten bluesmen from
north-central Mississippi, punctuated by recordings of famous players
the bluesmen listened to and idealized in years peat, as well as with
their own efforts. The programs were produced with the help of the
Blues Archive at the University of Mississippi, a branch of the
university's library. The archive is the largest collection in the
world of blues recordings and documentary material about the blues.
          Broadcast already on fifteen public radio stations around the
country this year, nineteen more are elated to air the program, said
one of the show's producers, Craig Koon. He is talking to potential
underwriters in order to distribute it free to all 347 public radio
stations.
          The interviewer on the programs is the research associate of the
Blues Archive, a Swiss-born blues artist named Walter Liniger who
plays harmonica for well-known bluesman Son Thomas.
          Liniger'a aim wee to cull memories of work and social conditions
from rural Mississippi blacks, so in these programs he deliberately
stayed away from blues musicians like Thomas who have achieved
renown. Conscious of the exploitation rural musicians have suffered at
the hands of eager Ph.D. candidates, Liniger instated on paying
them.
          His artists do not, for the moat part, have memories of standing in
recording studios. Their music is considerably rougher and more
uncultivated than those who do. Moat are like 76-year-old Stonewall
Maya, who spent much of his life milking cows: "Back in them days,
they'd give a little fish fry," May remembers. "I'd play
guitar. And man--we'd get things going!"
          Even more compelling than the memories of life on the white man's
plantations--which have, after all, been gathered elsewhere--is the
language of the old bluesmen.
          It is the poetic language of the songs, delivered without
accompaniment: "I come up the hard way. Didn't have no shoes on my
feet...Didn't have no mama or daddy. Just out there by myself,"
remembers Wilburt Lee Reliford, a blind harmonica player who once
played with Howlin' Wolf.
          The language in that reminiscence is both figurative and literal:
the absence of shoes summarizing succinctly a childhood of hardship
and deprivation; "out there by myself" abstracting the loneliness of
an orphaned youth.
          He lost his eyesight at an early age, Reliford remembers, and
"cried for about ten years." This is the semi-exaggeration of
song. Eyesight is valuable, he explains, because you can see things
before they get to you."
          Reliford, 62, still plays a powerful speaking harmonica--which he
keeps in a brown paper bag, according to Liniger.
          Famous blues artists like Big Bill Broonzy, Sonny Boy Williamaon,
and T Bone Walker do make musical appearances in the show. Liniger
asked his interview subjects to choose the music they listened to in
their youth. That music, pulled from the Blues Archive, helped bring
to the surface their memories of life forty and fifty years ago.
          Liniger, an intense blues enthusiast who says he reamed much of his
English listening to blues records, wee searching for the "subjective
remembering of facts" the musical memories would stir.
          Sometimes, the music is a direct reflection of those memories. In
the interviews, Howell, Mays, and Reliford talk about getting behind a
plow at the age of six, going without shoes, the ravages of the boll
weevil, and the hard times during the Depression. Then we hear Charley
Patton singing the "Mississippi Boll Weevil Blues," or Sonny Boy
Williamson plaintively pleading that he not be "sent down to that
welfare store."
          "We have a blues archive here," explained Liniger in the
cavernous room at Ole Miss which houses, among other things,
B.B. King's record collection.
          But what we actually have is a documentation of the
industry. What we don't have is field recordings documenting the
region we're in."
          That region provided a harsh livelihood for these old men: "It
was pretty rough," remembers Howell; "It wasn't easy at
all," says Mays. And yet they remember their lives with a
surprising absence of bitterness. Their life reminiscences are spiced
with memories of the things which made life pleasurable: women, fried
pies, even hard work--and above all, the life giving blues.
          "They'd pay a dime to dance. Then they'd dance round and
round," remembers Howell.
          
            Adam Nossiter covers Alabama and Mississippi for the
Atlanta Journal-Constitution. To learn when the series
will be broadcast in your area, or for more information, call Walter
Liniger, Blues Archive, University of Mississippi,
601-232-7753.
          
        
        
          Poverty Rate Climbs Despite Recovery
          By Noe, CindyCindy Noe
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, p. 18
          
          Although the nation is in its fifth year of economic recovery, some
eight million more Americans were poor in 1987--a total of 32.5
million--than in 1978, according to an analysis by the Center on
Budget and Policy Priorities.
          The Center, a Washington-based independent, non-profit research
organization that specializes in the analysis of data and policy
issues affecting low-income Americans, bases its figures on the
recently released Census Bureau data on poverty. The Center found that
the economic recovery has been uneven, according to director Robert
Greenstein, with the poor sharing less fully in the gains than in
prior recoveries, while the most affluent are moving farther ahead.
          An equally disturbing fact found by the Census Bureau wee that
although the employment rate was about the same in 1987 and 1978,
poverty rates were substantially higher in 1987 than in 1978. The
unemployment rate wee 6.2 percent in 1987 compared to 6.1 in 1978. But
the 13.5 percent poverty rate in 1987 was far above the 11.4 percent
poverty rate in 1978. Although more Americans were employed last year
than in 1978, the poverty rate was higher, contrary to peat patterns
when generally poverty rates declined as the unemployment rate
dropped.
          Among racial and ethnic groups the poverty rates rose. Poverty
rates for black Americans climbed significantly in just the last year,
from 31.1 percent in 1986 to 33.1 percent in 1987. This means that one
of every three blacks were living in poverty last year. The number of
poor blacks rose from 700,000 to 9.7 million.
          Poverty rates also rose a full percentage point for Hispanics, from
27.3 percent to 28.2 percent, although the Census Bureau said this
poverty rate increase was not statistically significant. The number of
poor Hispanics rose from 353,000 people to 5.5 million people.
          The largest increase in black poverty rates occurred among married
couples, up 1.9 percent. The poverty rate among female-headed
families, rose at a statistically insignificant rate, according to the
Center's findings. The proportion of poor living in female-headed
families actually decreased from 38 percent in 1978 to 37 percent in
1987.
          According to the Center, the poverty rate for whites dropped from
11 percent to 10.5 percent.
          The Census also found that poverty rates among children of all
races remained far above the levels of the 1970s. Some 13 million
children (under 18) were poor in 1987 compared to 6.9 million in
1978. That's 20.6 percent of all children in 1987 and 15.4 percent in
1978.
          The poverty rate for black children rose from 43.1 percent to 45.8
percent while the poverty rate for Hispanic children climbed from 37.7
percent to 39.8 percent. One of every two black children under age six
were poor in 1987.
          An increase in the number of very poor children occurred among both
black and white children. In both races the number of children falling
below half of the poverty line in 1987 ($4,528 for a family of three)
was more than 50 percent greater than in 1978. An interesting note in
1987 was the increase of white children falling below the poverty line
at 69 percent while 54 percent of black children fell below the
poverty line. The "poorest of the poor" children totaled 5.4 million
in 1987, some 2.2 million more than in 1978.
          The poverty rate for the elderly edged downward in 1987 compared to
1986 for the elderly as a whole, but rose for the black (31 percent to
33.9) and Hispanic (22.5 percent to 27.4 percent) elderly.
          In addition to showing that the poor have grown poorer, the new
Census data show that in 1987 the gap between rich and poor families
hit its widest point in at least forty years.
          The Census data shows that in 1987 the wealthiest 40 percent of
American families received 67.8 percent of the national family income,
the highest percentage ever recorded, while the poorest 40 percent of
families received 15.4 percent of the national family income, which
was one of the lowest percentages ever recorded.
          The 20 percent of American families in the middle of the income
spectrum received 16.9 percent of the national family income, another
of the lowest percentages ever recorded.
          In 1987 income gains were much larger for upper-income families
than for low- and moderate-income families. The income of the typical
family in the bottom 40 percent of all families rose just $57 from
1986 to 1987, after adjusting for inflation. By contrast, the income
of the typical family in the top 40 percent of the population rose
$699 last year, while the income of the typical family in the richest
10 percent of the population grew $1,021.
          The income of the typical family in the poorest 40 percent of
families was $741 lower in 1987 than in 1978, after adjusting for
inflation. By contrast, the income of the typical family in the top 40
percent was $3,031 above 1978 levels, while the income of the typical
family in the top 10 percent was $8,119 above 1978 levels.
          The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities says that some who have
tried to downplay the gravity of the new poverty data have cited
non-cash poverty measures, which' yield lower poverty rates.
        
        
          Aborted Rights in Arkansas
          By Ledbetter, BrownieBrownie Ledbetter
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, pp. 1, 3
          
          In the November elections, Arkansas voters--by a 52 to 48 percent
margin--moved the abortion debate to a new level. The issue in
Arkansas is no longer whether a woman has the right to have an
abortion, but whether she has the right not to have a child.
          Under the guise of a constitutional referendum to restrict state
funding for abortions, Arkansas voters have approved a measure that in
theory requires the state to force women to complete all pregnancies,
even in cases of rape or incest.
          In the words of some of the proponents of the three-part
referendum, rape may indeed be a traumatic experience, but rape or
incest victims should deliver and raise any children that might
result.
          The Arkansas referendum was the third attempt in six years to
eliminate all possibility of abortion (a 1984 "Unborn Child Amendment"
was removed from the ballot by the state's supreme court on the
grounds that the popular name was misleading). In 1988, pro-life
forces collected enough petition signatures to have the issue again
placed on the ballot, described as an amendment to restrict abortion
funding.
          The first section of the amendment prohibits public funding of
abortions except to "save the life of the mother." The second section
calls for the state to "protect the life of every unborn child from
conception until birth to the extent permitted by the federal
constitution." And, the third section declared that contraceptives
would not be affected nor would the state be required to appropriate
any funds.
          Arkansas does not have public funding of abortions, but most voters
were unaware 

of that. Pro-amendment radio ads implied that the issue
was whether voters would rather see their tax money go for roads and
education or for abortions. In newspaper interviews, some proponents
claimed that the amendment would have no effect unless, the
U.S. Supreme Court reverses Roe v. Wade, the 1973
decision protecting reproductive choice on the basis of a woman's
right to privacy. Throughout the campaign proponents claimed the
amendment would have no effect on birth control.
          Reproductive health advocates opposed the amendment primarily on
the issue of forcing rape and incest victims to complete their
pregnancies, and on the issue of government interference in family
decisions about such incidents. Opponents aired television ads
pointing out that there is no public funding of abortions in Arkansas
and demonstrating the potential effect the amendment could have on a
rape victim.
          However, opponents' concerns about the amendment were even
broader. The amendment was opposed for many reasons, most of them
difficult to communicate in a culture where reproductive health issues
are rarely discussed and where sexuality education is taught in only a
few of the state's 330 school districts.
          Protection of a woman's private choice about her reproductive life
is a major concern as is protection of all forms of birth
control. This is particularly significant in Arkansas, which has the
second highest teenage birth rate in the nation. Right-to-life
advocates have long opposed birth control and now seek to restrict the
term "contraceptive" to forms of birth control that are effective
prior to conception; all other contraceptives, in their view, are
"abortifacients," and are therefore no different from abortions.
          Opponents of the amendment saw it as yet another attempt to outlaw
many forms of birth control including intrauterine devices and many of
the medically safer birth control pills that are effective after
fertilization. The "morning after" pill, commonly used for rape
victims, was an intended target of the amendment, but the Arkansas
Governor's Task Force on Rape has already requested and received an
opinion from the state attorney general which declares--for the
moment--that the "morning after" pill can continue to be used.
          Advocates of such legislation have attempted in many state
legislatures and court cases to bestow "personhood," with accompanying
legal rights, to fetuses from the "moment of conception." The legal
ramifications are of great concern to those who work in reproductive
health care, not to mention in other areas of the law such as
decedents statutes and statutes that could affect working conditions
for women of fertile age.
          Ironically, in-vitro fertilization, a procedure which allows some
infertile couples to have a child, is clearly outlawed by the language
of the amendment since "conception" takes place outside the woman's
body, in a laboratory. The legal mandate of protecting a fetus from
"conception until birth" rules out such procedures because there can
be no practical way of insuring that all ovum fertilized in the
laboratory can be placed in a woman's uterus to be "protected" and
born.
          Other medical procedures such as amniocentesis, research that
enables advances for infertile couples, and potential cures for
Alzheimers disease, can tee prohibited by this language.
          Of particular concern is the fact that the first amendment section
prohibiting public (Medicaid) funding of abortions penalizes
low-income women. In addition, the language in this amendment is more
restrictive than the federal prohibition on Medicaid funding of
abortions. The only allowable exception in the Arkansas amendment is
"to save the life of the mother" while the exception in the federal
statute is in "life-threatening" situations. Many doctors have pointed
out that they can prescribe effective procedures for low-income
pregnant women whose progressive diseases would threaten their lives,
but under the new language, the doctors feel they would have to let a
patient's condition degenerate to the point that it could be legally
proven the patient would die without an abortion.
          No doctor can pick an absolute point in time at which a person will
die. Understandably, doctors are also worried about their medical
liability in such situations.
          
            Brownie Ledbetter is vice president of public affairs for
Planned Parenthood in Arkansas. She is also a member of the Southern
Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Women and the Civil Rights Movement: Roles Too Long
Unexamined
          By Hannon, SharronSharron Hannon
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, pp. 4-5
          
          The year 1988 wee a time for looking back. Twenty-five years ago a
church was bombed in Birmingham, thousands marched on Washington and
the President was shot in Dallas. Twenty years ago, assassins' bullets
felled Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King, Jr. These are not happy
anniversaries in our nation's history but they must be marked.
          "Those who cannot remember the peat are condemned to repeat
it," said philosopher George Santayana. That's motivation enough
to look back. But there are other compelling reasons.
          We look back because history is cyclical and because you can't know
where you're going if you don't know where you've been. We look back,
too, because we are disillusioned with the present. How did we get
here, in this poet-Reagan era, about to install George Bush as our
President far the next four years? What wrong turn did we take and
when?
          By searching the peat perhaps we'll find pieces of the puzzle that
we need to make sense of the world and our lives today.
          But that will only tee possible if we look in the right places and
ask the right questions. And we don't do that. No, twenty-five years
later, the burning unanswered question from the Sixties (to judge by
the number of prime-time TV specials) is whether or not Lee Harvey
Oswald acted alone.
          Meanwhile, who is exploring what makes men and women put aside
personal concerns for the collective goof, as so many civilrights
activists did back then? Who is trying to figure out what confluence
of personalities or events produced such a readiness for social action
in the Sixties?
          Fortunately, these questions aren't being altogether ignored. In
Atlanta in 1988, two conferences were held which explored such topics
while providing a generous dose of the "herstory" of the civil rights
movement. The first conference was sponsored by the Carter Center last
February, the second by the King Center in October. Georgia State
University co-sponsored both.
          What'a the difference between history and herstory? A lot. The
former focuses on the headlines, the big events, the men out in front
of the crowds. The latter looks at the day-to-day workings of people's
lives, the behind-the-scene activities that produced the big events,
and the women who, unheralded, carried them out.
          The Carter Center conference was titled: "Women and the
Constitution: A Bicentennial Perspective" and was wideranging in its
scope. But an underlying theme was the interconnectedness of the civil
rights and women's rights movements. Coretta Scott King spoke on "The
Civil Rights Movement's Impact on Women's Rights," while Mary King
tied the package together during the closing session. I sat in the
audience with a friend from the University of Georgia, a well-read
woman who works in women's studies. During Mary King'a speech, she
leaned over to me and said, "This woman is amazing! I can't believe
I've never heard of her before." Ah, if only we knew more
herstory. If only every school child in America grew up with stories
of amazing' women. Instead, we get these stories in bits and
pieces--if at all. And we have to put the pieces together
ourselves. I've been collecting pieces of the puzzle for ten years
since moving to the South and getting actively involved in the women's
movement.
          I started the search incredibly ignorant, having passed the summer
of '63 in sheer oblivion to national events. I was l6 years-old, had
just gotten my driver's license and had little else on my
mind. Perhaps the images of marchers and police with dogs and fire
hoses flickered past on our TV screen in a suburban Boston town, but I
don't remember them. It wasn't until I was in college that I began to
catch up with the civil rights movement.
          The year was 1968 and I was attending Purdue University in West
Lafayette, Ind., not exactly a hotbed of activity. But few campuses
were untouched by the times. That spring the black students at
Purdue--every last one of them, I believe, even the football
players--marched to the administration building with bricks in
hand. There they presented a fiat of demands and unfurled a banner
reading, "Or the fire next time."
          It wee a powerful demonstration and as a wide-eyed reporter for the
campus paper, I was significantly impressed. Especially by the fact
that it had been largely organized by a female student, Linda Jo
Mitchell.
          Among the demands presented that day was a need for courses in
Afro-American studies, and so it happened that the next fall Linda Jo
Mitchell came to be teaching a course' labeled Industrial Management
590A. The course had absolutely nothing to do with industrial
management, met at night and was discontinued after one semester. But
what a semester that was! Our class was composed of students and a few
professors as well, and was integrated by sex, race and age. We read
James Baldwin, Stokely Carmichael, Eldridge Cleaver, Malcolm X and
Martin Luther King, Jr., and had hot and heavy discussions that lasted
well past our scheduled hour.
          What I didn't notice at the time was that all these authors were
men. It wasn't until almost twenty years later that I learned about
women like Ella Baker and Fannie Lou Hamer and the significant roles
they played in those times. At the King Center conference, titled
"Trailblazers and Torchbearers: Women in the Civil Rights Movement,"
one participant noted: "This conference has done something I didn't
know needed to be done. Using the lens of memory, I look back and see
women."
          Overlooking women in history is a shame. It denies half the
population role models of courage. But it does more damage than
that. It clouds our understanding of how things come to be. For when
we overlook women, we overlook grassroots activism. And then we begin
to think that the only way things happen is from the top down. And we
sit and wait for a leader to come along and change things, relieved of
the responsibility of doing anything ourselves. That's not the lesson
we should be taking from the Sixties.
          I left both Atlanta women's conferences inspired to take
action. And with Black History Month in February and Women's History
Month in March, the time seems ripe: Let's share stories of the women
of the civil rights movement and learn from them. Fortunately, some of
these women have been telling their stories lately. Does your local
library have a copy of Mary King's Freedom Song,
(Quill, 1987) or JoAnn Robinson's The Montgomery Bus Boycott
and the Women Who Started It, (University of Tennessee Press,
1987). If not, ask them to order these two intriguing memoirs.
          Tell friends about these books. And let's get herstory into the
schools. The National Women's History Project (P.O. Box 3716, Santa
Rosa, CA 95402) is a great source for books and other materials for
elementary through high school years. Looking through last year's
catalog, I spotted Selma, Lord, Selma about the
girlhood memories of Sheyann Webb and Rachel West, and Ready
From Within: Septima Clark and the Civil Rights Movement, a
first-person narrative.
          But let's go beyond books. In our communities across the South,
there are women with stories to tell. Let's find them and listen to
them and honor them. They have something to say to all of us.
          
            Sharron Hannon is a freelance writer end former editor
and publisher of Southern Feminist
newspaper.
          
        
        
          The Press as Company Store, Atlanta Style
          By Guthey, EricEric Guthey
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, pp. 8-10
          
          To
doubt the current charming presentations of Southern growth and
prosperity is to bring anathema on one's head. What! The South not
prosperous. Impossible, they cry, and the individual who questions is
an idiot.--Lewis Harvie Blair, The Prosperity of the
South Dependent on the Elevation of the Negro (1889)
          Although Harvie Blair, native Virginian and former Confederate
soldier, wrote his description of such defensive, pro-Southern
attitudes a hundred years ago, his words apply just as well to the
South today. The survival of this mixture of the New South creed,
corporate-expansive boosterism, and belligerent local patriotism is
not breaking news. But when Bill Kovach abruptly resigned as editor of
the Atlanta Journal-Constitution in November, the
papers' corporate managers who accepted his resignation and the
community members opposed to it lined up on both sides of the myth and
pushed it into the national headlines.
          Atlantans who supported Kovach and liked what he had done with the
papers during his two-year tenure claimed the corporate elite-who
traditionally have promoted New South posturing and urban boosterism
to bolster their own power-had forced out the former New York Times Washington bureau chief because of his
tough coverage of the Atlanta business community. Publisher Jay Smith
and David Easterly, president of the papers' parent company, Cox
Enterprises, denied that business pressure had anything to do with
their acceptance of Kovach's resignation. He had resigned and they had
accepted because of a lack of "mutual trust," they said.
          But Smith and Easterly defended their actions against a barrage of
national criticism by doing what all good New South boosters
do-retreating to a stance of intense regionalism and denying any
problem existed. In an article in The Wall Street
Journal, Easterly responded to a comment from Washington Post editor Ben Bradlee by telling him to
"stuff it." Meanwhile, good ol' boys like Journal-Constitution sportswriter Furman Bisher and columnist Lewis Grizzard, both of whom had been at the papers long
before Kovach, gloated as the crowd they saw as "Northern
invaders" from the New York Times lost
the battle for the control of the papers. Said Bisher: "Maybe now
we can get back to covering Dixie like the dew."
          To many, though, that meant the papers would return to the previous
state of mediocrity which had chased serious Southern journalists away
and allowed local talents like Bisher and Grizzard to
thrive. "These papers have never attempted to excel," said
Dudley Clendinen, a former Timesman who had joined the papers in 1986
as Kovach's assistant in charge of local news and who resigned two
weeks after Kovach's departure. "They've always been content to
have to find their reputation in a single editor of conscience and
great writing ability. But those editors always felt threatened: Ralph
McGill spent every day afraid that he was going to be fired. Gene
Patterson was forced out."(In 1967, Constitution editor Eugene Patterson lost his job for
running a column criticizing Georgia Power's request for a rate
hike).
          "The [Cox] family takes the profits," Clendinen said. "It
doesn't involve itself in the conduct of the paper, to see to it that
they produce are cord of quality. That's always been the case here in
Atlanta, and because it has, people don't know better. They've always
lived here, always read these papers. If they've lived elsewhere
they'd know better." According to a recent ranking in Advertising Age, Cox Enterprises, an empire
originally built around newspaper money from Dayton, Ohio, is the
thirteenth largest media company in the world, and pulls in the ninth
largest revenues from newspaper operations (over $710 million in
1987). According to the Forbes 400 listing, the
sisters who control the family business, Anne Cox Chambers and Barbara
Cox Anthony, together share the distinction of being the eighth
richest people in the United States. Each is worth $2.25 billion.
          Kovach joined the Journal-Constitition in
1986, reportedly after being passed over for the position of editor at
the New York Times. The local community and the
national media heralded his hiring as a signal the Cox sisters had
decided to convert the Journal-Constitution from
the haven for mediocrity and soft business coverage it had become into
an institution that commanded national respect. Kovach himself
declared that he intended to turn the Journal-Constitution
 into a world-class news
organization.
          As business institutions, large U.S. city newspapers at their best
are never more than instruments of liberal reform, criticizing their
business communities within certain "acceptable"
limits. Bill Kovach tried to expand those limits at the Journal-Constitution, and his improvements were
encouraging compared to the papers' dismal record. Under Kovach, the
papers ran lengthy investigative pieces exposing the Atlanta banking
community's discriminatory lending practices in black neighborhoods,
the alleged bribing of Russian officials by Coca-Cola representatives,
and Georgia Power management's coercion of employees to make political
contributions to the campaign of Public Service Commission candidate
Bobby Rowan.

          The papers' coverage of the Democratic National Convention in
Atlanta last summer also drew national attention. In fact, even the
papers' senior management publicly praised Kovach as the man who had
turned around the Journal-Constitution and
likened him to the Pulitzer Prize-winning former Constitution editor Ralph McGill, under whom the
papers were said to have had their best years.  At a party in the
newsroom on the convention's last night, Smith stood atop a desk and
declared: "These are no longer the newspapers of Ralph
McGill. These are the newspapers of Bill Kovach."
          But five months later, Smith was explaining that he and Kovach had
never been able to establish a relationship of "mutual trust."
In a November 12 editorial, Smith instated that the company had let
Kovach go because he was impossible to work with. This very well may
be the immediate reason why the papers' management got rid of
Kovach. Kovach himself conceded that direct pressure from the business
community had nothing to do with his leaving. Some of Kovach's own
hirees admitted he had a hot temper, and may have threatened to quit
one time too many.
          Yet, it doesn't matter if a corporate conspiracy to Iynch Kovach
didn't exist. New South boosterism does not work that way. Rather, it
is a pervasive consciousness, a framework of attitudes within which
serious analysis and criticism-especially of the New South's booming
capital-are just not welcome. Complaints from Atlanta business leaders
over what they saw as Kovach's unfair coverage merely reflected and
contributed to that ethos. So did Kovach's protracted arguments with
Smith and Easterly, who wanted the papers to look more like USA 
Today, the shallow but highly successful paper
replete with short stories, bright graphics, and a decidedly
"up-beat" approach to the news. The Cox chain's
desire to emulate USA Today indicates that it
places a higher premium on marketing strategies and revenue than on
solid news coverage. All of these factors add up to a situation in
which the Cox corporate managers find themselves predisposed to think
that someone like Kovach would be difficult to work with.
          "I no longer respect or believe in the ownership of the paper,
or the corporate managers more particularly," Clendinen said,
adding he lamented Kovach's departure in part because it signaled the
end of an important experiment for the region. "There's never been
a great regional newspaper in the South," he
explained. "Serious editors and reporters have had to go North
because there's been nothing to aspire to. What we had here with Bill
Kovach was an effort to create a paper that would report on and
examine and reflect the culture of the South."
          Clendinen still bristles over the way he, Kovach and city editor
Wendell "Sonny" Rawls, who also joined the papers in 1986, have been
portrayed as an intrusive "New York Times Mafia"
Kovach and Rawls are both from Tennessee and both worked at the
Nashville Tennesseean before going to the
Times. Clendinen is from Tampa, Fla., went to Vanderbilt University in
Nashville, and his family's roots are in Georgia, where his
great-grandfather was surgeon general during the Civil War. "The
foreign implant, if you will, are the five people from Dayton, Ohio,
who now run the Cox corporation," Clendinen said.
          "This is representative of a tradition that has existed in the
South since the Civil War: that is, much of the choices that have been
made in the South have been given over to Northern, Midwestern
industrial money," Clendinen said. "The Dayton ownership, the
Cox family ownership, has been happy to play to and to patronize
Southern impulses, a set of impulses which has been true also since
the War-this defensiveness, resistance to outside influence, 'We're
just fine, thank you, just as we are.' You know, the Lewis
Grizzard line-if you don't like it, Delta is ready when you are-that
whole business...This was not an affectation, this was part of that
dug-in Southernness. And the papers, owned by Ohio money, played on
that fact."
          The real issue, though, Clendinen insisted, is the quality of the
public record. "These papers, this ownership-we thought-had made
that commitment, had joined the circle of the few who re really
committed to the quality of the record as opposed to the size of their
profits first. In retrospect, it most certainly seems a mistaken
impression."
          At a protest rally held outside the papers' downtown offices on
November 12, one week after Kovach resigned, journalist Hodding Carter
interpreted the incident in much the same way-as the latest battle in
a war for the soul of American journalism. "Is it going to be
packaging or the product? Is it going to be reality or is it going to
be happy times? Is it going to be speaking truth to power or speaking
power's truth? And each time that question is asked today too often
the answer comes back: packaging not product, happy time, not reality,
power's truth, not truth to power."
          Carter also stressed that the issue was important not just for
Atlanta, but for the South and for the nation as well. "In a fight
like this, in an issue like this, there aren't really any outsiders at
all. Because in the most basic way all of us, whether we're in
journalism or outside it, are being treated as outsiders by the fewer
and fewer who own the more and more in this life called
journalism."
          Also at the rally, novelist Pat Conroy attacked Lewis Grizzard,
whom he saw as the premier representative of the insular Southern
attitudes that had contributed to Kovach's downfall. He read to the
crowd of about 250 concerned community members and Journal
 and Constitution staffers the contents of an
ad that Grizzard had considered taking out in the Constitution in
which Grizzard said, "In fact, we might even benefit from

[Kovach's] departure, with apologies to those who enjoy exhaustive
series on what's doing in Africa." Grizzard was referring to a
series on the devastating famine in the Sudan.
          Conroy responded to Grizzard, "Because I too am a redneck, I
want to translate for all your readers and for the Cox chain what you
meant... You wrote it in code but the translation is this: Atlanta
doesn't care if niggers starve."
          However accurate might be Conroy's emotional indictment of the
racism undergirding Grizzard's attitude towards investigative
journalism, it does not change the fact that the papers' corporate
management-not Grizzard and not its readers or its staff-retain the
final say over what news in Atlanta will be like. In which direction
they will lead the papers now that Kovach is gone is not clear. But
there have been indications in recent weeks that the changes bode ill
for the public's need for more responsible coverage in Atlanta and
throughout the region.
          "The publisher and the corporate managers will now get the kind
of paper that they want" says Dudley Clendinen. "It's all a
question of direction, emphasis, and aspiration. Look at the front
page in the last three weeks-Christmas trees, Santa Clauses, warm,
optimistic business stories and tender family stories. What you see is
a reflection of the wishes of the corporate management. They want a
marketing tool, as opposed to a record of quality."
          "USA Today has become the symbol of how you
compete with people who are drawn to the images of television. You
create a package, an information package, which is not so much a
newspaper as it is a packaged digest of information bytes, like sound
bytes. And that is the paper that Easterly likes to cite-I don't think
anyone would argue that it is a record of quality."
          Perhaps an even stronger indication of the Cox chain's intentions
is its choice of a successor for Kovach. Arnold Rosenfeld has been in
the Cox chain since 1969. He will take over the papers for the next
six months, search for another editor, and then move further up in the
corporation. Rosenfeld most recently has served as the editor of the
Cox chain's Austin American-Statesman in
Texas.
          "He's just another guy from Dayton," says Clendinen. "So he
knows what they want, which is not very much."
          Even though Rosenfeld will be directly in charge of the papers for
only six months, his hiring sends out a definite signal. In the past
few years, community members in Austin have complained about that
paper's blatant boosterism as well. And last spring, Rosenfeld's Statesman fired reporter Kathleen Sullivan because,
according to accounts in Texas Monthly and The Columbia Journalism Review, Sullivan had
aggressively pursued stories on worker safety in high-tech industry
while the city itself was trying to woo just such companies to the
area. In other words, many believed that Sullivan was fired because
she was "a skeptic, not a booster."
          The paper also offered Sullivan over $8,000 to sign a severance
agreement which would have prevented her from criticizing the paper or
running the story anywhere else. She refused.
          Committed reporters and editors remain at the Atlanta papers who
would refuse to bow to such pressure as well. But many say they no
longer have any incentive to initiate potentially controversial
articles or major investigative projects. If the papers' management
can get serious and find an editor equally as committed to the quality
of the public record as Kovach was, then perhaps those staffers will
stay on and continue to improve the papers. Otherwise, Harvie Blair's
characterization of defensive, New South boosterism will still to
apply to the Coxes' Journal-Constitution and to
Atlanta another hundred years from now. 
          
            Eric Guthey is a student in the Graduate Institute of
Liberal Arts at Emory University in Atlanta.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By 
            Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, pp. 24, 23
          
          I do not expect George Bush to pursue the "kinder, gentler nation"
announced in his campaign rhetoric. The mysterious "thousand points of
light" about which he also spoke are more likely to turn out to be
points of darkness. I was not born yesterday.
          The Ku Klux Klan is as supportive of the budding Bush
Administration as it has been of the old Reagan gang. And, for the
same obvious reasons.
          In happy anticipation, two local Republicans recently said to me,
"It might come down to all the white people joining the Republican
Party and black people staying with the Democratic Party. I really
hope that doesn't happen."
          But, the eyes and crooked smile of the two Republicans made their
true opinion clear. They really wished that exact racist result on
this nation. A nation, already in deep trouble at home and abroad,
residing in a world where three-fifths of the population is
non-white. Makes one wonder about some Americans.
          A total racial realignment of the two parties won't happen. Many
thoughtful and decent white Americans would never buy such an
arrangement. Many Americans understand and see through both the
Republican and Democratic Party crap. They are unlikely to line up
with either party. I don't blame them.
          Most white people, as conservatives, accept society as they find
it. Few white Americans have been agitators for change in a
philosophical sense. Those who have agitated were regarded, at best,
as quixotic, odd, different and not quite normal. Some were suspected
of being Communists.
          National head shaking was joined by the numbers of white,
respectable young people who joined radical groups in the 1960s and
even identified with the Black Panthers. There wee consternation when
Patricia Hearst was revealed as an armed member of the Symbionese
Liberation Army, which was not only rebellious but criminal.
          Black radicals or agitators, on the other hand, feel they
understood the white mind set and what whites really think of
them. These blacks have written off white society as impossible in
regards to changing its attitude toward color. For many of these
blacks, burglary, robbery and even worse have become the legitimate
purpose of survival.
          They are wrong, of course, but do not believe so and are not
interested in such arguments. Some say that anything they can get away
with is justified.
          In the opposite direction and just as extreme, are blacks who think
they have it made. Blacks who are secure in their token roles in their
establishment, do not really regard themselves as tokens. They are
well behaved and well rewarded.
          These people might participate in the kind of march on Washington
that is a non-violent picnic, to which they actually fly, or go to by
train or chartered bus. They would, however, never dream of picketing
a business for its failure to hire blacks or women. This is the group
from which we get our black lawyers and judges.
          Now to turn the coin just slightly. As I said, it is a most rare
white person who will revolt against anything. After all, their color
permits them to be the beneficiary of the American way of life. There
has never been an example in America of the oppressed, when liberated,
becoming the oppressor.
          It is even more rare for a white person to consider his fellow man
as just another person as opposed to a "colored" person, a "Negro
friend" or a "black" one. This classification is an immediate
indication that a "colored person" is not 

simply another citizen, but something less.
          There have been genuine relationships of affection and mutual
esteem between blacks and whites. Relationships in which each regarded
the other as simply a good decent human being and not as "my black
friend" or my "white friend." But, that is rare.
          All too often, white people of commendable sensitivity give up
their zeal for a "kinder, gentler nation," move to the white suburbs,
and become occasional "moderates" or "liberals" with a black visitor
now and then.
          I understand.
          Peace.
          
            J. L Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
        
          A Movie with Eyes on the Wrong Prize: "Mississippi
Burning"
          By Bond, JulianJulian Bond
          Vol. 10, No. 6, 1988, pp. 22-23
          
          The new movie "Mississippi Burning" is the worst example of the
genre called docudrama: there is no documentation and very little
drama. Instead, filmgoers see "Rambo Meets the Ku Klux Klan" as
cardboard characters parade through a small Mississippi town in
1964.
          The filmmakers are quick to let the audience know their effort is a
dramatization, based on the FBI investigation into the disappearance
and deaths of Mickey Schwerner, Andrew Goodman, and James Chaney
outside Philadelphia, Miss., in June 1964.
          But the picture of the FBI, the civil rights movement, and white
Southerners which emerges places "Mississippi Burning" as close to
Freedom Summer as Lillian Smith's 
Strange Fruit is to a basket of avocados.
          No one emerges whole from this film.
          The FBI, which hardly endeared itself to movement activists, is
shown committing crimes beyond the imagination of its worse
critics.
          The civil rights workers--look-a-likes for Schwerner, Goodman, and
Chaney--appear only long enough to be murdered in the first five
minutes. The rest of the film is given over to cardboard caricatures
of dark-suited, buttoned-up federal agents and loutish Klansmen,
punctuated with enough burnings, beatings, and bombings to have
destroyed a town of Philadelphia's size.
          The Klan members are ignorant lumps and the FBI agents slow-witted,
if well-meaning, fools. The former confound the latter by dumping a
black beating victim from a speeding car in the town square at high
noon.
          When regular police techniques and massive searches fail to dent
the wall of white silence erected by the trio's murders, the FBI
resorts to two kidnappings, a faked lynching, a clumsy seduction,
and--most incredible of all--a threatened castration of the town's
kidnapped mayor by a black FBI agent. There were, of course, no black
FBI agents in 1964. In truth, the FBI bought information about the
murders for $30,000 from an informant.
          Mississippi was at war in 1964. The one thousand mostly white
summer volunteers who joined the permanent staffs of SNCC, CORE, and
SCLC in voter registration and Freedom Schools across the state poised
a real challenge to the white supremacists, who responded with arson
and murder. Eighty civil rights workers were assaulted; over a
thousand were jailed. Several unidentified black bodies were found in
the search for Goodman, Schwerner, and Chaney; one was wearing a CORE
tee-shirt.
          The FBI was stiff-necked and most often allied with local
lawmen. The agents did announce their presence through their uniformed
suits and shoes and their Northern ways and seemed more interested in
watching the law being broken than seeing it enforced. Their
investigations centered on political thought, not the denial of civil
rights.
          But "Mississippi Burning" takes that frightening summer and makes
it surreal and unbelievable.
          And it invites the movie audience to believe that the FBI cared
enough about the missing trio to use the Klan's tactics against the
Klan, and that the summer's heroes were dressed in blue serge, not
blue jeans.
          The true lesson of Freedom Summer is told in the stories of the
volunteers and the young, full-time civil rights professionals and the
nameless Mississippians who housed and sheltered them, took beatings
and blows for them. Nearly all the volunteers were white, and nearly
all their hosts were black, but some few white Mississippians stood
up, too. "Mississippi Burning" cheapens them all. Instead of
dramatizing the real heroics of a critical time in American history,
it is a made-up story with made-up people about a time and place which
never existed.
          There are those who argue that movies like "Mississippi Burning,"
as awful as they are, are preferable in an age in which most Americans
absorb history from small and large screens.
          That is precisely this movie's main affront.
          It enters a popular culture where 1964 is as remote as 1776 and
where lessons are learned from flickering film instead of the fumed
page or the award-winning documentary. It becomes the history it
parodies; a friend's date told me excitedly, "Billy says these things
really happened back then."
          She is thirty-five.
          One of "Mississippi Burning's" stars is already being touted for an
Oscar nomination; the FBI agent he portrays is a former Mississippi
sheriff, a good-old-boy with a red-blooded American heart. His desire
to catch the killers overrides his respect for the law. The makers of
Mississippi Burning" let their desire for a big box office and Oscars
overcome respect for history. They had their eyes on the wrong
prize. 
          
            Julian Bond, currently visiting professor in history and
politics at Drexel University in Philadelphia, Penn., is a member of
the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
      
    
  
