
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 11, Number 4,
	       1989
        
          Writing and Doing: Women in Civil Rights
          By Grant, JoanneJoanne Grant
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, pp. 6
          
          A spate of recent conferences has a common purpose: to assess the
civil rights movement and place it in historical perspective. They
have a common thesis as well--la lutta continua,
the struggle goes on.
          Clayborne Carson, historian at Stanford University, described as
"long-distance runners" the participants at a
session of the June colloquium at the University of Virginia on women
in the civil rights movement. The colloquium, sponsored by the Carter
G. Woodson Institute, brought together a hundred activists and
academics for an exchange on "The Roles of Women in Civil Rights
Struggles."
          Almost every speaker--panelists, commentators, and
participants--linked what had gone before to the present and talked of
their continued concern for social issues.
          The concept of continuous struggle was brought home from the
opening session, when panelists Virginia Durr, Modjeska Simkins,
Johnnie Carr, and Anne Braden recalled the civil rights struggles of
the Thirties, Forties and Fifties. From the floor Oliver Hill reminded
participants that in 1904 blacks in Richmond, Va., walked for a year
rather than ride segregated buses. "We have to stand on the
shoulders of those who went before," he said, "and do our part
while we are here."
          Another theme running through the conference was summarized by Mary
Frances Berry of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights: "Government
doesn't do anything unless you push it."
          Despite the common themes, however, there were two major areas of
disagreement. One was the question of whether women had played a
subordinate role in the civil rights movement which led to discontent
and hence to the development of the feminist movement. This concept
has been discussed at several civil rights conferences over the past
year and and seems to be based in a retrospective
assessment in which historians view the earlier movement through the
prism of the much later feminist viewpoint.
          The second area of disagreement was over the question of whether
racism or economic inequities lies at the root of social
problems. Anne Braden, the veteran activist from Louisville, Ky.,
said, "Racism, and the struggle against it, is the key to
understanding this society and changing it." Others argued that
the issue of class is paramount.
          Notably, several conference speakers pointed to the contributions
of Fannie Lou Hamer, the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party leader,
and Ella J. Baker, a founder of he Student Non-Violent Coordinating
Committee and an organizer of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference. Joyce Ladner, a sociologist at Howard University, said,
"It can be argued that there are some women whose public service
and leadership careers transcend the boundaries of feminism, as it is
popularly defined...Perhaps Ella Jo Baker and Fannie Lou Hamer can be
cast within such a tradition." Many others cited the work of these
two women as exemplars of the role of women in the movement including
Raymond Gavins of Duke University and Martha Prescott Norman of the
University of Michigan.
          The work of Southern black women, it was pointed out, is largely
underrated in historiography. Activist Cora Tucker of Halifax County,
Va., in detailing the civil rights struggles in her area, said the
work done by local people is just as important as that of national
leaders. Her own contributions have stretched over three decades
[Southern Changes, October-December 1985], but what
seems significant is that today she is developing young leadership and
has stretched the boundaries of the civil rights struggle to include
concern for the Third World, world peace and the environment.
          Perhaps the most important aspect of the colloquium, as Victoria
Gray--a leader in the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party--put it,
was providing a setting in which "the people doing the writing are
exposed to the people who are doing."
          In general there was agreement that historiography needs the
insights of activists and that local organizers could benefit from a
historical perspective.
          
            Joanne Grant is a writer and filmmaker. She edited the
anthology, Black Protest, and produced the film,
Fundi, on the life of Ella Baker.
          
        
        
          The Price of Empire by J. William Fulbright, with Seth P. Tillman. (Pantheon Books, 1989. xi, 243 pages. $17.95)
          By Dunbar, LeslieLeslie Dunbar
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, pp. 27-28, 30
          
          Radicals would do well to read this book by the Arkansas
aristocrat; it could teach them not to be so restrained.
          Americans generally, and Southerners in particular, ought to read
this gently worded but unsparing "J'accuse," for the American
political mind which Fulbright depicts menaces our nation's future,
and the world's, too.
          Fulbright says: Since World War II our "obsession" (a word he
repeatedly uses) with Communism and the Soviet Union has sustained an
arms race; that it can almost not be turned off because of the
economic and political interests now built into it; that every advance
in arms has subtracted from our security; that in these years since
1945 we have been as provocative as have the Russians; that there is
no alternative to detente; and that he cannot still his "suspicions"
that whenever in the past better relationships between the Russians
and us seemed in prospect "something unusual happened," and not by
pure coincidence.
          I think all except the suspicion is right, and it may be that if I
knew more, about the U-2 overflight and the shooting down of the
Korean airliner, I'd agree with that also.
          He says: Our political processes have become diseased, our mode of
nominating presidential candidates and then electing one of them is
both uniquely American and without sense--when we "get a president
with intellect and character--it is something of an accident"--and
that the dominating role of television is a principal cause, requiring
enormous funds and inevitably demeaning and debasing campaigning. I
think all that is incontestably right.
          He says: Attitudes must change, before there can be sound
progress. Southerners above all must know how hard that is. Once--and
for long, long years--it was established principle in the South to
ground political policies explicitly on race. No longer. Yet so deeply
embedded are the advantages of being white that the South without open
admission usually follows political directions that protect those
advantages. Perhaps we are ascending from that, but it is a long
climb, and millions are injured along the way. If we by similar
resolve eliminated anti-Communism as a declared policy touchstone, we
would still have to deal with all those who have advantage in its
survival, the profit takers, the workers, the Pentagon careerists, the
Congressmen who have tasted influence under its shadow.
          The South has, now as in the past, a plenty of political figures
who have served the cause of anti-Communism and the arms race
assiduously. Why has the South traditionally been so war-minded? Why
must it stay that way? Leave aside the economic stake, in plants and
bases. Is there from being reared in the South a destiny that leads
its political sons and daughters to become, in truth, the go-fers of
the Pentagon and the CIA and the National Security Council?
          Well, it may be so. It would be interesting to have responses to
Fulbright's book from such current senators as Nunn, Gore, Robb, from
all those who tell us so regularly that we--you and I--will support
only presidential candidates who are "strong" on defense." Well,
again, maybe. If so, there loom dark questions asked in starkest form
in Fulbright's chapter on "Our Militarized Economy": "We have
become a militarized 

economy...Millions of Americans have acquired a
vested interest in these expensive weapons systems; they provide
profit for large corporations and livelihoods for working people. The
same people acquire, indirectly, a vested interest in the foreign
policy that has committed us to a spiraling arms race with the Soviet
Union, made us the world's largest arms seller...Violence has become
the nation's leading industry...Yet this militarization of the economy
is undermining us internally..." Again, I think Fulbright is
right, and am grateful to him for saying these truths well and
forcefully.
          If people care to change this, they might think back on that
earlier great attitudinal challenge which confronted the
South. Difficult and slow and unfinished as that has been, it
nevertheless was set in motion, and it still moves. It had three prime
movers, none of whom were political leaders: tenacious courtroom
lawyers; victims speaking and acting in clear and mounting protest;
and the legitimizers of dissent. A movement for sane military and
foreign policies cannot now have the first--the "law" is probably on
the other side and with the present Supreme Court undoubtedly is; but
surely there is the potential for effective protest, and Fulbright's
book can be for that a warming light and ignition.
          The entire book is a plea for rational discussion, for the opening
of minds and discarding of myths, for the legitimizing of
dissent. There is little of that in the United States, not at any rate
within Mr. Bush's "mainstream." When did we last hear among its masses
a vigorous debate on the merits of NATO and whether it should be kept
alive; or on "forward defense"; or on the Monroe Doctrine, for that
matter? We go on year after year, assuming the necessity of such
policies as political--and indeed, moral--givers. Without that wall of
dogma being breached, and policies brought out for debate, there is no
progress. Some celebrate the role of Southern businessmen in uprooting
old-fashioned white supremacy but in fact they were neuters, until
liberals across the South, mainly women, made secure the right within
Southern public life to dissent; the acceptable right to talk, debate,
question.
          Senator Fulbright of Arkansas was of no help in those days. Some
have said, would say, that he played an ignoble role. To his present
honor, he makes no fancy defense. He simply wanted to be--he is clear
about this--re-elected, and Arkansas voters exacted a price in racial
conformity for his freedom to work at those issues which really
interested him. (He had signed the Southern Manifesto in 1956, filed
an amicus brief supportive of resistance in the 1958 case, Cooper
v. Aaron, had avoided as far as he was able any contact with the
school crisis which had wracked Little Rock. He had also been the only
senator in 1954 to vote to cut off appropriations for Joseph
McCarthy's witchhunting committee.) Brooks Hays, for the mildest of
acts, had been driven out of the House by a write-in candidate, and
thereafter could, we read, play "no significant or interesting role
in Arkansas affairs." Fulbright did not want that fate. He, as it
were, rests his case on the mercies of his liberal countrymen--not
since he opposed McCarthy has he had friends among conservatives, nor
among cold-war Democrats since he opposed the Dominican invasion of
1965 and gradually moved into opposition on Vietnam--his case being
that what else he stood for and accomplished made his continuance in
office a benefit.
          We can all ponder that with some profit. Consider: It is not
inconceivable, far from it, in fact, that there are members of
Congress today who would largely agree with the need to rise above
anti-Communism and a militarized society, and yet hold their tongues
and vote to the contrary because they have decided that their own
re-election is important to some other good cause; combatting poverty
or extending civil rights, for example, or befriending nation-building
in Africa (a continent which, incidentally, Fulbright never
mentions). Politics is always made of choices. Fulbright would believe
and say that some things are of first importance, and of course that
is right. I think human dignity yields place to no other. Fulbright
might, too, in principle, but is aristocratic in his valuations. To
him, both great or bad actions and policies occur in virtually every
situation because of what some few leaders do. I think he is wrong
about that. I think he never before now, never during his long
Congressional career, had a realistic chance of stamping his values on
American foreign policies. The nice irony is that he may now have, as
millions of new people, unencumbered by the interests which have
supported the dogmas of post-World War II foreign policies, come into
civic participation through the civil rights revolt he stepped aside
from.
          Those voters, in the South and Southwest, may go, however, in any
of several ways. Lord help us if they follow the "mainstream" of
Southern politics. It is an appalling mess. On virtually every one of
the great contemporary issues--interventionist foreign policies,
covert actions abroad, the Pentagon's budget, environmental
protection, abortion, the treatment of the poor--the trends of

Southern politics are opposed to the common good. The prospect of new
Southern seats in Congress after the 1990 census is, as of now, a
dreary, scarifying one, promising more Republicans--and the Republican
party and especially its Southern branch have become the first
monolithically ideological major party in American history--and
possibly a couple of Democrats of near likeness.
          There is much more in this book than I have been able to
suggest. There are delightful vignettes about past Arkansas
elections. There are many and candid reflections on personalities with
whom he shared Washington's power. There are deeply interesting
passages on some notable events, such as the Kennedy's assault on Cuba
(he was less opposed than one might believe) and Watergate (the worst
side of which he says was that it derailed detente).
          There is serious discussion of governmental structure; he is
fundamentally critical of the separation of powers, though he narrows
his criticism to executive-legislative relationships, never discussing
how his favored parliamentary system (as in Britain) would co-exist
with an independent judiciary and the power of judicial review, nor
how it would adapt to our federal system.
          His own pessimism is strong, and made stronger yet by this
country's relationship with Israel, which he calls a "garrison state,"
and also a "client state" of the United States, that paradoxically
through the great influence of the American Jewish community is
enabled to dictate our Middle East policies. The worst of this, in
Fulbright's estimation, is that Israel perceives continued animosity
between the United States and the U.S.S.R. to be in its interest, in
its struggle with Arab states and factions, and works to keep that
alive. Here too, there is at the very least' an urgent need to
establish free, robust debate.
          Finally, that need is what The Price of Empire is about: the
necessity of unfettered and thoughtful debate. Never mind that he
attained his own dearest legislative victory--the "Fulbright
scholarships"--by avoiding debate, getting it through, he notes, "as
quietly as possible." A necessary tactic. His faith for the future
embraces two courses: international organization--with all its
shortcomings, "I still believe in the United Nations"--and education,
especially that which brings Americans and other nationals into closer
knowledge of each other.
          Such hopes as he permits himself depend, he writes, on the
possibility of "strong and intelligent leadership." Fulbright is
living proof that liberal aristocrats, or aristocratic liberals, may
still survive. Would that they might abound!
          "Everything therefore comes back to the way in which we find and
then choose our leaders." Plato would have agreed with him. So
might Thomas Jefferson. So may we all, once we build a true democracy
from which to choose.
          
            The degree or nature of Mr. Tillman's role is never
described; all opinions, one assumes, are those of both men.
            Leslie Dunbar is the book editor of Southern Changes.
          
        
        
          Hooked on the Drug Problem
          By Dreger, Ralph MasonRalph Mason Dreger
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, pp. 7-8
          
          How do we fight the drug problem? Well, first, it must be
recognized that it is not "the drug problem," but a whole congeries of
problems:
                           the growing in other countries of crops of what we call "illicit drugs" but which are the sole
sustenance of multitudes of farmers;the creation of "narco-millionaires" in Columbia, Peru and
elsewhere;the illegal importation and/or growing of drugs here (such as
U.S.-grown marijuana)the shipment of drugs through other countries (as in the
Bush-Noriega connection);the impotence of law enforcement agencies that are overwhelmed
in attempting to combat drugs;the high profits from smuggling and "dealing" on our
streets;the extreme poverty in the midst of extreme plenty, as an
underclass looks with envy on prosperous drug dealers, and the
flaunting of the leisure class in the face of the unemployed and
underemployed;the easy access to "licit" drugs (Tylenol, alcohol, Demarol)
for relief of mental or physical pain or production of pleasurethe breakdown of families;the use of long sentence and capital punishment for street
criminals juxtaposed against plush federal prisons (or probation and
restitution) for white collar criminals;and so on.
          The "Drug Problem" is such a host of related issues that it is an
almost impossible morass. As such, "it" has no simple solution.
          How then do we fight the drug problem? Not how we have been
fighting it--or at least not how our governments have been fighting
it. Multiplied millions have been spent, armies of drug fighters
spread from here to the growing regions of Columbia and Peru, and
local law enforcement agencies have been overwhelmed with drug
operatives. The government links anti-Communism with the fight against
drugs even though officials know that in Latin America, Communist
insurgents and the drug kings are mortal enemies who visit murder
campaigns on each other. It is considered "patriotic" to support all
these huge expenditures and extraordinary efforts, to excuse the
unconstitutional actions of the Drug Enforcement Agency and its allies
in the name not only of fighting drugs but of Americanism. The Right
postures about a federal death penalty for drug kings--a notion which
would be as ineffective against drug traffic as it has been in
deterring murder.
          Observers fairly well agree that the War on Drugs has failed. So
what do we do in response to our evident failure? We appropriate not
millions but billions, we appoint an official "drug czar" (we have had
at least ten called by different names since Nixon began The War), and
we beef-up the same fruitless activities in which we have been
engaging.
          Before offering some suggestions about how to deal with the drug
problem, let me point out some of the human rights violations the War
on Drugs is perpetuating. The DEA itself has acted in ways that are a
"mixture of the illegal and the unscrupulous" (Gierginer,D., "Inside
the DEA," Reason, December, 1986, pp.23-29). On the
merest suspicion of engaging in illegal drug trafficking a person's
entire property can be confiscated, however false the suspicion
actually proves. Law enforcement agencies have been using the
so-called anti-racketeering RICO statute in ways scarcely envisaged by
Congress. Now, all that you own can be taken away from you--and you
have no recourse in law, for that is the law. The police are protected
fully in violating your Fourth Amendment rights, in searching and
seizing upon suspicion alone.
          Let me add one note which demonstrates how the War on Drugs can be
used to undermine people's rights: This spring David Duke introduced
into the Louisiana legislature a bill (which fortunately died in
committee) which had a high note of righteous justification for
promoting the safety and welfare of children and adults.
          The heart of the bill was this: "The legislature hereby
establishes a mandatory drug testing program for adults in public
assistance programs without the requirement of individualized
suspicion." There are some of us who object to mandatory drug
testing programs anyway, with all their errors and invasions of one's
body, except for those directly involved in the safety of the public,
and under very 

restricted circumstances at that. If Mr. Duke's bill is not a direct
contravention of the Fourth Amendment, I do not recognize one. And if
any reader does not know who David Duke is and what he represents, and
what he actually meant by his bill, then it would be well for them to
find out.  I fear that we shall hear more of Mr. Duke and others of
his ilk who have a chance to rise to power on such issues as the War
on Drugs.
          What, then do I advocate to fight the drug problem?
          I urge that drugs be decriminalized and that the country back off
on its present War on Drugs. We are repeatng the vain efforts of
Prohibition.
          It is estimated that one-quarter of the U.S. population uses
illegal drugs. If they wish to do so, and are allowed to do so without
being branded as criminals, all the vast apparatus which is now
spinning its wheels in a vain efforts to stem the flow of drugs can be
disbanded. Police can do the job they are supposed to do without
having to detect whether someone has a fraction of an ounce of
marijuana or cocaine or crack or whatever, or having to put someone in
jail for what would otherwise be considered legitimate activities. Of
course, I am speaking here of search and seizure operations, not of
checking for DWI.
          Police have enough to do just to cope with the ordinary problems in
our society. To ask them to enforce the unenforceable makes their job
virtually impossible, to say nothing of the pressures put upon those
often underpaid and overworked officers in a climate where drug money
flows so freely.
          I would go farther than mere decriminalization of drugs, which is
really only the first step in a genuine fight against the drug
problem. I shall assume only that the monies which now are being
wasted on the War on Drugs will be available for a sensible war. The
next thing is to set up clinics for treatment of addicts, with free
distribution of the substance(s) to which a person is addicted.
          Support services with trained personnel as well as lay helpers from
the several treatment programs, formal and informal, which have grown
up in the last few years would be fully funded. Religious institutions
and networks of the country would be enlisted, not in an attempt to
co-opt religion into a governmental program, but to assist in doing
what a number have been able to do in rehabilitating people.
          Educational programs would, of course, be part of the plan of
dealing with addicts or abusers. But such education would go far
beyond rehabilitation education and become part of the curriculum in
schools and colleges.
          I should go even farther in my War on Drugs. I could suggest that
more research needs to be done as to why people turn to drugs in the
first place. Perhaps there should I be more research, only I think
that enough has been done to enable us to get the general motivational
picture: the need of youth to experiment is surely one reason. Peer
pressure is already well known. Many in poverty seek ways to avoid
despair and hopelessness. The same magical mechanism operating in the
criminal who believes "I can't get caught" is a secondary motivation
after the start along the way of drugs. The general acceptance of the
licit drugs in our society promotes illicit drug use, as young people
tell their oldsters, "I see no difference between what you are
doing and what I am doing except that what I am doing is artificially
classified as criminal."
          Even though the general picture may be outlined, there may
nevertheless be a need for research in motivation aimed, say, at
specific drugs and their motivational influence or at other problems
not sufficiently understood now. And, yes, such research as shown to
be needed should be well-funded.
          The War on Drugs is not only futile but dreadfully corrosive of our
civil rights. If you don't like my way to fight drugs, then use your
best ingenuity to devise a better one, one that will not undercut our
Constitution, one that is compassionate and just, and one that will be
reasonably successful.
          
            Ralph Mason Dreger, a former member of the Southern
Regional Council, is professor emeritus of psychology at Louisiana
State University. Council members, life fellows, Associates and other
members of the SRC extended family are invited to submit essays from
The South at Large.
          
        
        
          Mergers in South Texas Colleges
          By Davenport, ElaineElaine Davenport
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 24
          
          The largely Hispanic population of south Texas now has a better
opportunity to get the same quality of higher education as Texans
living in other parts of the state, thanks to several bills signed in
May that will merge five south Texas colleges with the state's two
most prestigious university systems--the University of Texas and Texas
A&M [Southern Changes, July/Aug 1988]. 
          Texas A&I in Kingsville, Corpus Christi State and Laredo State will
combine with the A&M system and Pan American University's campuses at
Edinburg and Brownsville will join the UT system, giving the schools
access to the funds and management systems of UT and A&M and an
ability to grow into full-fledged four-year schools with graduate
programs.
          The arrangement will expand the number of advanced degrees
available in South Texas, where currently there are no accredited
medical schools, law school, or health science schools and no doctoral
programs except in bilingual education.
          "You're going to finally see an addressing of the problem of
South Texas--unemployment, a high crime rate. The more educated the
masses are the more productive citizens they'll become," said
Eddie Cavazos, state representative from Corpus Christi.
          But another south Texas legislator, state senator Hector Uribe,
says that it's much too little too late and confirmed that a pending
lawsuit on the matter will go ahead.
          This suit, filed by the Mexican American Legal Defense and
Educational Fund, was scheduled for trial in Brownsville in
September. It seeks a federal court order to make more state money
available for higher education in south Texas.
          Uribe says the state must spend an additional $500 million to
resolve the lawsuit.
        
        
          Bear Poaching in North Carolina
          By Davenport, ElaineElaine Davenport
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 21
          
          Hundreds of black bears are being poached in the southern
Appalachian Mountains for their heads, hides, teeth, claws, feet, pads
and gall bladders. "When we caught him this one guy was carrying 29
gall bladders--some no bigger than a coin, so they were probably from
summertime cub bears," said Ben Wade, who polices crimes against
wildlife for the state of North Carolina.
          Today's poachers are armed with CB radios, four-wheel drive
vehicles, and $5,000 hunting dogs wearing radio-tracking
collars. Black bear gall bladders, which sell for up to $1,000 an
ounce in many large cities, are used for medicine, especially by
Asians, for ailments such as heart conditions and high blood pressure,
jaundice and digestive disorders.
          Bear claws are made into earrings and necklaces and bear heads and
hides are displayed as trophies and used for decoration.
          Black bears are not endanged and with the proper licenses
and permits can be legally hunted in the Great Smokies for seven weeks
a year. However, scientists worry about a rapidly dwindling black bear
population since there are about as many illegal as legal kills being
made. To combat poaching, state and federal agencies pooled $160,000
for a sting called Operation Smoky. More than 50 arrests resulted but
Wade is not optimistic.
          Bears have less than 10 percent of their original habitat left in
the southern Appalachians, and the habitat that remains is confined to
protected areas. "The concern has been that the protected areas are
like islands, not connected corridors, and the wildlife have few
alternatives but to survive in those enclaves," says Wade.
        
        
          Issues of Reliability and Validity
          By Clayton, AlAl Clayton
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 11
          
          Too often, standardized exams are not accurate even within the
narrow range of things they are able to measure. The reasons for this
problem can be found in the somewhat technical areas of test reliability and validity.
          If we could administer a test to a person, then have that person
completely forget what is on the test, and finally re-administer the
test, would the two test scores be the same? If the answer is yes, the
test is reliable. Since people do not forget the test they take,
test-makers use a variety of statistical methods to determine
reliability and report the results on a scale from zero (no
reliability, the score was a random-chance accident) to one (perfect
reliability.)
          Reliability over 0.9 is considered quite good. Most major
achievement tests (such and the California, Iowa, Stanford, and
Metropolitan) reach this level.
          Sub-sections of these same tests ( e.g., a subsection on
calculating percents in an arithmetic test) provide the more detailed
information that could be useful in teaching. Sub-test scores,
however, are often far less reliable than the whole exam. Many
achievement tests report such sub-scores, with the cautions against
making decisions based on unreliable sub-test results buried deep
inside complex manuals.
          Tests for young children are particularly unreliable, with typical
ratings only from 0.5 to 0.7 This is largely due to the rapid
developmental changes children go through. Young children are also
less able to subordinate their immediate thoughts and emotions to a
task such as taking a test. The lack of reliability in the tests of
young children contributes to the dangers of using such tests for
placing them in special programs.
          Decisions about students should never be made solely or primarily
on the basis of test scores. Since reliability is never perfect, such
decisions will be wrong a certain percentage of the time. The lower
the reliability, the higher the "measurement error" and the more
likely a mistake will be made. Despite this fact, and even though test
manufacturers admit tests should not be used as sole determinants,
they often are used for deciding placement, grade retention and
graduation.
          Validity encompasses a set of concepts
designed to answer the question, "Are we measuring what we think we
are measuring?" A test is only valid in relation to the use made of
it. A test that does not measure what it claims to measure is not only
invalid, it is dangerous.
          A number of aspects of validity should be considered in assessing a
test's utility, but test-makers rarely look at more than the most
simple. Partly this is because doing a comprehensive validation study
can be expensive and time-consuming. More fundamentally, examining the
deeper issues of validity can call into question the entire test
itself.
          Construct validity examines how well a test
actually measures the underlying theoretical construct it claims to
measure. For example, does the test accurately measure "academic
potential" or "competence" or "reading"? To answer these questions
requires a theoretical grasp of the construct to be measured (e.g.,
"reading") as well as knowledge of how the tests scores will be
used.
          Consider, for example, a "spelling" test in which a student is
expected to find the correctly spelled word among four or five choices
or decide if an underlined word is already spelled correctly or
incorrectly. This is actually a test of spelling recognition. Test
manufacturers treat the two, spelling and spelling recognition, as
essentially the same tling, and the test will often be used as an
indicator of the ability to spell.
          Often, however, tests are a bad substitute for the real thing.  For
example, "reading tests" do not measure reading, they measure some
reading skills. Because reading is more than the sum of a set of
separate skills, reading tests are based on a faulty understanding of
reading and learning to read. Similarly, a test that is used to make
statements about "school achievement" may really be a test of another
construct such as "verbal ability."  Many tests are used as if they
possessed wide-ranging validity when there is little evidence
supporting such assumptions.
          These are the tests that are used to determine the educational fate
of children and the content of school programs.  Making educational
decisions based on instruments that fail to measure what they claim to
measure is a recipe for disaster for many children, most of ten those
from low-income and minority-group backgrounds.
        
        
          Kovach Named Nieman Curator
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 22
          
          Bill Kovach, the former editor of the Atlanta
Journal-Constitution, is the new curator of the Harvard-based
Nieman Foundation program of journalism fellowships.
          Kovach was a Nieman fellow himself this past year after resigning
from the Atlanta newspapers in a dispute with the owners, Cox
Enterprises, over the direction the newspapers would take and the
amount of money they would spend on the editorial
product. [Southern Changes, December 1988].
          Kovach was the editor in Atlanta from 1986-1988, following an
18-year career at the New York Times. He had also
worked for the Nashville Tennessean and the
Press Chronicle of Johnson City, Tenn.
        
        
          He Is The Blues
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 22
          
          Erstwhile blues guitarist Lee Atwater, a former member of the
Howard University board of trustees, is the subject of a new song,
"The Man Who Would B.B. King," by Nashville song writers Marshall
Chapman and Gary Nicholson. The single was released in July on
on the Bush-League Records label.
          "The thrust of the song is here's a guy courting black musicians
and playing black music, but at the same time he's slicing social
programs and knocking the legs out from under poor blacks
everywhere," said Nicholson, who performs on the record as
"Little Willie Horton."
          Atwater made news during the Bush inauguration by hosting a rhythm
and blues concert featuring Bo Diddley, Billy Preston, Percy Sledge
and other black performers. Atwater got on stage with his guitar and
played (poorly) with them and since then has formed his own blues band
to perform at GOP fundraisers.
          "What I want to know," asks Nicholson, "is how can you
attack Jesse Jackson on one hand and praise B.B. King on the
other?"
          Co-writer Marshall Chapman is, like Atwater, a South Carolina
native. Chapman is chief executive of Bush-League Records. Although
she has released five solo albums and written songs that have been
recorded by Tanya Tucker, Sawyer Brown and Jimmy Buffet, she calls the
Atwater spoof "the real stuff...Dan Quayle may be our next
target."
          Samples of the Atwater spoof lyrics include:
          
            How could he really know thc songs he sings
          
          
            This man who would be B.B. King?
          
          
            When he's meetin' with the President
          
          
            And planning what to do
          
          
            Whoa, does he think about his 'brothers
          
          
            And what they're going through?
          
          
            A Republican singing blues is as farfetched as can be
          
          
            It's like Einstein playin' football
          
          
            It just don't make sense to me.
          
        
        
          Hormone-free Texas.  Beef Ships Out
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 21
          
          Twenty tons of hormone-free Texas beef left the Port of Houston in
late July on their way to European customers. The shipment was the
first U.S. beef allowed into Europe since the federal government and
the European Economic Community reached an impasse over the issue of
artificial growth hormones in cattle, resulting in an embargo of
U.S. beef on January 1. Texas Agriculture Commissioner Jim Hightower
rounded up Texas ranchers who raise cattle without hormones and worked
out the "Texas Plan" for reopening the U.S.-European beef trade.
          Hightower called the recent shipment the start of a "modern day
cattle" drive that can bring extra money to enterprising ranchers, and
create jobs for both agricultural workers and members of
longshoremen's unions. While most of the U.S. trade community
protested that the hormones were necessary for profitable operations,
Hightower and some Texas ranchers set about to prove them
wrong. "From the outset, we felt that more was at stake than steak,
and a whole lot more was at stake than growth hormones," he
said.
        
        
          Publications
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 20
          
          War at Home: Covert Action Against U.S. Activists and What
We Can Do About It by movement lawyer Brian Glick traces
"the history of CIA style 'covert action' by the FBI and other
homefront police agencies" to show "how this hidden war has be
come a permanent feature of U.S.  politics, directed against a very
broad range of domestic movements for peace and social justice."
Glick "details practical steps. . .to combat covert measures."
$5 plus $1.50 postage and handling from South End Press, P.O.  Box
7816, Edison, NJ 08818.
          Thc State of Working America by the Economic Policy
Institute concludes that average workers lost ground economically over
the last decade. Hourly wages in 1979 averaged $9.65 in 1987 dollars
while today they average $8.98 per hour after adjustment for
inflation. Young families are hardest hit, with the income of families
whose main breadwinner is under 25 declining by 3 percent a year since
1979. The typical young working family today has has almost
$4,000 less to spend than in 1967. The report is $5 from EPI, 1730
Rhode Island Ave., NW, Suite 812, Washington, DC. (202-7758810).
          Thc Greenpeace Guide to Toxics in thc Home contains
recipes for alternatives to toxic cleaners, polishes and sprays
commonly used in most U.S. households. The pamphlet is free to anyone
contributing $15 or more to Greenpeace. For info, write P.O. Box 3720,
Washington, DC 20007.
          Quarantincs and Death. The Far Right's Homophobic
Agenda is a new booklet analyzing the differences between
white supremacists who are also homophobic and general homophobia on
the New Right. Written by Mab Segrest and Leonard Zeskind and
published by the Center for Democratic Renewal, the report argues that
issues of anti-gay violence ought to be included within the framework
of all anti-hate group activity. $4 from CDR, P.O. Box 50469, Atlanta,
GA 30302 (4042210025).
          Shopping for a Better World is a 128-page pocket
rating guide for "socially responsible supermarket shopping,"
published by the New York-based Council on Economic Priorities. Do you
buy Meow Mix for your cat? Using this guide you discover that Ralston
Purina receives poor ratings on charity giving, women's and minority
advancement, and right to know; a moderate score on community
involvement; good ratings on animal testing, South Africa, military
and nuclear involvement; and inconclusive scores on the
environment. In all, 138 companies and 1,300 brand-name products are
rated on 10 social criteria. The book is $4.95 from CEP; 30 Irving
Place, New York, NY10003.0r call 1-800-826-4357.
        
        
          Contemporary Hate Activity
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, pp. 16-18
          
          EDITOR'S NOTE: As Stetson Kennedy points out[see "One Less Voice for Discrimination, Vol. 11
No. 4], the problems of bigotry, violence and discrimination
remain very much a part of the U.S. landscape. The following incidents
were compiled for Southern Changes by Leonard Zeskind,
research director of the Center for Democratic Renewal.
          * Violence
          
            Asian beaten to death
          
          Two white men are charged in the Raleigh, N.C., beating death of an
Asian man. According to eyewitness accounts and statements to police,
Ming Hai Loo and four Asian friends were in the Cue-'N-Spirits
poolroom and bar on July 28 when Robert Piche and Lloyd Piche started
calling them "gooks, slanteyes and chinks." The Piches also declared
that they had lost a brother in Vietnam. The 

Asians reportedly left
the bar but were followed into the parking lot where one of the Piche
brothers confronted Ming with a shotgun and a pistol. Ming was struck
on the head and died three days later.
          Police handled the incident as an unprovoked, racially motivated
attack but the DA charged only one of the Piches, and him only with
second-degree murder. A spokesperson for North Carolinians Against
Racial and Religious Violence said this was the first recorded
incident of anti-Asian violence id North Carolina in this decade. A
1986 U.S. Civil Rights Commission report concluded that anti-Asian
violence was a national problem and found that anti-Asian incidents
rose 62 percent in 1985 over the previous year (no later statistics
are available).
          
            Racist assault in New York
          
          One black youth was killed and three others were attacked Aug. 23
in the Bensonhurst neighborhood of Brooklyn, according to press
reports. The attackers were a group of 10 to 30 white teenagers who
were armed with a least one gun and seven baseball bats. The dead
youth, Yusef Hawkins, 16, was shot to death. Police are treating the
incident as racially motivated.
          
            Letter Bomb Injures 15 at NAACP
          
          Persons in Southeastern Regional Office of the NAACP in Atlanta and
an adjoining medical office were injured Aug. 21 by a tear-gas bomb
received through the mail by the NAACP. Some 15 persons were injured,
including a four-month-old baby. The FBI is investigating.
          
            Skinhead Sentenced in Alabama
          
          A 19-year-old skinhead was sentenced to three years in prison for
defacing a Mobile, Ala., synagogue and a Jewish community center. Two
17-year-olds were given probation.
          
            Flag Burning Provokes Racial Confrontation
          
          Arkansas neo-Nazi Ralph Forbes was among some 400 whites who
surrounded, taunted and jostled a small group of blacks who attempted
to burn a U.S. flag on the steps of the Arkansas state capitol in
Little Rock on July 4. The object of the attempted flag-burning was
reportedly a protest against drugs and homelessness.
          
            Third Kluxer Sentenced in Donald Death
          
          Former United Klans of America member Frank Cox Jr.  was sentenced to
life in prison for his part in the 1981 murder in Mobile, Ala., of a
black teenager, Michael Donald, who was kidnapped at random and killed
by a local Klan group in retaliation for the failure of a local jury
to convict a black man accused of murdering a white police
officer. Two other Klansmen have previously been convicted in the
case; one faces the Alabama electric chair and is currently
represented in the appeals process by an attorney procured by the
NAACP Legal Defense Fund.
          
            Black Family Attacked in Queens
          
          A black family watching a July 4 fireworks display in Queens, N.Y.,
was attacked by more than 30 white youths, some wielding baseball
bats. One youth was arrested; police were looking for others. Several
family members were hospitalized.
          
            White Youths Sentenced
          
          Three white youths have been sentenced--to write an essay, 15 days in
juvenile detention, and 32 hours of community service,
respectively--in a May 8 baseball bat attack on black students in
Auburn, Wash.
          
            WAR Member Arrested in Florida Threat
          
          Walter Komorowski, who says he is a member of White Aryan
Resistance and the John Birch Society, was arrested Aug. 15 on charges
of making written threats against government officials in Port Lucie,
Fla. Police confiscated handguns, knives, 1,200 rounds of ammunition,
and 15 rifles, including an AK-47. Komorowski allegedly stated that he
bought the AK-47 after viewing television news about the Stockton,
Calif., shooting of school children by a gunman using an AK-47.
          
            Mexicans Harassed in Georgia
          
          Officials of the Mexican government have expressed concern after
Mexican citizens working in the Gainesville, Gal, area received
leaflets distributed by the Invisible Empire Knights.
          
            Racist Graffiti in Georgia
          
          "Nigger Go Home" was spraypainted Aug. 1 on the car of a black
person living in Stone Mountain, Ga. A car belonging to a black
teenager in Carrollton, Gal, was vandalized outside a pizza restaurant
on July 21. A KKK "calling card" was left on the teenager's car.

          Also in Georgia, a sign marking the construction site of Temple
Beth David, the first synagogue in rapidly growing Gwinnett County,
has twice been defaced by swastikas. On the morning of a community
meeting to condemn the antisemitism, area mailboxes were stuffed with
hate literature.
          
            Confrontation in Oregon
          
          A group of blacks chased by a group of skinheads in Portland, Ore.,
on July 22, turned on the skinheads and began beating them. One
skinhead, Walter Evans, was knocked unconscious, but on reviving began
screaming, "White Power!"
          * Politics
          
            LaRouche to Campaign from Jail
          
          Lyndon LaRouche reportedly will run a campaign from his jail cell
for Virginia's 10th District Congressional seat. Also running in
Virginia on the LaRouche ticket are Nancy Spannaus for a state senate
seat and Harry Broskie, Clyde T. Mayberry and Nereida Thompson for
delegate seats.
          
            LaRouche Front Meets with Congressional Aide
          
          A LaRouche-organized "Food for Peace" delegation met with Fred
Clark, associate counsel for the House Committee on
Agriculture. Included in the delegation were former National Farmers
Union Virginia state director Jack Hall and former Philadelphia NAACP
president O.G. Christian.
          
            Opinions Differ on Minority Set-Asides
          
          A recent poll by the Atlanta Journal-Constitution found that 29
percent of Southern whites believe a fixed percentage of city
government contracts should be awarded to minority firms; 59 percent
of blacks supported the set-asides. In Louisiana, minority set-asides
were one of the key issues in the successful state legislature
campaign of former KKK leader David Duke.
          
            Contra Supporters Convene
          
          Tom Posey, leader of the Civilian Materiel Assistance, recently
held a four-day conference in Madison, Ala., and told the press he is
ready to resume shipment of weapons to the Nicaraguan contras. Posey
was recently acquitted on charges of violating U.S. neutrality laws by
a federal judge who reasoned that the U.S. was not in a neutral
military position against Nicaragua.
          
            Studies Show Widening Gaps
          
          The Population Research Center in Chicago reports that housing
segregation has increased in the past decade but that the ten worst
segregated cities were in the Northeast and Midwest, not the South.
          The National Academy of Sciences found that income for black
families, as a percentage of income for white families, declined from
1974-1984. The Academy also reports that black babies are more than
twice as likely as white babies to die in infancy, that black students
drop out of school at twice the rate of whites and are less than half
as likely to finish college.
          
            Duke Bill Fails
          
          A bill by Louisiana State Rep. David Duke, former KKK leader,
forbidding the use of state funds for affirmative action programs was
tabled on a 48-37 vote near the close of the 1989 legislative
session.
          
            NAAWP Candidate in Memphis
          
          Scott Shepherd, a white supremacy activist in Memphis, has
announced that he will seek a local House seat in 1990. Shepherd has
been a spokesman for David Duke's National Association for the
Advancement of White People and has sponsored a white supremacist
television show, "Race and Reason," on community access cable
television for the past three years.
          * Fashion
          Two workers were fired in June for wearing KKK hoods while walking
through the Southington, Conn., Pratt &Whitney plant. In
Philadelphia, Pa., five civilian employees of the Graterford Prison
were suspended following an incident in which two of them donned Klan
costumes and harassed black and Puerto Rican inmates. None of the
five, are known Klan members.
          * Rallies and Meetings
          Klansmen and skinheads held a meeting and Crossburning July 1-2
near Kansas City, Mo. Mississippi white supremacist Richard Barrett
held a small rally in Dawsonville, Gal, on July 4.  A chapter of the
Invisible Empire Knights of the Ku Klux Klan rallied in Hancock, Md.,
on July 29.  The Populist Party, which has a number of white
supremacists in its current and recent leadership, held or planned to
hold state-level meetings in Florida,Aug.18-20; Maryland, Sept. 9;
Georgia, Sept. 16; Texas, Sept. 23; New York, Oct. 7; Alabama,
Oct. 21; Louisiana, Nov. 4; Arkansas, Nov. 11; Tennessee, Dec. 2. 
 Southern White Knights leader Dave Holland was an organizer for this
year's annual Labor Day Klan march and unify rally at Stone Mountain,
Ga. The scheduled speakers included J.B Stoner and Ed Fields of
Georgia, Thom Robb of Arkansas, and Richard Butler of Idaho.  Some 50
neo-Nazi skinheads and members of the True Knights Klan faction
rallied in Villa Rica, Ga., on Aug. 5 .  A man calling himself Bobby
Norton has applied in Pulaski, Tenn., birthplace of the original KKK,
for an Oct. 7 march permit on behalf of the Aryan Nations.
        
        
          Stopping the Overuse of Standardized Tests
          By Neill, MontyMonty Neill
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, pp. 9-10, 12-14
          
          During the past decade, a tidal wave of standardized testing has
washed over the school systems of America. In its report,
Fallout From the Testing Explosion, FairTest (the
National Center for Fair and Open Testing) calculated that at least
100 million tests are given in the public schools each year. And,
FairTest found, testing is more frequent in the Southern states than
in the rest of the country.
          In the past several years, however, a movement to turn back the
wave of testing has developed. In 1988, North Carolina passed a law
banning the use of standardized achievement tests in the first and
second grades. Mississippi will discontinue use of its kindergarten
test after the 1988-89 school year. Georgia will do the same, even
though it only enacted the testing requirement last year. And in June,
Texas approved legislation to eliminate its first grade test.
          These are contradictory trends: simultaneously a continuing push
toward more testing and an effort to reduce the massive overuse,
misuse and abuse of standardized testing. To understand why the
testing explosion has generated a growing movement for testing reform,
we need to answer a number of key questions:
          What are the effects of tests on students?
          How does testing hurt school curricula and instruction?
          Why does testing negatively impact on school accountability and
reform?
          What are the limitations of standardized tests?
          Why are standardized exams biased?
          After responding to each of these questions, we will discuss what
is being done in the South to counter the dangers of too much
testing.
          
            Harming Individual Students
          
          In the U.S., children from lower-income, rural, inner-city and
minority backgrounds often receive an inadequate education. To some
extent, the lower average test scores of students from these
backgrounds reflects this fact. But often at a very young age,
children are tested and placed in programs that virtually guarantee
they will never receive an adequate education.
          Based on standardized test scores, thousands of children are placed
in programs for the "educable, mentally retarded" or similar special
education programs. Students in such programs rarely rise out of
them. Instead, they usually fall further and further behind more
advanced students.
          Minority students are far more likely to be placed in these
programs than are majority-group students. For example, across the
nation, blacks are three times as likely as whites to be in "educable
mentally retarded" or similar programs. After hearing evidence about
the construction of the exams, a California federal judge concluded
that "IQ" tests had never been validated for use on black
children. Basing himself on information about placement and
construction, the judge banned the use of "IQ" tests in assigning
black children to special education programs anywhere in the state.
          The same tests are also a common method of determining eligibility
for "gifted and talented" programs. Blacks are only half as likely as
whites to be in these programs, which often provide a more enriched
education. Despite the racial disparities and the California decision,
test uses such as these remain all too common elsewhere in the U.S.
          Students also are put in or removed from Chapter I, bilingual and
other remedial programs on the basis of their test scores. In many
districts, scores are used to keep children out of kindergarten or
first grade or to place them in "transitional" programs.
          Testing is also an important factor in decisions to retain students
in grade. Not only are the tests of questionable merit in such
decisions, but retention itself is of dubious educational
value. Current evidence indicates that at the end of the third grade,
children who were retained before grade three do not perform better
than others who scored the same but were not held back, even though
the children who were held back are a year older at this point.
          Students who have been retained are also more likely to drop out of
school. So using tests to retain children often does not help them but
only increases the likelihood that they will drop out or otherwise
fail in school.
          Tests are also misused for placing students in tracks within
schools. Tracking is often justified on the grounds that it protects
slower children from being overwhelmed and helps advanced children by
keeping them moving at a faster, more interesting pace. In fact,
research shows that tracking does not help advanced students--they do
just as well in a mixed-ability group--but does hurt lower-ranked
students.

          In many districts, tracking based on test scores begins at a very
early age. At every grade, low-income and minority-group students are
more likely to be in the slower tracks. As a result, they are put at
greater educational risk by the testing and placement process.
          However, many students who do not score well on tests can in fact
do regular academic work. This was demonstrated recently when the
National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) adopted Proposition
42, which barred awarding athletic scholarships to students who did
not score 700 on the SAT or 15 on the ACT. That is, the NCAA concluded
that a student who scores under 700 or 15 could not do college level
work. But a recent University of Michigan study found that 86 percent
of the athletes who would have been denied entrance because of low
test scores actually succeeded in their freshman course work. A large
percentage of them went on to graduate. Evidence such as this has
forced the NCAA to reconsider the wisdom of Proposition 42. It
confirms, yet again, the fact that tests are extremely fallible
devices for predicting how well an individual will perform.
          Thus testing acts as a major barrier to gaining a decent education
and reduces the life-chances of many children. This barrier affects
students from low-income and minority backgrounds most strongly. Facts
such as these have helped create an emerging testing reform
movement.
          
            Damage to the Curriculum
          
          The damage caused by testing does not stop at barring minority and
low-income children from access to a quality education. Tests have
also come to control the curriculum in many schools, with
often-disastrous results.
          Several major reports issued during the past year all concluded
that U.S. students are not developing "higher order thinking skills."
Research also has shown that the methods commonly used to raise
standardized test scores--drill, memorization, rote learning and
repetition--are counterproductive to teaching higher order skills. In
preparing students to score high on the tests, teachers divert
educational time and energy from the "higher order" curriculum, as
well as from any nonacademic efforts.
          As tests have come to drive the schools, the curriculum has been
"dumbed-down." For example, basal readers often contain material of
little interest to students, written in a totally dry manner using
none of the language of real life or good literature. Children who
score high on the tests at the end of each basal lesson are given the
opportunity to read other things. But children who do not do well are
given more of what did not work the first time. This simplistic and
repetitive curriculum bores them and turns them off to schooling.
          The point is not whether children need basic skills or whether
there is a role for memorization or repetition.  They do, and there
is. But these methods are not the essence of education and
learning.
          Unfortunately, testing's harmful effects on curriculum and
instruction fall most heavily on those who have already been
victimized by standardized tests. For too many of today's students,
especially those from low-income and minority families, schooling has
been reduced to test-coaching.
          
            A Spurious Accountability
          
          Despite these flaws, testing is often defended on the grounds that
it improves the ability to assess the performance of students,
teachers, schools and districts, and thereby improves
accountability. However, instruments as full of problems as
standardized tests can never be adequate measures of educational
quality. Reducing accountability to test scores provides the illusion
of quality without its substance.
          As testing spreads and increasingly defines the content of the
curriculum, decision-making power over our schools is removed from
parents, teachers, and local government. Control either shifts to the
testing office of the state education department or is put in the
hands of the testing industry.
          Unlike food, drugs or transportation, the billion dollar a year
testing industry operates with little public oversight or
control. Moreover, as the late Oscar Buros, founder of the
authoritative Mental Measurement Yearbook, lamented,
"It is practically impossible for a competent test technician or
test consumer to make a thorough appraisal of the construction,
validation and use of standardized tests...because of the limited
amount of trustworthy information supplied by the the
publishers."
          Advocates of standardized testing expect parents and community to
leave important decisions about the lives of their children in the
hands of this unregulated, unaccountable industry.
          
            Limitations of Tests
          
          Reliance on standardized tests will ensure that quality education
remains unavailable to many students. Moreover, the problems of
testing cannot be fixed simply by changing some of the questions or
other minor tinkering. The basic structure of the standardized test
means that it is an extremely limited tool for measuring learning.
          The typical multiple choice format prohibits measuring more than a
very narrow range of student performance. In the real world, people
are not given a problem designed to confuse and mislead and asked to
pick the one correct answer out of four or five options.
          Real world problems may have more than one correct answer. Though
many questions on standardized test also have more than one correct
answer, the format allows for only one to be marked as "correct."

          For example, consider this question, presented by Hoover, Politzer
and Taylor (in Negro Educational Review, April-July
1987, p.91 ): "Father said: Once there was a land where boys and
girls never grew up. They were always growing. What was Father
telling? the truth, a lie, a story."
          As the authors explain, "The 'right' answer could be any of
them. Metaphorically, it could be the 'truth' if the growth were
mental and not physical. It could be a 'lie' in that the word 'lie' in
black speech can also mean a joke or a story, and it could also be a
'story.'" This question demonstrates how tests can penalize creative
thinking or cultural diversity.
          It also indicates that understanding how the test maker thinks is a
key to doing well on these exams.
          In general, standardized tests cannot measure knowledge in any
complex or in-depth fashion. They often trivialize subjects in order
to fit the multiple-choice, one correct answer format.
          They emphasize simple, memorizable definitions and formulas. And
they certainly do not measure critical thinking, problem-solving
skills, use of knowledge in the field, or creativity.
          Moreover, test reliability and validity is often inadequate for the
purposes to which tests are put (see related article [Al Clayton.  Issues of Reliability and Validity.
Vol. 11, No. 4]).
          
            Test Bias
          
          Misuse of standardized tests is one major reasons why children from
low-income and minority backgrounds are so often mix-placed on the
basis of test scores. Bias in the tests themselves is another
important reason.
          Test proponents claim that standardized exams are "objective."
However, the only thing about them that is objective is the mechanical
method by which they are scored. The decisions about what academic
areas to cover, what questions to put in the test, what language style
to use, how difficult to make the test, and how scores are interpreted
and used--all these are subjective, not objective, decisions. All can
be biased.
          As with any human activity or product, every test is grounded in a
particular culture. Contemporary U.S. society contains many cultures
organized around factors such as language, regional or national
origin, race and ethnicity, gender and class.

          Basing a test on one culture can lead to its being biased against
people from other backgrounds.
          Consider the following item from the WISC-R (Wechsler Intelligence
Scales for Children-Revised), the most widely used "IQ" test: "What is
the thing to do when you cut your finger?" Two-point response: "Put a
Band-Aid on it..." One point response: "...Go to the doctor
(hospital)...Get it stitched up..." Zero-point response: "...Suck
blood...Don't panic...Let it bleed."
          A Maryland sociologist discovered that minority children usually
score low on this item. She asked youths in inner-city Baltimore why
they answered the question the way they did. She found that many
answered "go to the hospital" because they thought that "cut" meant a
big cut. When told it was a small cut, almost every child said to use
a Band-Aid.
          Even getting a few questions like this "wrong" can dramatically
lower a child's "intelligence" score. However, on the WISC-R as on
many other tests, the problem is not one or two questions but that the
cultural background built into the exams simply does not match the
experiences of many children.
          Item selection and norming are the processes that enable individual
scores to be distributed on a "normal" bell-shaped curve. In order to
construct the curve, item selection and norming must be based
primarily on the responses of subjects from the majority culture. As a
result, all major tests in the U.S. are constructed to fit the culture
of white middle to upper classes. Thus, they are biased against those
who are not from that culture.
          Standardizing a test means standardizing bias. Assuming that a
given test has some validity as a measure for the majority population,
bias means that the test will not adequately measure the true
abilities of people from minority groups. That means the tests will
not be valid for use on minority populations. It was for reasons such
as this that the California court found that "IQ" tests were biased
against black children.
          Test-makers do not recognize that they might be measuring class or
culture rather than ability or achievement, and do not grasp the
fundamental nature of bias in testing. Thus, the procedures
test-makers use to remove bias treat the problem as occurring only
accidentally, in an occasional item, not as underlying the instrument
as a whole. As a result, test-makers' "fairness standards" fail to
eradicate test bias. Deeply rooted bias is one additional 

reason why
standardized tests are inadequate as primary tools in educational
evaluation.
          
            What Can Be Done?
          
          Test misuse and overuse threatens the educational health of our
nation. But what can be done about these problems?
          To develop a strong educational system for all, the testing tidal
wave must be fumed back. In its place, more useful, appropriate and
unbiased assessments must be developed and implemented. Parents,
educators and concerned citizens need to make certain that
standardized, multiple-choice tests are not used to harm students or
dictate the shape of education.
          FairTest believes that education can be improved if all testing
programs are evaluated on the following principles:
Tests must be relevant. They should only be used where they
can be shown to be directly helpful to educators and students. The
quest to score high on standardized exams must not be allowed to drive
schooling.Tests must be open. Parents, teachers and independent
evaluators should have a right to know how tests are constructed,
validated and used.Tests must be fair and unbiased. No student should be assessed
based on culturally specific instruments.
          FairTest is working closely with groups around the nation to
implement this agenda. In mid-March, FairTest convened, in Atlanta, a
Southern Regional Conference on Testing Reform in the Public
Schools. Civil rights, educational reform and children's rights
advocates from many Southern states attended. This conference launched
the Southern Network for Testing Reform.
          Thus far, its major emphasis has been on repealing the use of tests
on young children. For example, educators from Alabama plan to win a
moratorium on all mass standardized testing through grade three. In
this, they are largely following the example of North Carolina, where
the Atlantic Center for Research in Education (ACRE) initiated a
campaign to ban testing in grades one and two after the state mandated
use of the California Achievement Test (CAT) in those grades [see
sidebar]. ACRE opposed the tests because they have low reliability and
validity for young children, the scores are not useful to teachers,
too much time was spent on testing, and the tests began to drive the
curriculum.
          ACRE's testing reform initiative was joined by the 1700-member
North Carolina Association for the Education of Young Children. The
two organizations developed a strategy of public education,
watch-dogging the state's Testing Commission, and lobbying the
legislature. In time, they were joined by teacher organizations and
school psychologists.
          In 1987, the legislature ended funding for testing in grades one
and two. The following year, the state legislated an outright ban on
the use of standardized achievement tests in those grades and mandated
that alternative assessments be devised. These alternative evaluation
tools were developed out of an analysis of the state's curriculum and
are based on child development theory. They will be introduced across
the state in the fall of 1989.
          The movement to stop testing young children is only the
beginning. While testing young children often causes the most harm,
test misuse does great damage all the way through high school
graduation--or non-graduation. Activists in each state and district
must consider how best to combat all types of test misuse and
abuse.
          In summary, standardized tests are being used to deprive many
children of a quality education. Though the negative effect falls most
heavily on young children and students from low-income and minority
backgrounds, test overuse blocks the ability to improve education for
all students.
          While many of these problems are due to misuse of the instruments,
the instruments themselves are often flawed. Therefore, standardized
tests should be used with great caution, and even then only with
additional information about students or programs.
          Readers who are interested in working with others in their state on
testing reform should contact FairTest. We will put you in touch with
local activists, send you information, and help you initiate and
develop coalitions and campaigns to end the overuse, misuse and abuse
of standardized testing.
          
            Monty Neill is the Associate Director of FairTest, the
National Center for Fair &Open Testing. Documentation, as well as a
more extensive discussion of most of the points in this article, can
be found in Fallout Prom the Testing Explosion: How 100 Million
Standardized Exams Undermine Equality and Excellence in America's
Public Schools, by Noe Medina and D. Monty Neill, available
for $8.95 from FairTest, 342 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02139; (617)
864-4810.
          
        
        
          How Acre stopped testing in North Carolina
          By McCullough, PagePage McCullough
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, pp. 12-13
          
          In 1987, the North Carolina legislature voted against giving the
California Achievement Test to first and second grade children.  In
the following article, Page McCullough, the former executive director
of the Atlantic Center for Research in Education (ACRE), explains how
this victory was realized. Since its founding in 1978 as a group of
parents, teachers, and teacher educators focusing on the needs of
poor, minority and handicapped children in North Carolina's public
schools, ACRE has actively worked against misuse of standardized
tests. [In 1988, the state banned the use of standardized achievement
tests in grades one and two and directed the Department of Education
to construct developmentally appropriate individualized assessment
instruments.]
          The North Carolina campaign to stop norm referenced standardized
testing in the first and second grades began in 1983 when the state's
General Assembly voted to start using the California Achievement Test
(CAT) in the early grades. ACRE opposed the use of the tests for many
reasons: normed group achievement tests have low reliability and
content validity for young children; the scores provided little useful
information to teachers; the curriculum was becoming "test-driven";
and too much time was spent on testing.
          Our work to repeal this mandate has been as much as a state of
mind as any set of techniques. We knew we were in for a long battle
because many politicians and parents want accountability and they see
these tests as a good way to get it. The new testing program also
enjoyed the fervent support of then Governor James Hunt and State
Superintendent of Public Instruction Craig Phillips.
          In such an unfriendly atmosphere, ACRE began the campaign by
researching the issue, monitoring relevant boards, educating parents
and teachers, introducing ourselves and our position to the
legislature, building a constituency, training citizens to lobby and
"waiting for daylight."
          ACRE's campaign efforts included monitoring meetings of the State
Board of Education and the North Carolina Testing Commission, which is
responsible for advising the State Board on all testing programs
administered by the state. Our observers made it possible for us to
know when questions were being raised about the CAT in early
grades. When an elementary school principal asked for a review of the
program, ACRE and the North Carolina Association for the Education of
Young Children, (NCAEYC) got on the agenda to present our views. We
learned to hone our arguments, and we learned that the testing
commission was never going to recommend a change in the program.
          When the legislature was in session, we monitored relevant
committee meetings and made our position known. Not more than a dozen
legislators supported us at first, but we learned how the General
Assembly worked and we became familiar faces.
          ACRE educated parents and teachers about the issue whenever we
could. We held workshops and published articles about the issue in our
newsletter. We created our own "Parent and Citizen Test Review
Commission," which publicized our position opposing the testing of
first and second graders. With these efforts, we built a small group
of dedicated teachers who were willing to learn to lobby.

          ACRE found a firm ally in NCAEYC. This group has what our small
organization does not: 1,700 dues-paying members. NCAEYC is composed
of professors, teachers and day-care providers concerned with the
quality of services for children from infancy to 8 years-old. ACRE had
experience lobbying and cutting through the bureaucratic maze of the
State Department of Public Instruction; NCAEYC had voters in every
district. There's nothing like a lecture from one's first grade
teacher to change a legislator's mind!
          In 1987, a member of NCAEYC persuaded a respected and popular
legislator, who had young children, to introduce a bill to stop
testing altogether in the first and second grades. By this time we had
a different governor, who was not interested in the issue, and
legislators were beginning to hear complaints about the time testing
was taking and the stress it caused young children.
          ACRE's and NCAEYC's years of organizing paid off as teachers
testified before legislative committees and our phone trees went into
high gear. ACRE presented our position paper, signed by many
elementary school teachers. Our most persuasive arguments were that
young children were poor test takers, so the results were not
reliable, and that the test ignored very important goals of our
curriculum which cannot be measured with paper and pencil tests. The
unanimous vote for the bill in the Senate represented a major change
in perspective by lawmakers.
          However, the bill stalled in the House when opposition from
Superintendent Phillips and former Governor Hunt surfaced. Our
legislative allies then attached a provision to the education
appropriations bill eliminating the requirement for testing, and this
provision was enacted.
          Since our initial success with the issue, the NC Association of
Psychologists and the NC School Psychologists have joined with ACRE,
NCAEYC, and the North Carolina Association of Educators (NCAE) to form
a larger Coalition. ACRE continues to monitor and keep our network and
key legislators informed. The proponents of testing are attempting to
restore state-mandated use of the CAT in grades one and two.
          Our campaign suffered from the usual lack of time and  money.  Six
years is a long time to sustain a volunteer group and we are  no match
for the personnel at the disposal of the bureaucracy and  the test
companies. Our work also suffers from a lack of parental support,
which is a serious flaw. Parents have every right to  know about their
child's progress in school and we have not done a good job offering
alternatives to the lousy measures now being used.
          Our strengths in this campaign included an astonishingly persistent
group of volunteers who became increasingly skilled in lobbying in a
timely manner. We did our homework and knew a variety of arguments to
use and with whom to use them. We were pragmatic and non-partisan and
in the end had votes from the black caucus, liberal Democrats, and
conservative Republicans. Finally, we owe a great deal to three
experienced women lawmakers who were willing to work hard and trade
chips for this issue.
          Our conclusion is that successful campaigners must be prepared for
a protected battle, must organize a coalition that can develop
significant public support from critical sectors, must diligently
monitor relevant state bodies, must find the persuasive arguments and
evidence to influence decisionmakers, and must locate legislators
willing to take the issue as their own. Finally, victories must be
defended and hopefully expanded.
          
            Reprinted from the FairTest Examiner,
Spring 1988 quarterly newsletter of FairTest. A free sample copy is
available from FairTest, 342 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02139.
          
        
        
          H.L. Mitchell, 1906-1989
          By Land, MikeMike Land and Williams,  RandallRandall Williams
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 15
          
          H.L. Mitchell, co-founder of the Southern Tenant Farmers Union and
a life-long Southern radical and activist, died August 1 in
Montgomery, where he had lived in semi-retirement since 1973. He was
83.
          "I always believed that if you raised enough hell, something
would be done about a problem. And I always tried to do that,"
Mitchell said in an interview for the March 1987 issue of
Southern Changes. Armed with a socialist's convictions
and a cutting dry wit, Mitchell raised hell far and wide.
          In 1934 he helped found the STFU, perhaps the nation's first truly
biracial labor union. In the 1940s he became president of the National
Farm Labor Union, and in the 1950s he was leading migrant workers in
California--he issued Cesar Chavez his first union card. In the 1960s,
Mitchell organized sugar cane workers in Louisiana.
          Even in retirement he stayed active, writing letters to newspapers
and lobbying Congress for a new homestead act to help small
farmers. He found time to write his autobiography, Mean Things
Happening In This Land, and to shepherd the production of a
film, Our Land Too: The Legacy of the Southern Tenant Farmers
Union. And he lectured widely on college campuses.
          Only in the last few months did he markedly slow down. And August
1, when Harry Leland Mitchell died at a Montgomery hospital, he left a
rich legacy of his own: a legacy of social ideals, pragmatic action,
and colorful expression. He was, in essence, a great American
character.
          Telling of his 1930s visit to the white House to meet Eleanor
Roosevelt, he recalled riding "right through those iron gates, the
same ones where Reagan always stands and waves with all those damn
dictators."
          Then there was his first meeting with Reagan, at a 1950s American
Federation of Labor meeting. Mitchell was there as head of the NFLU
and Reagan as head of the Screen Actors Guild. "One day I saw Ron
standing there, looking wise like he does, and I said, 'Ron, I'm
H.L. Mitchell. I want to talk to you. People keep tapping me on the
shoulder and calling me Ron.' He said, 'Well, I'm glad to meet you
because I always have people saying, "Hey, Mitch, how are the farmers"
And I don't know a damn thing about farmers.' And he still
doesn't," laughed Mitchell.
          Mitchell was laughing and joking about the issues he took so very
seriously right up to the end of his life. He remained an advocate for
small farms and believed a combination of agricultural cooperatives
and a national homestead act could help a new generation of farmers
make a living off the soil. He believed small farms were inherently
more efficient and also better for workers, especially for individuals
who are unemployed today and untrained for an increasingly
technological world.
          He had traveled far for a sharecropper who was a Tennessee native
and who had become a socialist by reading tracts during breaks from
pressing clothes in a dry cleaners' in Tyronza, Arkansas.
          In his autobiography, Mitchell had described the funeral he
wanted. He didn't get it--being buried just up the hill from Lurleen
Wallace in a Montgomery cemetery--but the words said a lot about the
spirit of the man:
          "When I have lived out my life I have asked that my body be
cremated, and that my ashes be scattered in the wind over eastern
Arkansas. Then, if any one of the plantation owners or their
descendants who know of me still survive, may they some day look up in
the sky, and if something gets in their eyes, they can then say:
'There is that damned Mitchell again.'"
        
        
          One Less Voice for Discrimination
          By Kennedy, StetsonStetson Kennedy
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 16
          
          Any time a racist organization or hate sheet goes out of business
is a time for rejoicing. The recent obituary in The
Spotlight announcing the demise of The Citizen,
standardbearer of the White Citizens Councils which flourished at
mid-century, makes very good reading indeed.
          The appearance of these Councils on the local and state levels in
many parts of the country was part and parcel of the last-ditch effort
to perpetuate apartheid in America.
          The agreed-upon division of labor was for the Councils to wage
terror by day, and the Klan by night. To rope and faggot were added
firing, foreclosure, eviction and denial of credit.
          There was nothing new about this conjoining of economic lynching
with the more conspicuous forms. The same "double whammy" was employed
during the holocaust which overthrew Reconstruction, restored white
rule and institutionalized apartheid. Again, at the turn of the
century when blacks thought they saw hope in Populism, demagogues like
Tom Watson prescribed the same medicine.
          The White Citizens Councils of more recent memory were wont to
refer to themselves as "respectable elements" but they were terrorists
nonetheless. Denial of livelihood has always been tantamount to denial
of life itself.
          We would do well to ask ourselves why it is that The
Citizen, after thirty-four years, decided to give up the
ghost.
          Hopefully, the cause for which it labored, an apartheid America, is
a lost one, no less than that of the Confederacy. Except for the black
ghetto, Jim Crow has been dumped upon the ash heap of history. And
yet, I submit, where once we had segregated racism, we now have
desegregated racism. If in this modified environment the Klan can find
plenty to do, why is there not enough to fill the sheets of The
Citizen? 
          Part of the answer, in my opinion, is that its editors have
concluded that with plainclothes counterparts in the executive branch,
and black-robed counterparts on the federal bench, they can afford to
relax and go back to "discrimination as usual," i.e., on a more
covert, individual basis.
          What has happened is that recent administrations have been doing
the job of the Citizens Councils for them. Capitalizing on the
so-called "white backlash" against busing, "reverse discrimination"
which they helped conjure up, these administrations picked up the ball
in the ongoing game of keeping blacks, women, and others in a
disadvantaged status. The lynching, in one form or another, still goes
on by day and by night . . .
          To put it into another metaphor, in the great American crap game
blacks, women and other minorities have always been up against loaded
dice. School busing and affirmative action have been the only means in
sight for evening the odds. In one of the great turnarounds in human
history, a nation which had virtually prescribed discrimination
proscribed it.
          But the odds are a very long way from being even yet, and if we let
anyone take us bade to the loaded dice, we will all be in for a hard
twenty-first century.
          Some cynic among the philosophes once said, "The forms of
exploitation change from time to time."
          Woody Guthrie was also well aware of the versatility of exploiters
when he sang:
          
            As through this world I've rambled,
            I've met lots of funny men;
            some will rob you with a sixgun,
            some with a fountain pen.
          
          But Woody was an activist, not a philosopher, and he wasn't buying
any.
          
            With this issue, Stetson Kennedy joins Southern
Changes as a contributing editor. His four books, which at
mid-century raised the standard of total equality and called for an
end to Jim Crow--Palmetto Country (1942);
Southern Exposure (1946); The Klan
Unmasked (1954);and Jim Crow Guide (1955)--are
all being brought back into print by the University Presses of Florida
(15 N.W. Fifteenth St., Gainesville, FL 32603). Palmetto
Country has already appeared, and the others, as well as a new
work on Reconstruction, After Appomattox, are scheduled
for 1990.
          
        
        
          Louisiana, Third World Dumping Ground
          By GreenpeaceGreenpeace
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 21
          
          Oh, for the good old days, when U.S. environmentalists and their
gangs of regulators were ruining the economy by forcing well-meaning
companies to take their business abroad. Now, according to a report in
Taiwan's China Post, that country's super-rich plastics tycoon, Wang
Yung-Ching, is facing "difficulties raised by increasing labor and
environmental movements." He plans to take his business, Formosa
Plastics, abroad--to Louisiana.
          In March, Formosa Plastics announced plans for a $470 million
plastic firm production facility in Pointe Coupee Parish to
manufacture such consumer staples as imitation leather, swimming pool
liners and raincoats. This is the same Formosa Plastics that has had
"serious groundwater contamination and lots of releases" at a vinyl
chloride plant in Baton Rouge, according to Willie Fontenot, a special
assistant on environmental affairs to Louisiana state attorney
general.
          Formosa Plastics has a checkered history. In 1985, the Delaware
Department of Natural Resources issued an emergency decree revoking
all of the company's permits after tolerating four years of consistent
violations, including 40 separate illegal releases of carcinogenic gas
(10 after a cease-and-desist order was issued) and violations of waste
water permits in 16 out of the preceding 24 months. Louisiana seemed
unconcerned. The company's renewed interest in Pointe Coupee, said one
state developmental official, "symbolizes Formosa's commitment to
Louisiana."
        
        
          Do the Right Thing.  Do the Right Thing.  Spike
Lee.
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 26
          
          A scene late in Spike Lee's movie, Do Thc Right
Thing, depicts white firefighters trying to hose down the
blazes at Sal's Pizzeria, torched earlier in a small riot in the
Bedford-Stuyvesant part of Brooklyn. While the firefighters are trying
to save the building and the neighborhood, its black residents are
throwing things at and fighting with the white firemen.
          When I came out of the movie house last Saturday afternoon, I
thought about another firefighter I had seen on television earlier, a
member of the Birmingham Fire Department who was one of the white
plaintiffs in the recent U. S. Supreme Court case that now gives white
firefighters a belated opportunity to challenge that city's
affirmative action plan. When asked why he opposed the plan to remedy
past discrimination against blacks, the white firefighter said, "I
feel I'm paying the price for something I had nothing to do
with."
          It's a line that Spike Lee should have used, and one his film
acknowledges as fundamental in the attitude of many whites on issues
of race relations today. A couple of whites in the film are clear
bigots, but the only white who really suffers is Sal, the Italian
owner of the pizza parlour who, over 25 years, has grown to care
deeply about the neighborhood and some of its people. His store gets
burnt, not for anything he does directly, but because a white
policeman kills the black youth with whom Sal had had a fight
earlier.
          Like the firefighters, perhaps--in the film and in Birmingham--Sal
thinks of himself as a victim of something he had nothing to do
with. He has provided respectful service to the black community for
decades; he didn't trespass on someone else's property and cause a
disturbance as did the slain black youth; he didn't call the police;
he didn't kill the youngster.
          Yet it was his store that was trashed by rioters.
          In this dramatic setup, Lee captures accurately the current
standoff of race relations in every major urban area on both sides of
the Mason-Dixon. Today, the underclass of blacks continues to grow,
usually within unnoticed isolated areas of our central cities. Some
places have become literally no middle-aged man's land; all are
populated by many who are virtually helpless to improve greatly their
own circumstances through their own efforts. On the other hand, many
whites--near and far from the ghettos--don't see why we should pay the
price for fundamentally helping the underclass. After all, as
individuals we go to work and pay our taxes; we didn't create the
ghettos; we, don't discriminate against blacks in our own personal
lives' Some of us even try to help blacks whom we consider
particularly deserving.
          In the film, as in urban life, older blacks who have lived through
the terror of white violence demonstrate genuine remorse after the
burning. The opinions of most younger residents are embodied in the
voice of Mookie, Sal's black deliveryman (played by Spike Lee) who
explains the burning essentially as a justifiable reaction to the
white policeman's killing. It's a perspective that probably seems
grossly unfair, if not outrageous, to many whites who cannot believe
that we should be held responsible for the bigotry of other whites. To
be sure, it is a dangerous equation for people to reach on the streets
of any peaceful society. Yet, Mookie knows how fairness in Bed-Stuy
works: Sal has insurance; most of his damages will be recovered. His
pride and selfworth, more than his pocketbook or person, have been
hurt while, in fact, a black youth has died.
          The white mayor will have a blue ribbon panel investigate the
disturbance, not the killing.
          Admittedly oversimple, the film's conclusion is too much a
reflection on our society in places like Bed-Stuy for comfort or
condemnation: It is usually the white majority who elects presidents,
senators, governors, legislators, and, in most cities, mayors whose
policies and appointments allow racism and racial discrimination to
continue in places like our police and fire departments, and it is
primarily white indifference in our society that permits a new
generation of blacks to be born into the deadend and hopelessness of
an underclass. For that, Spike Lee bluntly suggests we must all pay
the price, one way or the other, one time or another. And, God help
us, he is right.
          
            Steve Suitts is publisher of Southern
Changes and the executive director of the Southern Regional
Council.
          
        
        
          Ruling in McKinney Surplus Property Case
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 23
          
          A homeless support group in Huntsville, Ala., has lost a federal
court action aimed at forcing the U.S. Navy to make an unused
warehouse available for shelter. However, the judge's ruling does
establish a government obligation to make underutilized federal
properties available to the homeless under the McKinney Homeless
Assistance Act.
          Judge Oliver Gash ruled in National Coalition for
the Homeless, et al., v. Veterans Administration, et al., that
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services was violating the
McKinney Act by failing to process applications from groups seeking to
use "underutilized" federal property for shelters or housing for the
homeless. HHS had maintained that its only responsibility was for
"surplus" property and that other agencies had to process applications
for property they still owned but were not using, thus frustrating
applications from support groups interested in using the properties
under the McKinney Act.
          The Gash ruling is considered a step forward by housing activists,
even though in the Huntsville case the judge ruled that the Navy
property in question was on land owned by the City of Huntsville and
the Navy was thus justified in turning the building on the site over
to the City.
        
        
          Affordable Housing Shortage at Crisis Stage
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, p. 23
          
          A growing lack of affordable housing has reached a crisis stage for
blacks and Hispanics, as well as for low income Americans in general,
according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
          Over half of poor blacks, Hispanics, and whites actually pay more
than half of their incomes for housing. The U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development considers housing affordable if it does not
consume more than 30 percent of a household's income. Actually, two
out of five families pay at least 70 percent of their income for
housing, according to a recent report based on a 1985 study by the
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities.
          Substandard housing is a particular problem for
minorities. One-third of all blacks and Hispanics lived in substandard
housing in 1985, compared to 13.5 percent of poor whites that lived in
substandard housing. For example, while black and Hispanic households
make up 17 percent of all households in the United States, these
groups make up 42 percent of those occupying such substandard
conditions as units with holes in the floor or evidence of rats.
          According to Edward Lazere, the principal author of the report on
the study, "These high housing cost burdens are likely
to have contributed substantially to the growing problem of
homelessness and to have intensified other problems such as the rising
incidence of hunger. When poor families spend so much of their limited
incomes for housing, little money remains for other necessities.
          Among whites, black and Hispanics alike, substandard housing was
most widespread in the South. Some 70 percent of all blacks living in
substandard housing--and about half of all Hispanics and whites living
in substandard housing--lived in the South, including Texas.
          
            Grants Available for Aid to Homeless in South
          
          Several projects in the South are among those in 34 states and the
District of Columbia which were recently awarded grants under the
Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act.
          A total of $89.2 million was awarded in June and July, with the
largest share going to projects for homeless families with
children. New York got 35 percent of the funding, or $25.8 million.
          In the South, project locations receiving funds for transitional
housing included Clearwater, Fla.; Atlanta; Huntsville, Ala.; and
Batesville, Ark. Transitional housing assistance is intended for
short-term help for homeless families with children or for the
chronically mental ill. Such assistance usually involves a sponsor who
arranges for services that help achieve independence. Job training,
education, and half-way programs are examples.
          For permanent housing, states themselves are the sponsors. Both
Kentucky and Mississippi were among the states receiving
grants. Low-cost financing and other ways around the housing barrier
are the typical approaches of such efforts.
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, pp. 32, 31
          
          On a morning in the midst of the Bill Lucas furor, I completed an
informal poll in the skyscraper building which houses both local
governments here in the Motor City. A small army is employed
there. Presumably these people know Lucas best. I asked a sampling of
municipal and county employees in the City-County building the
following simple, two-part question: "Should the U.S. Senate
confirm Bill Lucas and why or why not?"
          The Lucas affair is over now. But the questions are still
relevant.
          Detroit is 70 percent black and not many whites are employed in the
building. The white employees, however, gave answers and explanations
not unlike their black counterparts. Lucas, to say the least, is not
popular in Detroit.
          Well, how did he get himself elected sheriff and then county
executive?
          By being black, opportunistic and hard working. His opposition was
always token and having Mayor Coleman Young and the black urban
political machine behind him didn't hurt. Incidentally, Young grew up
in Selma. His dear aunt lives there now and is a grand lady. The mayor
wears wide, red suspenders and is a character.
          But, back to Lucas.
          An interesting number of whites in the western section of Wayne
County have consistently voted for Lucas. They even stayed with him in
his disastrous run for Governor last year. Those white voters are
appreciative Lucas didn't forget his promise to make suburban parks
safer.
          Predictably, when Lucas switched to the Republican Party and ran
for governor, white Republicans deserted him by the thousands and
voted for a Democrat. At the other end of the spectrum, Lucas received
less than 10 percent of the black vote.
          Lucas is the accurate embodiment of many so-called educated
blacks. He is selfish, opportunistic and so used to "brown nosing"
whites for personal gain he couldn't even break from that mold before
the Judiciary Committee though the President had understandably given
him latitude to appear independent and dedicated to civil
rights. Lucas slavishly mouthed support for the most outlandish,
rightwing nonsense of his sponsors.
          The incredulous nomination of this likable, well-meaning, but
unqualified and malleable black man is one for the books even in
surreal Washington. For years, Republicans have accused blacks of
putting forward "unqualified" blacks. The Republicans then give Lucas
to the nation. Washington is upside down.
          A shallow-minded Dixiecrat, Strom Thurmond, called liberal Joe
Biden a racist for opposing black Lucas. Thurmond made his political
career baiting black people. That is about all he had going in South
Carolina politics.
          Following Thurmond's logic, Jesse Jackson and Ben Hooks are racists
for opposing Lucas, and Thurmond and his Republican crowd ain't
because they supported him.
          In white Washington, Selma and virtually everywhere a "qualified"
black is little more than a stoolie who fronts and defends for white
politicians. It is difficult to teach black children the importance of
real qualifications when every day they see black dunces elevated for
simply selling out their own.
          At every level of government, white politicians put forth black
"leaders" of their choosing. Their reasons are identical to Bush's
rationale for putting forth Lucas. The process has been in vogue since
1965 when blacks were first empowered to vote.
          The difference now is an increasing number of blacks who will
publicly deal with black hustlers, black opportunists and black pimps
in the effective way whites dispatch ethnic traitors.
          There are growing signs of that development even in Selma and
Dallas County. Dr. King would be pleased.
          
            After Detroit, the Crescent City...
          
          In this joyous land of rich gumbo, spicy cajun seafood, boiled
crawfish, jazz, Mardi Gras and incessant partying there is developing
a new and active racism. How sad.
          When I lived in New Orleans 35 years ago, local racism was more
akin to Northern than Southern foolishness. Everything changes, I
suppose.
          White newspapers, white columnists, white editorials, white leaders
and even the so-called liberals say many local whites have "recoiled
in horror and fear" that blacks have dominated City Hall for a
decade. It is the old backlash argument again. The city is as
prosperous as ever.
          By hysterically screaming everyday about this "backlash" (one radio
station went into various white neighborhoods and took a poll "on the
depth of the backlash") white leaders are really saying to blacks, if
you push too hard for equality and parity we will hate you.
          I rejected that backlash crap more than forty years ago. Yesterday
I said so and even more in New Orleans.
          I told a successful black New Orleans politician that whites
remaining in the public schools in my hometown of Selma say
frequently, in so many words, they will leave the system if they
cannot have their way on everything important. But, to their credit,
they haven't. They deserve more credit than some blacks.
          The politician asked rhetorically if ever there would be a time
when race is not a problem. I said race is not a problem; racism
is. He said my "unnerving type of leadership is to blame." I
asked, "Blame for what?"
          He claimed that I had been preaching for years that white people
hate black people. He said I make emotional speeches that "Whites
hate blacks for trying to get out of their place as cooks, butlers,
gardeners and servants." He also claimed I imply whites would only
love blacks if they remained in these positions.
          I accused my friend of suffering from the usual self-serving
delusions of black politicians.
          I don't profess to know or care who hates whom. I do ask blacks to
objectively examine the facts of our existence. White Christians do
not, in the main, worship with black Christians. Schools,
neighborhoods and almost everything else--North and South--were or are
segregated by race. All this racial segregation hardly equates with
respect or love.
          There is no institution in America, including the federal
government, which treats blacks and whites with parity and
equality. The law, justice and even the market place have different
"measuring rods." When we ask for parity, we are told it takes
time.
          How much time?
          In an old film clip shown on TV the other night, the late James
Baldwin said, "I am almost 60 years old and will not live another
60 years. You have used my great-grandparents' time, my grandparents'
time, my parents' and my children's time. How much time do you need to
perfect your humanity and leave mine alone? I am fresh out of
time?"
          My response to the New Orleans politician echoed Baldwin. But, the
black politician did not believe. He cannot afford to believe. It is
not truth he seeks. It is truth he must avoid. Convenience and
acceptance are the cornerstones of his life. The world is saturated
with his kind.
          There is no backlash in New Orleans. It is the same old
frontlash. In 1989, it is simply more difficult to be hypocritical
about one's racism.
          So, a new racial word is invented--"backlash."
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and writer.
            Our columnist has been touring America.--Ed.
          
        
      
    
  
