
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 11, Number 3,
	       1989
        
          In the Governor's Year of the Child, a Call for Alabama
Arise
          By Scott, Carolynne B.Carolynne B. Scott
          Vol. 11, No. 3, 1989, pp. 7-9
          
          Governor Guy Hunt has proclaimed 1989 to be the Year of the Child
in Alabama. For the poor child whose mother receives Aid to Dependent
Children (ADC), this is hardly cause to celebrate.
          How much can a welfare mother buy with $118 per month for a family
of three--the average size of a family receiving ADC benefits? Add
food stamps and Medicaid to that, and the mother's total benefits rise
to $438 per month. Very likely, the $118 is the only cash that comes
in.
          Medicaid benefits, which help considerably in a health crisis, may
force the mother to remain on the dole, for if she happens to find odd
jobs, and if those jobs push her annual income over $1,428, then she
will not qualify for Medicaid at all.
          Although federal authorization for the ADC program is included in
the Social Security Act, ADC benefit levels are left to the individual
states, and Alabama in this Year of the Child provides the least cash
assistance in the nation.
          The ADC cash and food stamps' value together equal less than half
the federal poverty level for income ($9,044 for a family of three)
. The base payment in Alabama has not increased since 1976, and then
only 0.5 percent. Of some 45,000 individuals on ADC benefits in
Alabama, 31,500 are children. Two-parent families do not qualify
unless one parent is handicapped.
          While still inadequate, ADC benefits are somewhat better in Georgia
where a three-person family can receive $263 per month. In Florida,
the allotment is $264, and in Kentucky, $197. The Southeastern average
is $193. At the national level, the median benefit for a family of
three in 1987 was $359.
          
            Vexations of the Poor
          
          Kay Samples, a middle-aged mother of four (and a single parent for
seventeen years), explained some of the vexations surrounding
assistance for the poor at a hearing in Gadsden recently. The hearing
was mandated by the U.S. Catholic Bishops' Pastoral Letter on the
Economy and was one of five set up by the Peace and Justice Office of
the Birmingham diocese. "I wanted to go to school, to technical
college," Mrs. Samples recalled, "but if I got scholarship
money, I lost my Medicaid. If I worked, I lost Medicaid. A lot of us
that have special children need help to get a job and be able to keep
the children on Medicaid." Mrs. Samples has a chronically ill
daughter.
          Still, Mrs. Samples is grateful for the public housing assistance
she did receive. She recalled that "if you live in a HUD project
and your utilities get cut off, you can't keep the apartment."
          "I drew $118 per month, and when I paid my utilities I didn't
have anything left. I had to pay my gas bill one month and my power
the next."
          In 1986, Mrs. Samples married a retired military man who pulled her
out of poverty, then died of lung cancer within one year. His Social
Security and military benefits now support her and two daughters still
living at home, and she works at the Baptist Mission Association in
Gadsden to help others.
          
            Most Benefits Less Than Two Years
          
          Mrs. Samples received ADC benefits for seven years, but most
families do not stay on the program that long. Nationally, only 25
percent of ADC recipients stay longer than two years.
          For utility assistance, as Mrs. Samples pointed out, the mother
must turn to churches and charities. Alabama Power cuts off some
90,000 customers per year and Alabama Gas some 20,000, according to
Angie Wright, of Greater Birmingham Ministries. GBM has estimated that
50 to 80 percent of its direct assistance budget goes for help with
utilities. Yet many poor families lose their heat and lights, or,
worse yet, sell their food stamps to pay the bills.
          The situation has become even more critical since the latest
federal budget reduced federal aid in the form of the Low Income Home
Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP) by 9.6 percent. Children of
low-income families suffer an increasing risk to health and life due
to lack of electricity or gas.
          With the wealthiest fifth of Americans controlling 43.5 percent of
the income and the poorest fifth only 4.6 percent, the situation for
the poor grows steadily worse. As Sister Mary Roy, who operates the
Anniston Interfaith Center of Concern (a welfare agency providing
emergency food, clothing and cash assistance) pointed out at the
Gadsden hearing: "Little by little, the gap between the 

haves and
the have-nots is widening. The backbone of society has been the middle
class, but now, many of them are needing help, too."
          Enter Alabama Arise--a coalition of churches, social services
providers, and legal and political groups as diverse racially,
politically, and ideologically as the American Civil Liberties Union
and the League of Women Voters, Mobile Catholic Social Services and
the Loveman's Village Tenants' Council in Birmingham.
          The concept of a statewide network of advocates for the poor was
spearheaded by Greater Birmingham Ministries and the Auburn-based
Alabama Coalition Against Hunger. "We realized individually that we
did not have the power to make an impact on the legislature," says
Sandra Lawler, church and community organizer for GBM.
          "We introduced the idea and worked hard by telephone and through
letters. Very quickly, we got a number of interested groups. They
decided there would be one representative from each organization and
that we'd come together for an all-day meeting to set priorities."
That was in June of 1988. Now there are fifty-one organizations with a
well-tuned social conscience who pay $100 to $500 to support Alabama
Arise's efforts.
          Alabama Arise has retained Jim Littleton as its legislative
coordinator in Montgomery. A soft-spoken black businessman, Littleton
worked as an aide to former Alabama governor Fob James during his
administration and has lobbied for Alabama A&M University and
"the Electric Cities," towns which have their own
electric companies.
          At a recent meeting of the Direct Services Network, a coalition of
some sixty organizations addressing issues affecting the poor, Angie
Wright of GBM and Lucille White of Partners in Advocacy gave Alabama
Arise's strategy; "Activate the phone tree at night, and we can
have 4,000 calls into the Legislature by the next morning."
          Through these calls, as well as personal visits with legislators
and Littleton's efforts, Alabama Arise hopes to ensure utility service
for the poor fund adequate maternal and health care, raise ADC
benefits, and initiate tax reform.
          "We don't expect to have all this happen in one session,"
says Angie Wright, "but it is realistic to think we will make some
of our goals."
          By mid-April, $4 million, which would provide a 15 to 20 percent
increase in monthly ADC benefits had passed both the Alabama House and
Senate to become a conditional appropriation. "That means that if
the state takes in more than it has budgeted, Governor Hunt will
decide what to do with it," Ms. Wright said. "Last year, he was
in favor of an increase in benefits," she added. "It will be a
priority of Alabama Arise to lobby him this summer."
          
            A Political Power Play
          
          Alabama Arise's other trump--a $0.25 surcharge on residential power
bills and a 0.4 percent charge on businesses--came up as House Bill
761 before the House Ways and Means Committee on April 19. Wright,
Public Service Commissioner Charlie Martin and the Rev. Joe Elmore of
Vestavia Hills Methodist Church testified on behalf of the bill.
          Wright pointed out that the bill would provide between $10-$13
million for assistance, in effect doubling the LIHEAP monies now
available.
          Commissioner Martin added that one of eight Americans lives below
the poverty level. "While the federal government is decreasing
LIHEAP monies, we're increasing the numbers who are cold."
          Representatives of Alabama Power Company, Rural Electric
Cooperative, and the City of Dothan testified against the bill.

          Oscar Walker, Alabama Power's manager of rates and regulatory
matters, pointed out that under LIHEAP only ercent
goes for electricity while 35 percent goes for liquid petroleum gas,
and 30 percent for natural gas. (In other words, electric companies do
not benefit as much as other suppliers from those LIHEAP funds which
the surcharge would swell.)
          He said that only 9 percent of Power Company customers now
participate in Project Share, a voluntary program through which they
contribute a dollar at each billing to help the poor with
utilities. Walker added that it is hard to get large industrial
companies to locate in Alabama, and the 0.4 percent tax might
discourage them further.
          He also objected to the fact that TVA industrial customers along
the Alabama/Tennessee line would not be taxed under this
bill. Commissioner Martin explained that Alabama cannot tax a federal
entity, but that municipal utility customers of TVA would be taxed.
          House committee members asked numerous questions indicating a real
interest in the bill and the distribution of funds through the
Department of Economic and Community Affairs.
          But at the end of the session, Rep. Bill Fuller of LaFayette, one
of four co-sponsors of B 761, introduced a substitute bill that would
make the tax voluntary, reduce it to ten cents for residential
customers and 0.2 percent for businesses.
          Rep. John Buskey, Montgomery, who had introduced the bill, said
this would "do irreparable harm to the program," and moved to
table the substitute. By voice vote, the committee
concurred. Rep. Taylor Harper, Grand Bay, committee chairman, heard it
differently, however. He said the "no's" carried and promptly put the
substitute to a vote. It passed.
          Alabama Arise proponents left the chamber in shock.
          Moments later, lobbyist Littleton was vowing he'd get the original
bill introduced through the Senate. "We"ll keep working," Angie
Wright added.
          If each affiliate organization of Alabama Arise develops a
telephone committee of five to ten persons, who, in turn, contact five
to ten others, 4,000 calls to legislators might indeed be made the
night before the key vote.
          
            Calling for Clout
          
          Will it work? This was the tactic Partners in Advocacy used to
bring about rudimentary changes in perinatal health care for
low-income mothers. "Four years ago, we were in the same place
Alabama Arise is," Lucille White told a DSN meeting recently,
referring to her group's effort to win funding for pre-natal and
delivery care.
          At that time, Alabama had the worst infant mortality rate in the
country. Less than 20 percent of pregnant women without doctors were
poor enough to qualify for Medicaid. Even if they could qualify,
benefits to physicians and hospitals were the lowest in the
nation. Wilcox County had an infant mortality rate of 34.2 deaths per
thousand births, three times the national average and as high as in
many Third World countries.
          "A woman had to show up at the hospital already in delivery to
be admitted," White added. Now, besides its other goals, Alabama
Arise is joining in the Partners' concerns by trying to get the
Medicaid eligibility income ceiling raised and to let older children
up to three be covered also.
          Whatever the long and arduous outcome of future legislative
efforts, the children of Alabama at least have found a voice.
          
            Carolynne Scott teaches fiction writing at the University
of Alabama-Birmingham and writes for Catholic Charities.
          
        
        
          Life As We Knew It
          By Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 11, No. 3, 1989, pp. 1, 3-6
          
          LIKE OTHER NOSTALGIAS, the notion of Southern folk cultures in transition used to seem simpler, easier to track, cut and dried. If you ever have heard the Red Clay Ramblers introduce their version of the Golden Melody Boys' song "Cabin Home," you will know what I mean. "There are two places in old time music where the singers of the songs don't want to be," Tommy Thompson or Jim Watson will say. "One place singers don't want to be is home, and the other is away from home. If they are home, they want to get away from home. If they are away from home, they want to be home."
               
          Even in the late twentieth century South where plumbers don't make house calls, double-wides travel by night on the Lee Highway, and electronic villages post their city limits signs by modem, the Ramblers' insight remains a good first principle of cultural transition as it affects songs of the South. Weary pilgrims, restless fools, poor boys a long way from home, rank strangers, friends and loved ones left behind have filled out much of the demographic profile of the South's folk and working class music, sacred and secular, black and white, young and old, male and female.
          Yet things have also been changing. And, as eras change so do the meanings of words such as "home" and "away from home," and even the meanings of "natives," and "strangers," and "loved ones." You can hear the 

Southern changes of the 1980s as easily on major-market country radio stations as well as anywhere else. "I sang 'Dixie,' as he died," sings Kentucky hillbilly outmigrant Dwight Yokam. "People just walked on by, while I cried." Or, in another current country hit by Kathy Mattea:
          
            I loved life as we knew it
            I still can't believe we threw it away
            Good-bye, that's all there is to it
            Life as we know it ended today
          
          If there is a scent of the post-mortem South in the air it is charred from the bonfire of the self-interested 1980s. You probably won't hear Webb Wilder's "Is This All There Is'" on your local top forty country station, but neither should you forget the lyrics: "You walked off the scene when I couldn't make your life like Southern Living magazine."
                     
          So what has changed in the South and what remains the same?
          First of all there remains something called the South. This is the South in which Vann Woodward insists its people have a shared, rather unpleasant historical experience distinct in America, the enduring South seemingly without end that sociologist John Shelton Reed continually labors to document in that territory which he describes as lying below the Smith and Wesson Line, the South that this summer is being bound together between the covers of The Encyclopedia of Southern Culture.
          Perhaps it is helpful to think of the South as a section of the United States. A section, like the West, or Northeast, which contains many regions and sub-regions. More about these Southern regions later.
          Enclaves of Disparity
          The South of the 1980s has become a place in which certain white enclaves of affluence, such as the suburbs of Northern Virginia and northern Atlanta, are home to some of the wealthiest householders in the nation. At the same time overall conditions for working people, and for the poor, continue to be the worst of any section of the nation.
          Today there are more poor people in the South (some twelve million) and a larger percentage of the South's population living in poverty (about 18 percent) than nearly a decade ago. Southerners from the mid-1970s down to the present have seen, or have chosen not to see, a war by the wealthy in business and government against the poor? and against working people who often hold fulltime jobs yet remain in poverty. The gap between the nation's wealthiest and its poorest has never been as large as it now, nor has so large a portion of this wealth been held by so few people.
          For the year 1987, 44 percent of the nation's total income went to the top one-fifth of all U.S. families (up from 41 percent in 1973), while only 4.6 percent of the nation's income went to the bottom one-fifth (down from 

5.5 percent in 1973).
          What is true for the nation is truer for the South which has seen, in the last decade, rising poverty rates during a time of declining unemployment. Not only are many jobs worth shoving, but poverty rates for children have climbed enormously.
          The Southern Labor Institute, a Southern Regional Council project that has among its duties the biennial gathering and analysis of national, state, and local data for the preparation of its report, The Climate for Workers in the United States, finds that the South ranks lowest when compared to other sections of the country with regard to workers' earnings and income, workplace conditions, worker protections such as unionization, unemployment benefits, disability compensation, and overall quality of life.
          One index among several that were considered in the Southern Labor Institute study-in the "quality of life category"-was infant mortality.  The United States has now fallen to a tie for last place among twenty industrialized nations in preventing babies from dying during their first year of life. In the U.S., eight of the twelve states with the highest infant mortality rates are Southern--with Alabama ranked at the bottom. Although a few states stand out as mild exceptions to thc rule, Southern states when considered as a section remain the poorest in the nation with regard to median family income.
          If you look at states in which blacks are employed in what have traditionally been predominantly white-male occupations-better paid, higher skilled, higher status jobs, there is much that seems historically and familiarly Southern. At thc low end of the scale, where fewer than one-quarter of blacks work in thc better occupations, there you find a heavy concentration of Southern states. In 1987, most states of thc South also ranked in thc bottom twenty with regard to thc percentage of women employed 

in occupations traditionally dominated by white men. And so on.
          If I have so far talked mostly about working people--wage earners, factory workers, keyboard operators, clerical workers, construction workers, temporaries, labor pool hands, fast food workers, janitors, agricultural laborers, farmers--it is because I consider them, and their families in the 1980s,to make up a large number of the Southerners who have become our contemporary "folk."
          Although most of the South's current country songs don't address themselves directly to the statistics I've mentioned, the facts and figures help shape the context in which thc music is made and heard. These days, although I tend to hear only musicians who have major label contracts, even here the current misery loves company. I've already mentioned Dwight Yokam. Consider such songs as Steve Farle's "Hillbilly Highway," "Someday," or "Nowhere Road." Nancy Griffith's "Trouble in These Fields" with its evocative, but ultimately ineffectual solution to the assault on family farming. Lyle Lovett's "This Old Porch." And even Randy Travis's realistic, ol' boy centered, "The Reasons I Cheat."
          Despair and Myth
          If I were to venture into contemporary Southern black secular music forms, especially rap, about which I know all too little, it would be easy enough to fill a list of songs which carry angry and pointed social complaint. Even in recent recordings of older forms--such as the talking blues--Southern Changes' readers have sampled the fare of North Carolina bluesman Richard "Big Boy" Henry's "Mr. President," a reelection upon the demography of trickle-down: homelessness, cuts in assistance to the those most in need, lack of empathy with people in poverty, absence of commitment to low-income housing and decent jobs, cuts in education. "Come live with me a little while," sings Big Boy Henry. "Find out how the situation is here ,' [Southern Changes, August-September 1984]
          On the other hand from this enduringly grim and callous South, recent years have seen the anxiety over the South's supposed demise be replaced by an increasingly more mythical, superficial South of merchandising. Although I could point to numerous projections of this mystique of Southernism--in movies, television, and travelogue--the best example is that of Southern Magazine. Here, advertisements embodying Southern regional "lifestyles" (not "ways of life," which would imply something deeper and less easily packaged for quick sale) cannot always be distinguished from upbeat articles. In its three year existence Southern Magazine has grown to a circulation of 260. In Southern Magazine folk and working class cultures can be prettified, transformed into vehicles of purchasable nostalgia, and kept at armchair length. Black faces, when they turn up, are in their comfortable roles as entertainers and athletes.
          This spring Southern Magazine was purchased by Southern Progress Corporation, the publisher of Southern Living magazine--itself a subsidiary of New York-based Time, Incorporated. The households of Southern Living's two million plus subscribers have a median income of $42,000. No doubt many of these readers have family roots deep in Southern folk cultures. But what these two magazines do best is skim and package a colorful cream that rises above past and present unpleasantness.
          Beyond the enduring South of history, and in addition to the mythical South, lie a couple of other Southern changes that need mention.
          In early autumn of 1988 a film, Sataam Bombay, which told of street life in Bombay, India's red light district, won a first prize at the Cannes Film Festival. When asked about her next project, the film's director Mira Nair described to a New York Times reporter a fiction film that would tell the story of "an Indian family expelled from Uganda by Idi Amin in the 1970s, who now own a motel in the black Bible Belt of the South."
                     
          The South (and particular cities and states of the South) is becoming home to significant numbers of immigrants. Nearly 90 percent of immigrants to the U.S. between 1983 

and 1986 settled in twenty states. Five of these twenty are Southern: Texas, Florida, Virginia, Georgia, and Louisiana. Atlanta, for instance, now has 100,000 Hispanics, 25,000 Koreans, 11,000 Indochinese, 10,000 Indians. Houston's Hispanic population is over 425,000. Miami- no longer even considered Deep Southern-has 600,000 Hispanics.
          The South's history with regard to race relations can hardly encourage the expectation that these newest Southerners will be warmly and quickly embraced. The first Vietnamese resettled along the Texas Gulf Coast met Klan violence and intimidation from anxious Anglo fishing communities.
          Folklorists will have much to do in interpreting new and existing Southern cultures to each other. With the coming of all these people--including the still increasing numbers of Yankees and other regional Americans--and the recognition that there are some 190,000 Native Americans living in the contemporary South, Southerners will be "obliged," as Flannery O'Connor anticipated in her short story "The Displaced Person," "to give new thought to a good many things." Not the least of the new thoughts prompted by the settling-in of new ethnic immigrants will be those that disclose the unsuspected in the South's old racial arrangements.
          Briefly, a few observations about the continuing emergence of regions within the South. Regions such as the Delta, the Black Belt, Southern Appalachia, the Low Country, the Ozarks, Northern Virginia. These regions are as genuine and persistent, if still emerging, as the South of which they are portions. At the level of day-to-day life, these regions are frequently more significant to the people who live in them than is something called the South.
          A French Gulf Coast cultural resurgence is well underway in Louisiana, as is an Appalachian consciousness in the Southern Mountains. In the Alabama Black Belt, the legacy of the civil rights and voting rights movements have resulted in unprecedented political power for black people of that region, and most recently in cultural projects ranging from the production of a newspaper to a regional folk festival to discussion about a civil rights tour along the route of the Selma to Montgomery March.
          Movements Held Hostage
          Yet, these emergent regional cultures face familiar troubles. They are not immune from the same sort of celebratory mythmaking and merchandising which affects Dixie as a whole. Consider what has become of all things "Cajun" for instance. French Louisiana is also experiencing an intensifying ecological crisis. And, in two of the regions that I mentioned--the Black Belt and Southern Appalachia--absentee ownership of most of the land and economic resources threatens to hold hostage the movements for regional self-determination.
          Finally, there are changes which affect the South's "folk" that only can be briefly noted here. The rise of suburban Republicanism, like the surge of evangelical fundamentalism, is symptomatic of civic and moral retreat. The fragmentation of many Southern emotional, spiritual, and cultural institutions continues helter-skelter. New possibilities of critique and reintegration--whether feminist, socialist, ethnically pluralist, or ecological--have hardly won the day. For now, the emotional landscape seems simultaneously alienating and liberating. Bobbie Ann Mason captures it for a moment in her recent short story, "Memphis." "Beverly and Jolene," writes Mason, "ate at a Cajun restaurant that night, and later they walked down Beale Street, which had been spruced up and wasn't as scary as it used to be, Beverly thought. The sidewalks were crowded with tourists and policemen...
                     
          
                        ". . . Beverly's parents had stayed married like two dogs locked together in passion, except it wasn't passion. But she and Joe didn't have to do that.  Times had changed. Joe could up and move to South Carolina. Beverly and Jolene could hop down to Memphis just for a fun weekend. Who knew what might happen or what anybody would decide to do on any given weekend or at any stage of life?"
                     
          Southern changes.
          
            Southern Changes' editor Allen Tullos presented a version of this essay at the "Sounds of the South" conference on Southern traditional music held in April at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
          
        
        
          Margaret Long: March on Montgomery
          By Long, MargaretMargaret Long
          Vol. 11, No. 3, 1989, pp. 9-11
          
          EDITOR'S NOTE: Margaret Long, editor from 1961-1966 of
New South, the Southern Regional Council publication
that was one of the forerunners of Southern Changes,
died in February in Tallahassee, Fla.; she had been ill for several
months. Her recounting, below, of the conclusion of the 1965 Selma to
Montgomery March remains as a testament to her gifts as writer and
observer. Thc article originally appeared as Long's regular column,
"Strictly Subjective," in the March 1965 issue of New
South.
          A pearly light glowed gray-bright through the rain clouds over
Montgomery and bathed the beautiful old city in a humid, soft
glare. The overcast day of the March on Montgomery was deceptively
luminous so that the spacious, serene streets, the great trees fuzzed
green and gold, the romantic old white houses behind magnolias and
sugarberries, the teeming mud-soaked squalor of the back streets of
Darktown and the commodious suave slow white downtown with its low
skyline, crowned by the State Capitol at the high end of Dexter
Avenue, all showed themselves in picturesque pause as "the Negroes"
and their white Yankee friends--from 25,000 to 50,000 strong--marched
from the red brick buildings and brown mud quagmires of Catholic
St. Jude City three miles to the Capitol.
          We hastened late to St. Jude City to meet the March, which was two
or three hours late getting started, with plenty of time for the
familiars at such events to greet one 

another as we moved about,
pulling our shoes precariously out of the sucking mud each
step--journalists, radio men black and white interviewing Negro
notables and oddly talking their stylized air-waves talk into their
little mikes; obscure young Negro heroes from the violent vineyards of
the Deep South; a middle-aged Jewish devotee of Civil Rights, jail and
the heady camaraderie of the Movement; hurried notables hastening to
the front line of the March forming inside the gate of St. Jude.
          The March gathering inside St. Jude--to the hideously amplified
sound of some emcee or other insistently shattering the pearly
expectancy of the air with his banal bellowings--took shape with
famous figures in the front line: Dr. Martin Luther King and his
handsome young wife Coretta, her curly dark hair blown black in the
damp breeze; Dr. Ralph Bunche, moon-faced and beaming with the
felicity and pride he brings to such occasions; Whitney Young, head of
the National Urban League, massive, handsome and smiling; Bayard
Rustin, tall and gracefully genial; John Lewis, Chairman of the
Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee, tenderly baby-sitting a
little brown girl he held by the hand; and other leaders black and
white. James Baldwin, small, black and bug-eyed, hung back with the
field hands and marched, some ten thousand people behind, with James
Forman, Executive Secretary of SNCC, Forman wearing his Snick
trademark denims. Baldwin marched in a grave business-like way, and
occasionally exhibited an elegant, warm charm in a quick smile or wave
to an acquaintance.
          They were all very grand, the leaders, great white churchmen,
dramatic and girlish nuns and the famed black and white
entertainers. Somewhere in the crowd which the press estimated at
4,000 to 25,00 and 30,000 and Rev. Ralph Abernathy called more than
50,000, were Anthony Perkins, the actor, Shelley Winters, the actress,
Dick Gregory, a bunch of famous folk singers, distinguished Negro
entertainers and, I think, Leonard Bernstein. At any rate, the great
maestro appeared the night before at the St. Jude program of
celebrities come from all over the country to show they want Deep
South Negroes to vote and be free Americans, even in Alabama.
          
            Bearing Witness
          
          Thus they bore witness to the best American feeling for our civil
rights and liberties, and as one beset and outcast white Montgomery
liberal (who had to cook for one hundred of the distinguished visitors
crowded out of hotels and restaurants) said, they were "the
conscience of the country converging on Montgomery."
          Still, with all their beauty, talent, distinction and  feeling I felt the biggest and most absorbing show was
staged by the Negroes of Montgomery as the thousands, black and white,
marched through their ghettos to downtown and the Capitol.
          As dun-colored white boys of the Alabama National Guard, formidable
in heavy helmets, boots and khaki coveralls, and sternly impassive
perhaps in confusion at their federal role of protecting Negro
marchers and Yankee outsiders, lined the sidewalks and as Army
helicopters rattled above in the gray sky, we passed a sagging,
paintless house where six or eight Negro children watched the march
from their porch, the shy, pigtailed little girls in doe-eyed, docile
wonder and the little brown boys smiling. And a fat three-year-old man
child suddenly attacked a buzzing helicopter in a fierce show of
joyful valor. He laughed, he shouted, he threatened, he shook his
fists and waved his arms, he flung himself about mightily, stomping
and hollering to drive the intruder from his sky--baby refutation of
the popular thesis of the demeaned Negro male--while his brothers and
sisters giggled and rejoiced at his ragings.
          
            Walking on "Nice" Streets
          
          We walked on Cleveland Avenue, a "nice" Negro street with a white
columned apartment house, a tasteful big gray house and grassy yards
with budding trees and gold-showering forsythia and the faint scent of
crabapple blossoms in the beginning pink bloom, and the well-dressed
Negroes on the sidewalks watched their protesting, marching friends
blandly and non-commitally.
          The March broke into song off and on--"We Shall Overcome" on one
block which drifted offend swung into "Which Side are You on, Boy?"
two blocks ahead, started by the five thousand Negro high school and
college students Snick organizers go out for the March (young Negroes
who have never before set foot in the street, ten years after
Dr. King's Montgomery bus boycott) and the parade tramped smiling and
dense into the muddy streets and lanes of "niggertown," dingy stores,
ramshackle houses, big trees, budding white spirea and yellow Dutch
broom, slick dirt sidewalks, and the poor, black, brown and golden
people, beaming, waving, clapping, beholding their Negro greats
marching for their freedom, and the strange, comradely whites from
North and South come, at 

last, to befriend them.
          An old patriarch, a sallow, mustached ninety-year-old  color of a green olive, sat in a rocking chair on his
paintless porch, watching with aged, narrow eyes, while his brown
daughters waved and smiled at the marchers and his great-grandchildren
ran about and shrilled out "We Shall Overcome."
          Half a dozen boys on the dirt sidewalk hollered at a round-faced
black boy in the March and he smiled and waved at them, and a group of
dark women waved and called to their high school girls and boys
walking by. Some old men and young women raised their voices to join
in the March's chorus of "We Shall Overcome, black and white together,
brothers we shall be-ee," and a nun's high soprano met the clear
contralto of a young mother holding a fat golden baby in dirty diapers
in the soaring, mournful assertion of "Deep in my heart, I do believe,
we shall overcome some day."
          
            Smiles in Grateful Greeting
          
          An old black grandmother in a white apron over her colorless dress
raised her heavy eyelids to look at, smile at and wave at white women
in the March, to welcome the strange friends from far away. On
porches, on the dirt sidewalks and in the mud streets, the young and
old women with shy grace and great effort met the white faces to smile
in grateful greeting. A brown slattern, her belly distended with
another baby under her streaked and faded red dress, her crisp hair
swathed in a dirty head rag, her feet in shoes run down to the soles,
lifted her weary, bitter face to nod and smile at a white woman
walking by.
          Nicely garbed young and old Negro women and Sunday-dressed children
waved and clapped as the marchers passed, in sweet hospitality for the
marching guests.
          We passed a drab stretch of sagging houses, dirty store fronts and
grassless yards, and suddenly blooming like a brilliant zinnia bed in
a dirt alley were a dozen or so children in a baby delegation
marshaled by two pretty young colored women, who exchanged grown-up
smiles with the marchers and passers-by appreciating the lovely little
ones. Their deep-eyed, tender faces, black, beige, nut brown and
nearly white, smiled shyly and their little pink-palm hands waved like
petals in a wind. I can't imagine what the black two-year-old boy or
the bronze, pigtailed ten-year-old girl in a starched yellow dress
thought it was all about, but their welcome was entrancing.
          Here and there a watching Negro joined the March. A thin old black
lady in a white dress, beside herself in the wonder and pride of the
event, left the March to greet by-standing friends and pull some of
them into the parade with her.
          And, when the throngs got to town, passing a poor white section
edging on the Negro neighborhoods where white girls amiably took
pictures, workmen watched wondering and undecided and a shabby fat man
cursed the marchers and reporters and photographers, they were a great
army of Negroes, distinguished white Americans, foreign delegations,
and the black poor of the Alabama countryside from Selma to
Montgomery.
          Negroes in the movement are always talking about the
"confrontation," of which it seems to me, for all their efforts, they
have had very little, since the white folks they would "confront" like
to turn their eyes away, put the Negroes in jail and behave as if
their dark neighbors are somebody from New York, Moscow or Peking. But
in Montgomery there was a "confrontation" when what looked to me like
40,000 or 50,000 Negroes and white people walked up Dexter Avenue,
past the big hotels and office buildings and the stunned, solemn,
smiling whites on the wide streets and in office windows and hotel
balconies, and proceeded singing the Battle Hymn of the Republic,
toward the State Capitol of Alabama, which loomed like an alabaster
dream palace in the sky at the end of the avenue. This first Capitol
of the Confederacy must be the most beautiful state building in the
country, with its elegant high dome, its white columns, graceful wings
and tiers of marble steps, splendidly gleaming on bright greensward
and among high old trees.
          
            Easter Egg Troopers
          
          And that March Thursday, a row of state troopers with bright green
helmets, green ties, khaki shirts and green trousers stood guarding
the dream ramparts of the Old South in bright and gala array like so
many festive Easter eggs as the black and white Americans marched
singing to the steps. Behind the Easter egg troopers stood hundreds of
white state officials and employees, while scores more leaned out of
office windows to hear the glorious singing, the great oratory, the
outsiders' American assertion and the Alabama Negroes' vows to vote,
sit in the legislature and equally participate in political power in
Alabama.
          I don't know what the white folks so spectacularly confronted
thought. But they stood on the marble steps for four hours hearing
every pounding song, every surge of laughter, every black shout of
ridicule and every rousing ring of the orators' echoed promise to
march, vote and demonstrate until Alabama belongs to black and white
together.
        
        
          A Turn for the Worse.  A Turn in the South by
V.S. Naipaul. (Alfred A. Knopf, 1989. 307 pages. $18.95.).
Library Service in Black & White; Some Personal Recollections,
1921-1980 by Annie L. McPheeters. (The Scarecrow Press
Metuchen, N.J., 1988. xvi. 152 pages. $22.50.)
          By Dunbar, LeslieLeslie Dunbar
          Vol. 11, No. 3, 1989, pp. 13-14
          
          A Turn in the South is, the author says, a travel
book-- "travel on a theme"--, which is, I suppose, his way of saying
that it is an interpretation of the present-day South gained from
visiting some of its parts. What he finds is a South "of order and
faith, and music and melancholy"; or, as he writes in a full-blown
passage, which testifies to a sort of epiphany: "Music and
community, and tears and faith; I felt that I had been taken, through
country music, to an understanding of a whole distinctive culture,
something I had never imagined existing in the United States."
          In the wondrous process by which our cultural clergy,  the New York City and New England cloisters, certify
works of art and literature as agreeable and acceptable to it, this
book has been granted "importance." It has none in itself. It has a
lot, in the evidence it pressed on us regarding the standards of our
cultural tastemakers. The New Yorker magazine ran three
lengthy portions; once upon a time, the New Yorker had
Calvin Trillin roving now and then the South, as good a stylist, to
say the least, as Naipaul and one who, besides, knew what to look for
and what and whom to believe.
          But it was the New York Review of Books which sealed
the book's "meaning," by choosing the pages which describe "rednecks"
for its December 22, 1988 issue. The review which the NYRB
subsequently gave the whole book was captioned "The Reddening of
America"; the reviewer called the "redneck" piece "a miniature
masterpiece." Naipaul praised it himself, calling it "full and
beautiful and lyrical." "Rednecks" in this treatment are practically
synonymous with all low-income Southern whites--and with the yearnings
of many who are better off as well; they are depicted as something
above junkyard dogs, but not far above. No other discrete minority (as
in Naipaul's understanding they are one) would be so dishonored and
lampooned in the pages of the NYRB, nor, for that matter, in a book
published by Alfred A. Knopf. It is always interesting to observe what
racism and overt prejudice are admissible in polite society. These
days, the white Southern working class is fair game.
          And country music, most particularly including Elvis Presley, is
capstone and key to the South's "distinctive culture."
          The "redneck" story is told, of course, by an interviewee, but
throughout the book Naipaul carefully lets his readers know which
persons interviewed he likes and which he doesn't. The few I can
recall whom he likes but little are black. Sometimes he is frank
enough, as with Atlanta's Marvin Arrington, to let his disapproval
show dearly, and as arising from temperamental differences. And a few
blacks he did like; Atlanta's Hosea Williams was one. But there are
far fewer blacks than whites in this interpretation of today's South,
and the whites are predominantly from that stratum known as
"moderates."
          Mississippi is an outstanding example. By my count, he reports on
an outdoor prayer meeting of blacks, as well as fourteen individual
interviews, exactly two of which are with blacks, and one of those not
consummated. Even more amazing was his selection of those two, both
rather nondescript men, in a state as rich as is Mississippi in strong
black leadership, both women and men.
          Naipaul can insist upon the exclusivity of his theme, but 

this
book, with all its hype, will be taken as a study of the contemporary
South. It is a distorted one. A few of his interviews are insightful:
I think particularly of those with Robert Waymer of the Atlanta School
Board and Judges Alex Sanders and R.P. Sugg of South Carolina and
Mississippi, respectively. Some of his own apperceptions are on
target, though by now fairly commonplace; such are his statements that
blacks have had by various stratagems to cope with the "irrationality"
of the South, or that blacks have won political positions that do not
insure actual social power, or that the old South was violent and
lawless. The interpretations of the South which dominate this book
come, however, from tradition-hallowing or politically conservative
whites; nor does he ever challenge or balance a single one of their
several disparaging remarks about blacks.
          If Naipaul has read any of the classic white interpreters of the
white South--Cash, Lillian Smith, Myrdal, Dabbs, Woodward, Leroy
Percy, others--, there is no evidence of it. He has read Up
From Slavery several times and admires it, as he does Booker
T. Washington  author. He has nothing good to say
of W.E.B. DuBois, nor of his The Souls of Black Folks,
which has "too pretty ways with words," a strange criticism from this
particular writer. Some of Naipaul's prose is wild, his description of
kudzu, for one example: a long incomplete sentence, broken by a
parenthetical clause set off by dashes, and a like one inside that,
topped off with a complete sentence within parentheses, being as
entangling as the vine itself.
          There are mistakes of fact scattered throughout the book; most are
small and come in the interviews. Neither an informed writer or editor
would, however, have indulged them. The publisher has done, on the
other hand, an exceptionally handsome job of bookmaking and
printing.
          "TELL ABOUT THE SOUTH. What's it like there." Is anyone
really interested anymore? If so, Naipaul is not a guide to follow,
not if one cares to find the reality of it. Better to read, among
other things, Annie L. McPheeters, Library Service in Black &
White; some personal recollections, 1921-1980. No fancy
foot-work here. Only clear, syntactical sentences (and clear
photographs), that  truths about the
South. Mrs. McPheeters served the Atlanta Public Libraries for over
thirty years, half of them as head librarian of the West Hunter
Branch, the principal facility for blacks; after retiring in 1966, she
became the first black faculty member of Georgia State University.
          At one place in the book, she sets down a chronology of library
services for black Atlantans between 1902 and 1959. The first item
records that W.E.B. DuBois and a committee of black citizens
petitioned the Carnegie Trustees for a library. It was denied, though
in 1903 some funds were provided to Atlanta University, for citizen
use. The last item, May 24, 1959, records that Mayor Hartsfield
announced the desegregation of the public library system, and that
Whitney Young, for the Atlanta Council on Human Relation, "reported
that the Council was pleased that race was no longer a barrier to use
of the library." What a march of events, of struggle and striving,
lay between those two dates! Mrs. McPheeters chronicles it, and in her
doing so we learn of the white and black people who confronted each
other, and revealed some truths about themselves to each other, and to
us.
          This is an honest book. The final chapters are autobiographical,
and enrich the earlier pages; the chapter on "early life and
education" is a bright gem: indeed, Mr. Naipaul, "lyrical."
          
            Leslie Dunbar is the new book editor of Southern
Changes. His earlier affiliation with the Southern Regional
Council began in 1958. He was Director of Research during 1959 and
1960, and Executive Director 1961-1965. He lives now in Durham, North
Carolina.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 11, No. 3, 1989, pp. 16, 15
          
          With all the recent useless and stupid killings by blacks there is
budding concern by some decisionmakers into the real causes of black
crime and violence. Up to now, when that question was raised all we
received was a racist wink and, "Well, you know how some blacks
are!"
          Black violence, like drugs, now threatens even white neighborhoods;
hence a belated but urgent white concern in the genuine causes and
effects of black criminality and violence.
          For forty years I have been concerned with the outrageously
disproportionate number of black people who end up in prison and on
death row. Poverty, despair, rage, and hopelessness are only part of
the problem. Racism in the criminal justice system and in the society
at large are also problems.
          Blacks comprise about 12 percent of the national population, but 46
percent of those incarcerated in jail are black and almost 41 percent
of those on death row are black. These statistics are both true and
misleading.
          Black people account for 60.7 percent of those arrested for
robbery. Caucasians account for 74.8 percent of the people arrested
for embezzlement. Fewer than one percent of people convicted for
robbery are given probation. More than 85 percent of all convicted
embezzlers are placed on probation.
          The crimes that are seen as most dangerous also have a racist
twist. A lone black street robber is treated as more dangerous than
corporations who violate plant safety laws and cause numerous
deaths. Moreover, in certain predictable states the incarceration rate
of blacks exceeds the national average.
          In the same predictable states, far fewer blacks serve as top law
enforcement people, lawyers, judges and even jurors. That procedure
guarantees the predictable result. It always has. That was one of the
reasons for political discrimination and the wholesale denial of the
right to vote.
          People of color have the fewest resources and are the most
vulnerable to the consequences of poverty, disease, despair and
rage. A consistent message made by the predominant white culture is
that blacks are less than whites and are bad, ugly end generally "no
account." Self-hate and insecurity have been watchwords in black
America for 350 years.
          Self-worth, pride and dignity are lessons taught by many black
families, some black leaders and so-called activists. These lessons,
however, are often overshadowed by the awesome and overpowering gap
between the "haves and have nots." Blacks make up 32 percent of the
homeless in the United States. Black unemployment is double that of
whites.
          This stifling poverty translates into poorer schools with a higher
dropout rate. A primary method for raising school revenues is property
taxes, but schools in poverty areas have a much smaller tax base. I
can take you to schools with cockroaches crawling the walls and to
classrooms where 

the ceilings are crumbling.
          These conditions cannot be corrected by building more prisons. A
plausible argument can be made that incarceration increases
criminality. A thinking society should be developing alternatives to
incarceration as punishment, especially for crimes merely against
property and not against people.
          After thirty years as a trial lawyer, I say without blinking that
the United States' criminal justice system is being used to destroy
people of color, most notably black people and the poor. There must be
a change in the part it plays in maintaining the current power
relationships in the U.S.
          Most of what politicians and public office holders say about crime
is not worth listening to. The more they talk the worse the problem
gets.
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
      
    
  
