
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 11, No. 4, 1989, pp. 32, 31
          
          On a morning in the midst of the Bill Lucas furor, I completed an
informal poll in the skyscraper building which houses both local
governments here in the Motor City. A small army is employed
there. Presumably these people know Lucas best. I asked a sampling of
municipal and county employees in the City-County building the
following simple, two-part question: "Should the U.S. Senate
confirm Bill Lucas and why or why not?"
          The Lucas affair is over now. But the questions are still
relevant.
          Detroit is 70 percent black and not many whites are employed in the
building. The white employees, however, gave answers and explanations
not unlike their black counterparts. Lucas, to say the least, is not
popular in Detroit.
          Well, how did he get himself elected sheriff and then county
executive?
          By being black, opportunistic and hard working. His opposition was
always token and having Mayor Coleman Young and the black urban
political machine behind him didn't hurt. Incidentally, Young grew up
in Selma. His dear aunt lives there now and is a grand lady. The mayor
wears wide, red suspenders and is a character.
          But, back to Lucas.
          An interesting number of whites in the western section of Wayne
County have consistently voted for Lucas. They even stayed with him in
his disastrous run for Governor last year. Those white voters are
appreciative Lucas didn't forget his promise to make suburban parks
safer.
          Predictably, when Lucas switched to the Republican Party and ran
for governor, white Republicans deserted him by the thousands and
voted for a Democrat. At the other end of the spectrum, Lucas received
less than 10 percent of the black vote.
          Lucas is the accurate embodiment of many so-called educated
blacks. He is selfish, opportunistic and so used to "brown nosing"
whites for personal gain he couldn't even break from that mold before
the Judiciary Committee though the President had understandably given
him latitude to appear independent and dedicated to civil
rights. Lucas slavishly mouthed support for the most outlandish,
rightwing nonsense of his sponsors.
          The incredulous nomination of this likable, well-meaning, but
unqualified and malleable black man is one for the books even in
surreal Washington. For years, Republicans have accused blacks of
putting forward "unqualified" blacks. The Republicans then give Lucas
to the nation. Washington is upside down.
          A shallow-minded Dixiecrat, Strom Thurmond, called liberal Joe
Biden a racist for opposing black Lucas. Thurmond made his political
career baiting black people. That is about all he had going in South
Carolina politics.
          Following Thurmond's logic, Jesse Jackson and Ben Hooks are racists
for opposing Lucas, and Thurmond and his Republican crowd ain't
because they supported him.
          In white Washington, Selma and virtually everywhere a "qualified"
black is little more than a stoolie who fronts and defends for white
politicians. It is difficult to teach black children the importance of
real qualifications when every day they see black dunces elevated for
simply selling out their own.
          At every level of government, white politicians put forth black
"leaders" of their choosing. Their reasons are identical to Bush's
rationale for putting forth Lucas. The process has been in vogue since
1965 when blacks were first empowered to vote.
          The difference now is an increasing number of blacks who will
publicly deal with black hustlers, black opportunists and black pimps
in the effective way whites dispatch ethnic traitors.
          There are growing signs of that development even in Selma and
Dallas County. Dr. King would be pleased.
          
            After Detroit, the Crescent City...
          
          In this joyous land of rich gumbo, spicy cajun seafood, boiled
crawfish, jazz, Mardi Gras and incessant partying there is developing
a new and active racism. How sad.
          When I lived in New Orleans 35 years ago, local racism was more
akin to Northern than Southern foolishness. Everything changes, I
suppose.
          White newspapers, white columnists, white editorials, white leaders
and even the so-called liberals say many local whites have "recoiled
in horror and fear" that blacks have dominated City Hall for a
decade. It is the old backlash argument again. The city is as
prosperous as ever.
          By hysterically screaming everyday about this "backlash" (one radio
station went into various white neighborhoods and took a poll "on the
depth of the backlash") white leaders are really saying to blacks, if
you push too hard for equality and parity we will hate you.
          I rejected that backlash crap more than forty years ago. Yesterday
I said so and even more in New Orleans.
          I told a successful black New Orleans politician that whites
remaining in the public schools in my hometown of Selma say
frequently, in so many words, they will leave the system if they
cannot have their way on everything important. But, to their credit,
they haven't. They deserve more credit than some blacks.
          The politician asked rhetorically if ever there would be a time
when race is not a problem. I said race is not a problem; racism
is. He said my "unnerving type of leadership is to blame." I
asked, "Blame for what?"
          He claimed that I had been preaching for years that white people
hate black people. He said I make emotional speeches that "Whites
hate blacks for trying to get out of their place as cooks, butlers,
gardeners and servants." He also claimed I imply whites would only
love blacks if they remained in these positions.
          I accused my friend of suffering from the usual self-serving
delusions of black politicians.
          I don't profess to know or care who hates whom. I do ask blacks to
objectively examine the facts of our existence. White Christians do
not, in the main, worship with black Christians. Schools,
neighborhoods and almost everything else--North and South--were or are
segregated by race. All this racial segregation hardly equates with
respect or love.
          There is no institution in America, including the federal
government, which treats blacks and whites with parity and
equality. The law, justice and even the market place have different
"measuring rods." When we ask for parity, we are told it takes
time.
          How much time?
          In an old film clip shown on TV the other night, the late James
Baldwin said, "I am almost 60 years old and will not live another
60 years. You have used my great-grandparents' time, my grandparents'
time, my parents' and my children's time. How much time do you need to
perfect your humanity and leave mine alone? I am fresh out of
time?"
          My response to the New Orleans politician echoed Baldwin. But, the
black politician did not believe. He cannot afford to believe. It is
not truth he seeks. It is truth he must avoid. Convenience and
acceptance are the cornerstones of his life. The world is saturated
with his kind.
          There is no backlash in New Orleans. It is the same old
frontlash. In 1989, it is simply more difficult to be hypocritical
about one's racism.
          So, a new racial word is invented--"backlash."
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and writer.
            Our columnist has been touring America.--Ed.
          
        