
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 11, Number 5,
	       1989
        
          Land of Deepest Shade: An Interview with John McWilliams
          
            
              Rankin, TomTom Rankin
            
          
          Vol. 11, No. 5, 1989, pp. 10-14
          
          EDITORS' NOTE: "Land of Deepest Shade," an exhibition of
more than a hundred photographs by John McWilliams, is currently on
view at the High Museum of Art in Atlanta. A book by the same
title--with an introduction by Theodore Rosengarten and more than sixty
of McWilliams's photographs--was published jointly by Aperture and the
High Museum of Art. "Land of Deepest Shade" is at the High Museum
through January 7 when it will travel to museums across the region and
the nation, including the Gibbs Museum in Charleston, S.C.; the
McKissick Museum at the University of South Carolina in Columbia,
S.C.; and the Columbus Museum in Columbus, Ga.
          Southern Changes photo editor Tom Rankin discussed
the exhibition and the book with John McWilliams.
          How did you get to the South?
          When I got out of graduate school I kind of wandered around
aimlessly for about three years. I had jobs, but I didn't know how I
was going to deal with my photography and I think what I needed was a
kind of adventure, to take off somewhere. Jim Dow [Boston-based
photographer and Walker Evans protege] and I made a trip south. We

were gone for about a month. I had read a lot about the South, like
Let Us Now Praise Famous Men. And Jim knew more
than I did about the region.
          I realized when I went back that I was really dissatisfied with
being up North. I looked around for different things and I eventually
got offered this job in Atlanta at Georgia State University teaching
photography. That was in 1969. I've been teaching there ever since.
          Do you remember your first successful pictures in the South?
          I think the first ones were when I started to go out into the
country and I initially photographed architecture. Those pictures
would lead me into pictures I really cared about, pictures about the
atmosphere, the architecture versus the vegetation. The conflict that
might exist there. And I remember going up to Roswell which is very
different now-I haven't been up there in years, but it was all very
wild then. Nowhere near the development that's up there now. I started
going out and exploring more. I was ranging farther and farther
away. Especially down to the coast. One thing about Atlanta is that
it's not a real magical place. And I think you have to go outside of
this city to really find these places where you get a sense of
history, of something more to the land than just development. When
things got really ridiculous in Atlanta I used to go to Savannah and
stay in this big old hotel. It's no longer there. I didn't know
anybody there. I would wander and photograph. I finally ended up in
McClellanville.
          How did you come on McClellanville?
          I was on the coast and, you know that Robert Frank photograph of
the barbershop? I always loved that picture. And I was looking at a
map and I found McClellanville. I said I have to go there. At that
time it was a sleepy little village tucked away from everything and
Highway 17 was still two lanes. So it still had a very mysterious
feeling about it. I drove into the village and the big live oaks and
the hanging moss was like I've never seen it since. The moss was so
thick that it was like curtains. And it was white. Now you think of
the moss as sort of gray. I'd never seen anything like
that. Never. And I've never seen it since. I wanted to move there. I
made a connection with this village. I'd never found anything quite as
special. There are other towns that are similar, but none quite the
same.
          In your acknowledgments you thank Greg Day for "opening my eyes at
the beginning." Who is Greg Day?
          Greg was an anthropology student at Georgia State. He took some
classes from me in photography. Greg is a very smart fellow. He had
been doing research with basketmakers in South Carolina. He eventually
moved down to Mt. Pleasant where many of the basketmakers live. Just
my dialogue with Greg over a number of years gave me much insight into
the South, the kind of diversity and the underlying currents that one
might not perceive right off, the decadence of some and also the
strong sense of history. Greg was really good at articulating these
things and we talked about it a lot. He and I used to go out and try
to find old plantation sites. There are some pictures in the book from
those times.
          Over the years you have photographed in other places besides the
South. When did you start to see the Southern pictures as parts of a
whole?
          I think back from the beginning when I was working with the 8 x 10
view camera I felt I was capturing a sense of atmosphere and a sense
of light about the region. And I always thought that sometime I would
pull that stuff together and make it into something. And when I had an
opportunity to do the show and the book I realized it was time. I have
fine pictures from Alaska and the British Isles, places up North, all
over, but I realized that I did not want to do a show or a book that
was my "greatest hits" over the years. I think that books that are
merely based on a chronology are not usually successful. And so I
wanted to concentrate on the Southern work.
          Some of the strongest work depicts the South's land-either in a
state of change or completely transformed, usually by man. When did
this work begin?
          Around 1975, maybe 1974. To me the whole involvement with
photographing the South has been an organic recognition. It started in
my own backyard, in my own tomato patch, making nude portraits back
there. Then I moved to the architecture, to ranging out more and more
and exploring and eventually to the land forms. At first the land
forms were pretty much piles and holes. I used to like to photograph
from out of the context of the bulldozers so that they had no scale
reference. This way they have other possibilities. Then as I moved out
I got more and more involved with landscapes.
          The photograph of the tree covered with cotton lint that's on the
cover of the book is central to your work. Did you happen on that sort
of image or were you out looking for them?
          I took that in '75 or '76. I was definitely looking for things like
that. I was on the road a lot and I was specifically looking for those
things. I had the sense of-I almost had a preconceived idea in my
mind-but it wasn't like I thought about it intellectually so much. But
I had this idea of looking out from underneath bridge abutments. And
that strong afternoon, golden light. Somehow being initiated from
these big concrete forms. And somehow trying to make sense out of all
that.
          The book and show begin with a real recognition of 

place and
history, reflective of an old South. But by the end you recognize and
deal with a much newer, different South. Where are the connections?
          Being in the South at that time I found things were changing
rapidly. You would go to these places and it was just startling
sometimes. The land was being completely transformed and changed. You
really didn't have to look very hard to find the juxtapositions of new
with the old, the scarred land of development and that sort of
thing.
          There's a photograph I have to ask you about. It's the image taken
in a prison where a black man is looking through the bars of his cell
and a white man in a shirt and tie sits on the electric chair. How did
that come about?
          When I was out traveling around I made a point to swing by
Reidsville State Prison which is way out in the country west of
Savannah. As I was driving around the prison outside of the barbed
wire I could look in and see those twisted bar bells. I felt like
photographing the prison was a really important thing. If you look at
it intellectually it can be a metaphor for what our society
represents, what is important, what is taboo. Our society is reflected
in the prisons.
          So I had won the Governor's Award in the Arts in 1975 or '74. So I
called up Governor Busbee's office and said, you've given me this
award, it establishes my credibility in the state, so therefore I want
you to get me into Reidsville so I can photograph. They bought that. I
had to write my reasons. And I had to go for an interview at the
Commissioner's office. A few months later-I had given up-this deputy
commissioner called me and said can you go in a couple of days. So he
came and picked me up and we stayed for three days.
          And they let me photograph anything I wanted to. And I went all
over, working with a 5 x 7 view camera. I wanted to deal with it as
landscape. And the one of the guy sitting in the electric chair came
from a kind of situation where a lot of times people just don't know
what you're doing. And they don't know you're taking their
picture. And it's funny how you can just mask it with activity. He was
sitting there in that chair, being real macho. He was an
administrator. He was sort of there while I was photographing. There
were two people with me at all times: the deputy commissioner and
somebody from the prison. And so this guy was there with me, he was
sort of haughty and acting real macho. It was a long exposure,
probably about a half minute. And it's one of those things where I
knew it was a good picture. I started talking to him while I was
making the picture so he wouldn't move. He didn't move. All the odds
are against you making such a picture, but somehow you can do it.
          You ended up buying land and building your own cabin in
McClellanville?
          I always kept coming back there. To me it's one of the few 

places
that is relatively wild. When I was doing the landscapes that deal
with analogy and irony I was really trying to make some sense of the
landscape outside myself. It was not so personally motivated, other
than that it was something I recognized happening in front of me. And
I wasn't alone in this. There were other people doing landscape
photography that were interpreting it in different ways, but basically
dealing with the same thing I was dealing with. But going back to
McClellanville, there's something very personal about that. About the
wildness of that landscape. The mystery.
          The title "Land of Deepest Shade" and the epigraphs for your book
come from the nineteenth century hymnal, The Sacred
Harp. How did you settle on that?
          I originally titled the book "Promise Land." But there was a lot of
resistance to that title, mostly because Aperture was publishing a
book that was very close to that title about Mexicans crossing the
border into America. So I started thinking about alternative
titles. And Kelly Morris (editor of the book and curator of "Land of
Deepest Shade") suggested I look to The Sacred
Harp. I had heard sacred harp singing when I had been with Kelly
in the past. Different functions that Kelly has had would always end
up with singing from The Sacred Harp. I was
familiar with it for a long time. And we discussed it. We re-read some
verses. And as soon as we read over "land of deepest shade" I knew it
was really important. Because it deals with the idea of light and the
sense of heavy shadows in the region, with the potential to reveal
things. So then we started thinking about the epigraphs. We went over
The Sacred Harp together and separately and came
up with a bunch of verses that we thought might be appropriate.
          What is Kelly's relationship to shape-note singing, to The Sacred Harp?
          He organized a sacred harp sing in Grant Park in this old
church. He invited me to come down there and said we'll sing "Idumea,"
the hymn that contains the verse "land of deepest shade." So I went
down there one Saturday morning and it's a thing that lasts all
day. They get pretty worked up. There are a lot of older people
there. Young people too, but a lot of old people. This is a tradition
that is fading. But these people came from all over to attend. And it
was wonderful. There was a leader of each hymn and that leader beats a
rhythm with his or her hand. And they start singing the notes -Do, Re,
Mi and so on-and sing the notes. And once they have gone through that
and everybody had gotten into it, then they would go into the
verses. It brings down the house. It's all part-singing. Just
beautiful. I had my kids with me and I really love that kid of
singing. I used to sing choral music and I love choral music. And this
is the root of it all.
          Land of Deepest Shade ends on the water. After
a strong series of pictures of land and of man's intemperance with the
land, what are we to make of the watery ending?
          I spend a lot of time on the water, on my boat. When I got out of
graduate school one I spent a year as a boat carpenter in Rhode
Island. I love boats. I love working on them. There is something about
building a boat where you really understand what's involved. You know
every nail that goes into it. It sort of gives you a sense of
confidence about what you can do with it.
          I was down in McClellanville for Hurricane Hugo and photographed
immediately after it. Obviously, Hugo has had an enormous impact on
the coast. And on me. I know it will affect how I see in the
future. Right after the storm when I came back to Atlanta is when we
had that four days of rain. And the rivers were starting to flood
out. I went around the rivers at the height of that. I just had this
burning desire to get out there. The rivers swollen, flooding. I don't
know what it all means. But I'm really drawn to it.
          I really want to make photographs that deal with the ocean. And
photograph it from the land, from the water. I want to photograph what
goes into it, what comes out of it. The kind of power that the ocean
has for us in terms of being a source of life. But also the sense of
the cesspool, the dumping ground that it can be. I really want to
explore that.
        
        
          Native Southerners
          By Perdue, ThedaTheda Perdue
          Vol. 11, No. 5, 1989, pp. 1, 4-8
          
          
            Southerners do not think very much about Indians unless, of course,
they are vacationing in the Great Smoky Mountains or perhaps south
Florida where the Cherokees and the Seminoles/Miccosukees maintain
tourist attractions. Instead, Southerners tend to associate native
peoples with the region's distant past (Pocahontas) or with the West
(cowboys and Indians). Yet in 1980 the South's population included
almost 190,000 people, excluding nearly 170,000 others in Oklahoma,
who identified themselves to census takers as Indian. Of these,
approximately 14,000 live on reservations while others maintain their
ethnic identity without federal recognition, a land base, or a
governing structure. The South's native peoples are enormously
diverse, yet they share a complex ancient culture and a recent history
that has challenged them to preserve that cultural tradition in
remarkably creative ways.
            Today's Southern Indians are descendants of people who have lived
in the region for thousands of years. In the millennia before the
arrival of Europeans, they developed an agriculturally based economic
system and organized themselves into large centralized
chiefdoms. These native Southerners were not hunters who roamed the
forests in isolated bands: they were farmers who lived in towns. Only
recently, in fact, has the South once again become as urbanized as it
was on the eve of 

European "discovery." The rich
bottomlands, a long growing season, and ample rainfall made it
possible for the region to support a population as dense as many areas
of Europe. In Their Number Become Thinned:
Native American Population Dynamics in Eastern North America
(Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1983), historical
demographer Henry Dobyns, for example, suggested that the current
state of Florida was home to nearly a million people. Quite clearly,
the South was not a wilderness in 1492.
            The demography, economy, government, and belief system of these
people promoted a sense of community and cooperation: they joined
together in performing large tasks such as planting and harvesting and
they maintained public granaries for visitors and villagers who fell
on hard times. The responsibilities and obligations of kinship
governed one's behavior; a strong community ethic balanced
considerable individual autonomy; and cosmological order demanded
temporal harmony. They did not operate in an individualistic way; the
community ethic was foremost.
            European invasion disrupted this way of life in several ways. Most
profound was the impact of disease. Native Americans had no resistance
to the diseases of Europe, and they suffered horrendous casualties not
only from common killers such as smallpox but also from milder
diseases such as measles. Dobyns and other demographers have suggested
that as many as 95 percent of native Americans died in the first
hundred years of contact with Europeans. In addition to disease,
warfare and slave-raiding claimed victims. Furthermore, Europeans,
particularly the English, demanded native land and allegiance. A
growing dependence on European goods left Indians little bargaining
room, and so they relinquished territory and sovereignty.
          
          
            Indians in Slavery
            In the South, the colonial economy quickly came to depend on
agriculture. In the early years, native peoples sustained this economy
through their land, which the colonists seized by the foreign practice
of treaty-making, and native labor, acquired by enslavement. Indian
prisoners of war took their place alongside African captives in the
tobacco and rice fields of colonial plantations. In 1708, for example,
South Carolina's population of 9,58O included 2,900 Africans and 1,400
Indian slaves. In The Only Land They Knew: The
Tragic Story of the American Indians in the Old South (New York:
The Free Press, 198I), historian J. Leitch Wright asserted,
however, that the number of Indian slaves actually could have been
much higher because of imprecision in recording the race of
slaves. Furthermore, he contended that many of the characteristics of
African American culture may be native in origin rather than African
because of the high proportion of native people in the slave
population.
            By 1820, the native population in the South had declined to
approximately 100,000 people. Many of those who survived belonged to
five powerful nations-the Cherokees, Chickasaws, Choctaws, Creeks, and
Seminoles-who had begun to adopt European culture in varying
degrees. Except perhaps for the Seminoles, they had centralized their
governments, recorded laws and established courts to enforce them, and
engaged in commercial agriculture. Some welcomed missions and schools,

adopted the English language, and bought African slaves. These peoples
came to be known as the "civilized" tribes, yet
their "civilization" offered little protection
from the land hunger and racism of the white South. In the 1820s and
1830s, the vast majority of these people, through fraudulent treaties
or by force, surrendered their homelands in the South and moved to
what is today eastern Oklahoma.
            Remnants of some of these peoples remained in the South. A group of
Cherokees held on to land in the Great Smoky Mountains in North
Carolina, some Choctaws retreated to the swamps and sand hills of
central Mississippi, the Creeks living along Poarch Creek in southern
Alabama retained their homes, and the Seminoles took refuge in the
Everglades of south Florida. In addition to these remnant nations,
other native peoples who had not been subject to the removal policy
struggled to maintain their status and identity as Indians in a South
that increasingly defined itself as biracial, that is, black and
white.
          
          
            Coping with a "Biracial" Society
            For those Indians who constituted sizeable communities of readily
identified historical peoples, the task was somewhat simpler. The
Eastern Cherokees, for example, never had to defend their
"Indianness" although the means by which to
incorporate them into North Carolina's political system was long in
doubt. However, the native people, now known as Lumbees, who lived in
Robeson County had considerable difficulty in resisting designation as
"free people of color," that is African American,
in the ante-bellum period. With their origin in question and their
culture largely indistinguishable from that of frontier whites, North
Carolina questioned their claim to be Indian. In the Civil War, the
Confederate army welcomed Cherokee enlistment, but officials
conscripted Lumbees as forced laborers building coastal
fortifications. The Lumbees responded with a guerrilla war that lasted
through Reconstruction. Historian William McKee Evans has suggested
that North Carolina's failure to defeat the Lumbees insured their
designation as "Indian," since Southern racial
ideology made failure to win an Indian war more acceptable than
inability to subdue a black uprising. The result was state recognition
of the Lumbees as "Indian," creation of separate Indian schools in
Robeson County, and establishment of Pembroke University as a teacher
training school for Indians. The United States Bureau of Indian
Affairs, however, has never extended full recognition or services to
the Lumbees, and they have continued to experience racial harassment
despite their highly publicized rout of the Ku Klux Klan in the
1950s.
            Smaller, less powerful Indian peoples have had a far more difficult
time than the Lumbees in achieving recognition as
"Indian." Until the second Reconstruction of the
1960s, many southern Indians shared the indignity of segregation with
other non-whites. When facilities specified
"white" and "colored," law
and convention forced most Indians to use the latter. White officials
usually barred them from "white" schools; their
own racism plus a desire to preserve their ethnic identity meant that
Indians rarely attended segregated schools. Parents sometimes raised
funds for private "Indian" schools, but the
precarious financial situation of most Indian communities limited this
option. In the late nineteenth century, the Catawbas in upcountry
South Carolina welcomed Mormon missionaries who promised help in
educating their children, but other communities struggled along with
far less satisfactory solutions.
            Native Americans also found that they had few political rights in
the segregated South. The fifteenth amendment presumably protected the
right of non-reservation Indians to vote (reservation Indians were
"wards" not "citizens" of
the United States until 1924), but many native peoples had difficulty
exercising the franchise. The same prejudices and tactics that kept
African Americans from the polls denied 

the vote to Indians. Those who
lived on reservations finally received the right to vote by
Congressional act in 1924, but many found that the grant of
citizenship was an empty gesture. Southerners simply applied the
literacy test and poll tax to Indians with predictable results, or
they invented new legal subterfuges in order to exclude native peoples
from the political process. The Democratic-controlled counties of
western North Carolina were so desperate to keep the Republican
Cherokees from voting that the legislature insisted that the 1924 act
did not apply to them. A separate Congressional act in 1930 that
specifically enfranchised the North Carolina Cherokees still did not
mean ready access to the polls. As recently as 1988, some Lumbee
leaders were calling for a United States Justice Department
investigation of political corruption and discrimination in Robeson
County.
            The lack of educational opportunities, legal segregation, and
political disfranchisement compounded the economic problems
experienced by Southern Indians in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. Living on marginal lands, they barely survived
through subsistence farming or sharecropping. Sometimes they even lost
what land base they had to unscrupulous individuals or state
governments eager to profit from the sale of lands for which no
recorded titles existed. Most Southern Indians lived far from urban
areas, and whatever industrialization and prosperity came to the
"New South" passed them by. Furthermore, racial
discrimination excluded most Indians from all except the most menial
jobs. While New Deal programs brought some relief to Southern Indians
who lived on reservations, most native Southerners lived so marginally
that they barely noticed the waxing or waning of the Great
Depression.
            The boom in tourism that followed World War II provided minimal
economic benefits to the Seminoles and Cherokees whose locations near
national parks made them tourist attractions. Certainly tourism meant
employment opportunities, but the jobs usually paid poorly and the
work was seasonal. Furthermore, tourists' expectations of Indians
forced native peoples to project a stereotypical image that many found
demeaning, and the tasteless shops, restaurants, and motels built to
cater to the tourists gave native communities a cheap carnival
atmosphere. Most Southerners have driven down the strip in Cherokee,
North Carolina that is lined with shops selling foreign-made
"Indian" souvenirs and Cherokees dressed in
polyester Plains Indian garb for tourists to photograph. While some
may have been appalled, this was most expected of Indians and Indian
reservations, and until recently, the limited economic resources of
the Cherokees gave them little alternative to catering to these
expectations.
          
          
            Debating Federal Termination
            In the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, some native peoples
did manage to secure a reservation, a commonly held tract of land
whose title was protected by the federal government, and the services
of the Bureau of Indian Affairs including schools, health care, and
financial support for various tribal ventures. In the 1950s the
federal government's termination policy threatened these
benefits. Most Southern Indians who had federal recognition sought to
avoid the termination of their relationship with the federal
government and the allotment of their assets, including land, to
individuals. Among the Cherokees and Seminoles, however, considerable
dissension existed from different quarters. Highly acculturated
Cherokees sought termination because they felt that federal
restrictions on the alienation of land thwarted free enterprise, while
very conservative Seminoles organized a separate Miccosukee tribe in
order to disassociate themselves from federal programs they believed
undermined traditional culture. Neither the Cherokees, Seminoles, nor
Miccosukees were terminated, but the Catawbas of South Carolina and
the Alabama-Coushatta were.
            Mississippi Choctaws, Eastern Cherokees, Florida Seminoles, and
Miccosukees today have federally recognized reservations on which most
of their members live. Other peoples such as the Tunica-Biloxi and the
Poarch Creeks have won federal recognition and are acquiring land to
be placed in trust. Only people whose names appear on the official
membership rolls of these tribes enjoy federal status as Indians. The
health, education, and other benefits that accrue to these people are
limited to those indi-

viduals who are on the rolls; that is, a Cherokee
grandmother does not automatically entitle a person to BIA services
unless her/his name appears on the roll. These benefits are not a
special kind of Indian "welfare" but represent
payment for ceded lands and fulfillment of federal obligations.
            Most native Southerners do not have federal recognition. Some
Southern states operate state reservations; other states acknowledge
Indian groups within their borders but provide relatively little in
terms of services. State reservations, recognition, and organization
of Indian councils, however, represent official acceptance of these
people as Indian by the larger society. Furthermore, most
non-recognized tribes have incorporated pursuant to state
law. Nevertheless, federal recognition is a goal for many because of
the expanded services and sovereignty involved.
            Federal recognition, which can be pursued administratively through
the Bureau of Indian Affairs or legislatively in Congress, is
difficult for Indian peoples to achieve. First of all, they must
demonstrate identification as a specific native people through
time. In other words, a group of people cannot merely assume an Indian
name and expect federal acceptance as Indian. Furthermore, they must
demonstrate that they have long occupied a particular site as an
Indian tribe and that a tribal government has exercised continual
influence over the group. Historical circumstances make these
provisions almost impossible for most native Southerners to meet. Many
tribal groups in the South are composites of remnant peoples who
joined together to forge a new tribal identity. This is true not only
of nonrecognized peoples but also of some such as the Catawbas, whom
the BIA at one time recognized, and the Seminoles. Furthermore, many
native peoples fail to occupy traditional lands through no fault of
their own; indeed, whites forced many of them to relinquish their
homelands. By the same token, state governments denied political
authority and sovereignty to tribal governments, and so their
inability to govern often had little to do with the wishes of their
own people.
            Federal recognition, however elusive, offers native Southerners an
opportunity to reaffirm their Indian identity in a political and
economic sense as well as their public image as Indians. Federally
recognized tribes come under the jurisdiction of the federal
government which, in recent years, has been more protective of the
civil rights of minorities than state and local governments. This is
particularly important to peoples like the Lumbees who have been
subject to overt racism in recent years. Furthermore, federally
recognized Indians can govern their own lands and establish their own
priorities for their communities. Federal recognition gives tribes a
corporate identity under which they can file suit, enter contracts,
and apply for grants (this also applies to the tribes that have
incorporated under state law), and it usually removes them from the
jurisdiction of state law. Since federally recognized native peoples
acquired far greater control over their own affairs in the 1970s,
these advantages have provided a means to challenge the poverty and
impotence they historically have suffered.
            As a result of the expanded sovereignty that federal recognition
provides, many Southern Indians have significantly improved their
economic situation. The most controversial exercise of sovereignty and
economic ingenuity is the opening of bingo parlors on Indian
reservations. The pioneers in this enterprise were the Seminoles. In
the 1970s, at their reservation just north of Fort Lauderdale, the
Seminoles set up a "smoke shop," where they sold
cigarettes without paying state tax, and a high-stakes bingo parlor,
which violated state law. Later they added establishments at their Big
Cypress reservation near Fort Myers and on tribal land in Tampa. The
state of Florida tried to close the businesses, but in 1982 the United
States Supreme Court ruled that bingo and smoke shops were legal and
were not subject to state law. Since then, the Cherokees have followed
suit and opened a high stakes bingo parlor in North Carolina, as have
the Poarch Creeks in Alabama.
            Bingo is big business for Indians whose reservations are so remote
and poor that few other economic opportunities exist. In 1985 Seminole
tribal chairman James Billie told the Florida legislature that the
Seminole tribal income was over seven million dollars; of this,
two-thirds came from bingo. The effects on the tribe have been
significant. The employment rate has increased by twenty percent. More
Seminole children can afford to go to college, and bingo revenue has
provided services ranging from health care to day care. Each enrolled
Seminole also receives an annual dividend which she/he can use to
improve her/his life through the purchase of a new stove or the
payment of college tuition. The tribe also offers loans to members who
want to begin their own businesses. Indeed, the Seminoles 

have used
bingo revenue to expand and diversify their economy because they
realize that bingo is not a very secure source of funding for the long
term, particularly if the state legalizes gambling. The Seminoles like
many other native Southerners are adapting their traditional corporate
ethic to the modern economy. Rejecting a rigid free enterprise
ideology, the tribe actively tries to improve the economic life of all
its members, and it marshals community resources to accomplish that
goal.
            In some ways the Choctaws pioneered this approach to solving tribal
economic problems. In 1969 the Choctaws formed a development
corporation that built over four hundred houses and upgraded another
two hundred. Furthermore, the Choctaws have used tribal land and
federal loans to construct an eighty-acre industrial park. One of the
industries that located here manufactures hand-finished greeting cards
while another makes electrical harnesses for GM automobiles. Many
Choctaws work in these industries but so do non-Indians: today the
Choctaws are the largest employer in Neshoba County. In addition to
providing employment these industries generate profits that fund
tribal services. In an era of federal budget cuts, such non-
government sources of income are essential. This is a major reason why
the Cherokees, for example, acquired a mirror company that is not
located on the reservation. Although its factories will employ few
Cherokees, the income the company produces will help improve the lives
of all the people who live on the reservation through expanded
services.
            The growing independence and self-confidence of native Southerners
has led to a renewed interest in their past and a desire for more
authentic representations of their culture. Native peoples have become
involved in protecting archaeological and historic sites. The
Cherokees, for example, joined environmentalists in trying
unsuccessfully to stop the Tellico reservoir in east
Tennessee. Although Cherokees no longer live there, the valley
contained some of their most important eighteenth-century village
sites. The Seminoles acquired land in Tampa and built a cultural
center (and a bingo parlor) because the site had historical
significance for them. Many native peoples have constructed modern
museums and "living villages" in order to help
visitors understand their ancestors' way of life. Powwows and
community centers strengthen community bonds and ties to the past.
            Perhaps the most authentic way in which Southern Indians have
embraced their past and reasserted their culture, however, is in using
their traditional communal ethic, which emphasized the welfare of the
group over the individual, to modify the institutions of
twentieth-century America. Native peoples such as the Choctaws have
employed the tools of capitalist America to provide social services,
offer educational and economic opportunities, and preserve ethnic
integrity and independence. Contrary to current conventional wisdom,
they have improved substantially the standard of living on their
reservations not through trickle-down economics and free enterprise
but through direct aid and a commitment to community. Although some
leaders verbally have rejected the idea of preserving distinct native
cultures and communities and have advocated assimilation, the effect
of native economic expansion has been to reaffirm
"Indianness" and offer us an important model for
economic development. Native peoples, not white bureaucrats, clearly
are the best engineers of their own futures. Unfortunately, the Bureau
of Indian Affairs' stringent requirements for recognition deprive most
native Southerners of the institutional structure needed to benefit
fully from this model. Because the South has so many non-recognized
Indians, it is a matter of regional concern and may well be a pressing
cultural and racial issue of the twenty-first century.
          
        
        
          The Law.
          Reviewed by McDonald, LaughlinLaughlin McDonald
          Vol. 11, No. 5, 1989, pp. 21-23
          
          Whose Votes Count? Affirmative Action and
Minority Voting Rights by Abigail M. Thernstrom (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1987. 316 pp. $25. Paperback edition, 1989,
$10.95.)
          The Voting Rights Act of 1965 has had a profound impact on minority
political participation in the South, and increasingly in the nation
as a whole. In some jurisdictions registration and turnout of
minorities are now equal to those of whites, while the number of
minorities elected to office-not simply blacks in the South but
Hispanics, Asians, and Native Americans in the North and West-has
grown steadily each year. Significant disparities remain but this
progress is encouraging, representing as it does the growing
fulfillment of the long deferred promises of the Fourteenth and
Fifteenth amendments, as well as an increasing national consensus in
support of minority political participation.
          The Act has always had its critics, of course, but they were
usually from the expected quarters. They were mainly disgruntled
Southern solons who complained that the legislation was punitive and
regionally based, whites whose political and economic control was
threatened by voting reforms and those who supported racial
segregation and "the Southern way of life."
          Now, ironically, comes Abigail Thernstrom, not a Southern
malcontent but a Senior Research Associate at the Gordon Public Policy
Center at Brandeis University. Armed with a grant from the prestigious
Twentieth Century Fund and the new conservative's hostility to
affirmative action and race-conscious remedies for civil rights
violations, she argues in her book, Whose Votes
Count?, that the Voting Rights Act has been transformed, wrongly
and dangerously, from a law whose "single aim" was
to remove blatantly discriminatory barriers to registration and voting
into "an instrument for affirmative action...to promote the
election of blacks to public office." She is particularly critical
of single member districts, a form of neighborhood or community
voting, which she sees as basically a scheme to achieve proportional
representation and unfairly protect minority candidates from white
competition.
          The Supreme Court and Congress disagree with Thernstrom that the
Act was concerned only with vote denial. Congress was certainly
concerned with the difficulties blacks had in registering, but it was
also 

concerned with practices that could dilute the effectiveness of a
ballot actually cast.
          Congress knew that prior voting rights laws had failed in part
because local jurisdictions could always think of new ways to
discriminate and stay one step ahead of the federal courts. As soon as
a court invalidated an objectionable practice a jurisdiction could,
and generally did, simply enact another to take its place. For that
reason Congress not only banned such discriminatory practices as the
literacy tests for registration, but it provided in Section 5 of the
Act that certain "covered" jurisdictions had to preclear any
new voting laws with federal officials and demonstrate that they did
not have a discriminatory purpose or effect.
          In the Supreme Court's first decision construing the scope of
Section 5, in 1969, Allen v. State Board of
Elections, a majority of the justices concluded on the basis of
the legislative history that Congress intended to require preclearance
of all laws enacted by covered jurisdictions which altered election
practices in even a minor way, including the adoption of procedures
such as at-large elections that could dilute minority voting
strength. The Court has applied this standard in every subsequent
preclearance case.
          Moreover, when Congress extended preclearance in 1970, 1975 and
1982, it discussed and expressly approved the Supreme Court's
interpretation of Section 5. Had Congress felt that the Voting Rights
Act had the sole and narrow purpose of eliminating only discrimination
in registration, it could have said so and taken corrective
action. But it did not.
          In concluding her discussion of Allen,
Thernstrom does an anomalous and abrupt about face. While she
professes not to like its prohibition on vote dilution, she concedes
that Allen "was both correct and
inevitable."
          Thernstrom is highly critical of the 1982 amendment of Section 2 of
the Act in which Congress provided that voting practices, whether or
not subject to preclearance and whether or not purposefully
discriminatory, are unlawful if they "result" in
discrimination. The amendment passed, she says, not on its own merits
but because Congress was "slapdash" and "inattentive."
The press was guilty of "distortions" and reported only
"partial truths." The real villains, though, were the civil
rights activists who supported the "result" standard. They had
a "self-proclaimed moral superiority." They hewed "to a hard
line." They were "diehards." They had set out merely "to
peddle a product."
          Arrayed against these forces of Congressional, communications
media, and civil rights sloth and zealotry was a stable of academics
collected by Senator Orrin Hatch to testify at the Senate
hearings. According to Thernstrom, they were "distinguished...a
balanced and impressive group." But the "deck was stacked so
mightily against" them and against Hatch, that their warning went
unheeded that if the result standard were enacted single-member
districts would spread "like a blight across the nation."
          The reason Section 2 was amended, and it is a reason Thernstrom
generally ignores, is that the case was fully and fairly made in
Congress that race is still a factor in American political life and
that the result standard was needed to combat continuing
discrimination in the electorate. According to Congress, which
carefully considered and repudiated the charge, calling the remedial
use of single-member districts in racially polarized jurisdictions a
blight was "like saying that it is the doctor's thermometer which
causes high fever." Experience has shown, in fact, that
single-member districts, and the black electoral success associated
with them, tend to break down racial isolation by bringing minorities
into the decision-making process. They also tend to make government at
all levels more responsive to minority concerns.
          At the end of her book Thernstrom again confronts the hard line of
new conservatism and again she flinches, effectively answering her own
argument that single-member districts are an unfair form of
affirmative action.
          She conceded that where 'racial politics...dominates the 
electoral process' and public
office is largely reserved for whites, the method of voting should be
restructured to promote minority officeholding. Safe black or Hispanic
single-member districts hold white racism in check, limiting its
influence. And where whites- and often blacks-regard skin color as a
qualification for office (in part because no experience suggests
otherwise), the election of blacks helps to break both white and black
patterns of behavior.
          Few civil rights activists would disagree.
          Where there is considerable disagreement is in how many
jurisdictions are dominated by racial politics. For Thernstrom there
are very few. One does not have to be a prophet of racial doom or deny
the fact of change, Thernstrom suggests, to appreciate that race is
still dynamic in American politics. One should have to be naive to
believe that it isn't.

          The extent of Thernstrom's naivete shines through in her discussion
of South Carolina politics, which she believes is far removed from the
racial vulgarities and excesses of other Southern states. South
Carolina, she writes, has "an unusual commitment to law and orderly
change, stemming perhaps from an aristocratic respect for
civility." As evidence of this, she reports that blacks and whites
can be seen standing side by side in Charleston markets picking over
the local okra, depicting "a life that in significant ways was
shared." And, she adds, in 1963 "South Carolina governor Donald
Russell held an inaugural barbeque that was attended by both blacks
and whites."
          Thernstrom would have rendered a more accurate account of the
significance of race in South Carolina politics if she had told more
about life beyond the imagined intimacies of the okra bin, if she had
reported, for example, that Governor Russell, following his inaugural
barbeque, became a United States Senator and cast one of eighteen
votes in the Senate against the Voting Rights Act of 1965, or that
South Carolina led the challenge to the constitutionality of the Act
immediately after it was passed, or that modern voting rights cases
continue to document extremely high levels of racially polarized
voting, or that nearly all of the black elected officials in the state
were elected by constituencies in which members of their own race were
in the majority. One of the failings of Whose Votes
Count? is that, despite being eight years or more in the making,
it contains very little original research and relies primarily upon
court decisions and interviews, many of which are anonymous and
essentially impressionistic.
          Thernstrom believes that the ideal electorate is one composed, not
of black, brown or white voters as such, but of "a community of
citizens." Most civil rights proponents do, too. Thernstrom,
however, apparently thinks a community of citizens is a present day
reality and that minorities need only look for the protection of their
rights to "the political process left substantially to its own
devices." I cannot imagine anyone even casually familiar with the
protracted struggle for civil rights in this country taking that
advice, and therefore this book, very seriously. 
          
            LAUGHLIN McDONALD is Director of the Southern Regional
Office of the American Civil Liberties Union. Perhaps no other
attorney has been responsible for as many redistricting cases. (An
abbreviated version of this review appeared in Foundation
News, May/June, 1989.)
          
        
        
          Politics of Nativism.
          Reviewed by Kilbourne, LarryLarry Kilbourne
          Vol. 11, No. 5, 1989, pp. 20-21
          
          The Party of Fear: From Nativist
Movements to New Right in American History by David H. Bennett
(University of North Carolina Press, 1988. 509 pp. $29.95.)
          Right wing extremist groups are scarcely a neglected
subject. Persistent survival from one era to another, violence,
paradoxical relationship to a country which they profess to love while
repudiating its values of equality and tolerance, these
characteristics have won and will continue to win them the attention
of critics and historians. Most interpretations have followed Richard
Hofstader, Daniel Bell, and Seymour Martin Lipset. For these authors,
the racist, religious, and anti-alien hate groups endure because they
appeal to the displaced and marginalized, to those whose social
positions and cultural norms have been threatened by too rapid
change. As consolation to the. orphans of change, abandoned in a
social landscape grown suddenly unfamiliar, right wing movements
offered rituals and ceremonies which restored the feeling of community
that modernization had eroded.
          On the whole, William Bennett, professor of history at Rutgers
University, accepts their thesis. From the several themes of right
wing rhetoric, however, he isolates one--nativism, the irrational fear
and hatred of foreign peoples and foreign ideas--as the primary
attribute of the traditional right. For Bennett "Americanism,"--as
defined by the dominant Anglo-Protestant culture--is the binding
thread. Newcomers, with unfamiliar religions and customs, became
convenient scapegoats for resentments that could not be safely
expressed otherwise. In the colonial and early national periods,
Catholics from France, Germany, and Ireland served this
function. Later, nativist animosity focused on eastern European
immigrants, and the virus of anarchist and socialist ideas they were
presumed to carry.
          Much of this is familiar. Bennett's originality lies in his
contention that with the assimilation of the ethnic groups that
arrived in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries nativism
gradually lost its force, and that the new right which has emerged in
the last two decades is largely free of this preoccupation. In
Bennett's treatment, Father Coughlin, the radio priest of the 1930s,
emerges as a pivotal figure who, by directing his attacks at foreign
ideas rather than at groups and by adding the WASP 

establishment to
the right's customary list of villains, was able to make nativist
themes appealing to Catholics who were themselves of immigrant German
and Irish stock.
          Can Bennett's contention, that recent developments on the right
show a decline of nativist bias, be accepted? I would question whether
the psychological dynamics underlying nativism have died out, or
merely been deflected. Rather than vanishing, the anger that once
drove religious and ethic hatred has merely been refocused, so it
appears to this reviewer, on subcultures and lifestyles perceived as
alien. The poor, the homeless, homosexuals, and AIDS patients have
become the objects of a hatred once directed at immigrants. Moreover,
when viewed in larger perspective that includes other competing
hatreds, nativism seems a less pervasive, less central preoccupation
than racism. For throughout American history, blacks more than any
other group have played the roles of the "disturbing alien," the
vaguely threatening "outsider," to mainstream white society.
          Yet even traditional nativism may still possess more vitality,
albeit latent, than Bennett imagines. The retreat of nativism during
the last few decades was linked to the decline of immigration and the
acculturation of the descendants of the immigrants who had arrived
around the turn of the century. But the nation is now once again
receiving large numbers of immigrants--this time from below the Rio
Grande and the Caribbean, from southeast Asia and Korea, from Africa
once more--and the middle years of the century may be a trough between
the crests of two waves. If so, the weakening of nativist sentiment
may prove equally transient. Thus far new Americans from the Pacific
rim have met with relatively little hostility, certainly far less than
their turn of the century counterparts. On the contrary, their success
in adapting has been praised in the news media and compared to the
supposedly poorer performance of older minority groups. All this could
change: nativism thrives on hard times, and might return with added
overtones of racism should the economy drop.
          The ecumenicalism of the religious right, which Bennett points to,
doesn't, I think, go very deep. The alliance of Southern Protestant
fundamentalists and conservative Northern Catholics--to which
President Reagan owed much of his support--is a marriage of
convenience that might dissolve under other circumstances. An
off-the-cuff remark of Jerry Falwell's cited by Bennett, about the
unlikeliness of Mother Theresa going to heaven without first
undergoing the born-again conversion experience, bears witness to the
contradictions within this coalition. Why should someone who feels
called upon to reshape society according to the literal word of God be
less incensed by doctrinal heresy (the Virgin Birth, Papal
Infallibility, Transubstantiation) than by secular apostasy
(Darwinism, abortion, religiously neutral schools)? Indeed, given that
many Vietnamese and most Hispanics are Catholic, the conditions may
exist once again for coalescence of religious and ethnic
hatreds. Intolerance is implicit in the logic of the religious
right.
          
            LARRY KILBOURNE graduated from Brandeis University and is
now a U.S. Air Force historian living in Ohio.
          
        
        
          Victorian Reformer.
          Reviewed by Fleming, Harold G.Harold G. Fleming
          Vol. 11, No. 5, 1989, pp. 18-19
          
          Lugenia Burns Hope: Black Southern
Reformer by Jacqueline Anne Rouse (Athens: The University of
Georgia Press, 1989. 192 pp. $25.)
          If a truly definitive history of the South is ever written, some of
its best pages will be devoted to those unsung women of the region who
led the way in the battle for social justice. Aside from a few who
achieved national recognition, like Mary McLeod Bethune and Lillian
Smith, their names and deeds are not to be found in the standard
historical records.
          This admirably succinct and understated biography is a valuable
addition to the meager body of writing that seeks to cure that
neglect.
          Lugenia Burns Hope (1871-1947) was a prominent member of a network
of Southern black women who banded together in such organizations as
the National Association of Colored Women, the Southeastern
Association of Colored Women's Clubs, and Atlanta's Neighborhood Union
to find remedies for the wretched conditions in which most blacks were
obliged to live. As was the case with most of her collaborators, Hope
was animated by a spirit of nobolesse oblige. She
was an educated woman of proud family background and the wife of a
prominent educator--John Hope I, the first black president of Atlanta
University and himself a leading reformer, or "race man."
Conventionally, a woman of her status was expected to serve mainly as
an adjunct and adornment of her prestigious husband, a devoted mother,
gracious hostess, and bellwether of the social elite.
          Lugenia Hope's advantaged position, however, drove her to give
first place to a duty of another kind--to fight for the dignity and
well-being of the less fortunate, especially the children of the black
slums. Her intense commitment to this cause took precedence over all
other concerns, even her own health and comfort and the many claims of
family life. (Her husband's illustrious career imposed its own heavy
demands of work and travel leading to long periods of physical
separation and presumably loneliness.) She was a rarity on yet another
count: Her independent spirit and assertive manner made it all but
impossible for her to play the accommodationist role adopted as a
pragmatic strategy by most of her black contemporaries. While her
forthrightness won admiration in some quarters, it often subjected her
to painful criticism.
          Rouse has given us not only an account of an inspiring life. but
also an insightful view of black community life in the South, dating
back to the beginning of the century. The racial customs of those
years would seem quaint if they were not so egregiously inhumane. The
protracted struggle required of Hope and her allies, first to get a
"black" branch of the YWCA established, and then to wrest control of
it from condescending white Southern women, is one of the milder
examples.
          There is a certain quaintness, too, in the 

Victorian values that Hope
and her network brought to the reformist crusade. The Neighborhood
Union prided itself on ridding black neighborhoods of immoral elements
that threatened to corrupt the youth of those areas. The records of
the organization include the following:
          February 1911: "Mrs. Barnett succeeded in getting two families
out of her district who indulged in doing things that were immoral
such as breaking the Sabbath and gambling."
          August 1912: "The Mildred Street Case has been satisfactorily
disposed of. The Holy Rollers were made to move on the grounds of
disorderly conduct."
          Victorian principles and all, our society today could do with some
brave and dedicated reformers like Lugenia Burns Hope.
          
            HAROLD FLEMING was on the staff of the Council
continuously from 1947-61. From 1957-61 he was executive
director. Since then, he has led the Potomac Institute, in Washington,
and in countless other ways served civil rights and the enlargement of
American justice.
          
        
        
          Transformed Color
          Reviewed by Dunbar, LeslieLeslie Dunbar
          Vol. 11, No. 5, 1989, pp. 19-20
          
          The Mississippi Chinese by
James W. Loewen, with a preface by Robert Coles. (Prospect Heights,
Ill.: Waveland Press, 1988, second edition. Paper, xii, 257
pp. $8.95.)
          Whatever has set off the South from other societies, set off its
politics, social order, its culture even including its literature and
music, has been owing to the black presence, and its subordinated
status to the white race. Consequently, what to do with, how to think
about, other peoples, ones neither clearly black nor white, has always
been a distracting question, wherever such peoples appear. The
pre-Civil War division between free persons and slave implied at least
the potential of there being a class between or beside the two colors,
but after freedom that possibility hardly existed; whites would not
allow even some of their own offspring to have a separate status, like
the "colored" of South Africa: it must be black or all-white.
          But other peoples there have long been. Perhaps as widely known as
any, despite their small number, are the Chinese of the Mississippi
Delta, and that because of fumes Loewen's book, which first appeared
in 1971 and is now in a second edition, with a preface by Robert
Coles, good photographs, and an afterword by the author that brings
the story to date. It sparked a widely shown documentary film, a very
instructive issue of Southern Exposure (July/August
1984), and other studies.
          But as well, on the other side of their state, there are the
Choctaw Indians, quietly (for the most part) living outside the
currents of Mississippi history. Other Indian tribes and groups are
about the region; one group of them, the Lumbees of Robeson County,
North Carolina, and vicinity, is many times more numerous and every
bit as interesting as the Delta Chinese. There is also a scattering of
small groupings, whose origins seem more cloudy even than are those of
the Lumbees and the Mississippi Chinese: twenty-six years ago, in the
pages of New South, one of this magazine's predecessors, the estimable
Ira Kaye wrote of one such, the Turks of Sumter County, South
Carolina.
          In more recent days, other new groups have appeared, and with no
mystery about their comings. The Cubans of southern Florida (unlike
the long established ones of Tampa) arrived with verve and
muscle. Other Hispanic and Asian peoples seem in small numbers to be
everywhere about.
          It is tempting to tender another contrast with South Africa. That
mad country is obsessed with separateness, holding even Afrikaans- and
English-speaking whites at a distance from each other, trying to hold
each black tribe from the others, holding the Indians and the colored
from everyone else, everybody pushed into an assigned and graded
place. Our South, on the contrary, has wanted but one division and
distinction--either white or black--and some inner social force drives
other peoples one or the 

other way, unless they are Indians who stay
on reservations.
          So it has been with Jewish Southerners. Some of them resist, but
blacks clearly have decided that Jews are simply white, differing from
other whites no more than Catholics or Episcopalians differ from
Baptists. By and large, save for a few social anachronisms, so have
decided whites. And so, as Professor Loewen shows us, it has become
with the Delta Chinese, and even more dramatically. When they first
appeared, in the 1870s and 1880s, they were treated as Negros. By the
1970s, they were "white." They had made the transition in a special
way: by selling groceries to blacks.
          How this happened Loewen, who is a sociology professor at the
University of Vermont, tells authoritatively and well. I suspect many
readers will, as I did, find its story of the Chinese mainly of
interest as bring a prism reflecting sharper understanding of the
situation of the Delta's blacks. Thus does the old division
concentrate our thoughts!
          One chapter in particular tells not only a lot about the Chinese
but also about whites and blacks, about the United States and blacks,
about the place of the poor of our country. It is chapter five, its
title is "Opposition," and Loewen regards it as his "most important
single contribution to the theory of race relations." Its
conclusion can be briefly stated, though without doing justice to its
merits. The argument is that the upper stratum of Southern society
determines its values, including its racial norms and
practices. Against the commonplace charge that discrimination, and
worse, are the fault of poor whites, never of "good people," Loewen
stands resolute. "I was not trying to prove the lower class free of
prejudice. Rather, I attempted to show that status pressures impinge
upon the lower white strata from the white status structure." In
short, "racism originates in the upper class." Whether or not
this is a theoretical discovery, it is a clear-eyed observation; and
whether or not it can be applied to other situations in other
societies, Loewen makes the case convincingly that it is a truth about
our South.
          As benefits of one of the protegee of that great and good man, the
late Ernst Borinski (Loewen taught for a number of years at Tougaloo
College), Loewen has written a book not only sensitive and keen but
concerned for the humanness of its subjects. The book is sound social
science. It is not a book one cannot put down, but it is one that
rewards the reader who keeps at it.
          
            LESLIE DUNBAR is the book review editor of
Southern Changes.
          
        
        
          A New Heaven and Earth.
          Reviewed by Dean, Mary JamesMary James Dean
          Vol. 11, No. 5, 1989, pp. 16-18
          
          The Temple of My
Familiar by Alice Walker (New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
1989. 416 pp. $19.95.)
          Alice Walker in The Temple of My Familiar creates a
mythical saga, a journey to the source of unity behind our racial,
sexual, and cultural diversity. Walker's compression back to the
"African Eden" provides a vision of a new heaven and a new earth,
which gives energy to propel the soul forward with a revised cosmic
understanding.
          The novel leaves characters serving theme and events subordinate to
mission. While the characters are believable, the plot is so
dispersed, in eons of time, that the reader is asked to abandon logic
and coherence in a "willing suspension of disbelief" and embrace a
surreal blending of people, animals, cultures, countries, and sexes in
a black, feminist, evolutionary view. The whole globe is caught up in
a sensual, spiritual, liberating experiment toward an unfettered
life.
          The narrative voice shifts repeatedly as different characters tell
their stories and add threads to the cloth in a Faulknerian weaving of
a mythological past that becomes history.
          The narration, although it is telling many stories, is always
plaintive, simplistic, and almost ethereal in its timeless wisdom. It
is both stream of consciousness and unconsciousness; as she says,
"There was no seam. It was whole cloth. " Out of this whole
cloth, she renames people and events with brilliant use of
language. Drawing from history, theatre, art, literature, psychology,
she recreates a new universe with remnants of the old.
          The five major characters in the novel--Fanny, Suwelo, Carlotta,
Arveyda and Lissie--all become symbols for the contemporary voice that
searches meaningful linkage to the past. In their separate journeys,
they are bound together in strange and convoluted ways, perhaps
signifying the ultimate unity of all persons. Fanny's line goes back
through poor blacks in Georgia and on back to Africa. Fanny's
grandmother, Celie, we met in The Color Purple. But
that is only a taste of the many linkages of people, throughout time
and places, visioned in the book. Lissie, the cornerstone of the
entire novel, has been many people in different centuries, has been
lover to men called Hal and Rafe, having children by both, but this is
only one of her lives. Other lives take her back to Big 

Mama Eula May
who dipped snuff, made sugar tits, and said, "Ooo Wee" and also forced
radical changes on the Island of the Gullahs off the coast of
Charleston, South Carolina. Another life finds her in Africa being
sold by her uncle to Arab slave traders. Still earlier, she was in a
harem in North Africa, a cousin to black and white tree dwellers, an
ancient priestess, Earth Mother, lover of men and women, daughter of a
lion, and claiming to have had both black and white, male and female
existences.
          Behind the genealogies, Lissie's and the others, that overlap black
and white, Jew and gentile, slave and free, male and female, there is
constant quarrel with male/ white/materialistic/sexless history, and
there is a search for a "first glimpse of ourselves before we, and
all Britain, all Europe, became pressed into the forms created for us
by civilization."
          This search comes to focus not on what divides races, cultures,
countries, but on what unites the globe and binds us essentially to
the rhythm and generativity of life. This is not a linear search, but
a circular, cylindrical one that traces power back to "Isis, mother
of Horus, sister and lover of Osiris, Goddess of Egypt. The Goddess,
who, long before she became Isis, was known all over Africa as simply
the Great Mother, Creator of All, Protector of All, the Keeper of the
Earth, Thc Goddess."
          There are women in all the genealogies that lay claim to the noble
earth mother tradition, but it is Lissie in whom the vision is
consummate. She is as many lives as the imagination can create, each
building on a blend of primal instinct, imagined history, and sensual
fantasy. It is through Lissie that connections are made about people,
animals, selves, passions, truths of time and space, for she is
lesbian, man, woman, black, white, lion, goddess, priestess,
warrior. She dates back to a time when human and animal were totally
free and blended in harmony. But when men began to rule, they became
jealous of women's preference for animals and, thereafter, hunted
animals mercilessly. Women lost their their animality and
were only "familiar" with men; they lost their passion and their
wildness.
          It is this return to the generative passion that is Walker's
vision. The New Gospel is circular, Blakean, Laurentian, reaching back
to all that has gone before and incorporating it into a prophetic
unify of ourselves today. "Artists. . . were simply messengers. On
them fell the responsibility for uniting the world." Alice Walker
has become an artist to unite the world.
          Interestingly, she uses Laurentian symbols to describe the
"familiar" and its "temple." The "familiar" is an animal--part bird,
part fish, and part reptile, (reminiscent of the phoenix and
Quetzlcoatl imagery in D.H. Lawrence.) Its "temple" is a Native
American adobe hut, representing freedom and rebirth. Walker describes
the bird as trapped beneath a metal washtub (its naturalness stifled
by white, metallic, middle-class restrictions on the natural self.)
Centuries of slavery of mind and body, and particularly of the
genitals, have all but crushed its free spirit. But, wonder of
wonders, it breaks through the metal washtub to be free, rising like
the phoenix, with "wings it had never used 

before," a victory of the
solar plexus, the archetypal, primordial self.
          This is, perhaps, the most irreverent holy book I have ever read,
in which nothing is sacred and everything is holy. But, like other
holy books, it is an overlay of stories, people and events that start,
stop, and repeat as if compiled over centuries of time. Its mythology
places black women at the center, for a return to the source of life
in the African sun goddess.
          But the sun may lure us, as it did Icarus, toward disaster if we
fly too high or desire too much. Alice Walker has desired much in
Thc Temple of My Familiar. She has soared in all
directions, with no boundaries. The reader is left with little sense
of focus on an organic plot, but with also a great sense of something
masterful being done.
          Although the cosmic connections are there, this is essentially an
interior vision. The characters come together primarily to tell their
stories and experience sexual and emotional revitalization, with
little realistic relationship to everyday life, love and work. The
novel stays trapped between the cosmic vision and the interior
psychological struggle, so that the flesh and blood characters are
important for their contribution to the symbolic imagery of the unity
of all people.
          The message remains clear, however. It is a celebration of oneness,
peace, and forgiveness in the midst of diversity. As Mama Shug says,
"Helped are those who love all the colors of all the human beings,
as they love all the colors of animals and plants; none of their
children, nor any of their ancestors, nor any part of themselves,
shall be hidden from them."
          The universality of Alice Walker's profound message of ultimate
unity may be seen in this white reviewer's own Mississippi history, as
I remember that my grandmother was also called Big Mama. And she
dipped snuff, made sugar tits, killed hogs, ate sorghum and fatback,
spat offthe back porch, and said "Ooo Wee!"
          
            MARY DEAN, M.A., D. Min., a native and long-time resident
of Mississippi, now lives in Rochester, N. Y., where she practices
marriage and family therapy.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By 
            Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 11, No. 5, 1989, pp. 24, 23
          
          I spoke recently in Pittsburgh at an annual NAACP
banquet. Ordinarily, NAACP types are leery of me because they often
naively believe every societal problem in the world can be settled in
the courts. That is one of the reasons many of them don't march or
walk picket lines.
          For three decades I have preached about the severe limitations on
the law as a tool for positive social change. So, why was I asked to
come and speak at a NAACP banquet in Pittsburgh? Good question.
          The very conservative Republican majority on the U.S. Supreme Court
recently acknowledged the racism surrounding and undermining the death
penalty in America but sanctioned it anyway. I didn't have to say, "I
told you so." The court said it for me and in a most eloquent
manner.
          In addition, the so-called pro-lifers recently won a stunning
victory against abortions in the Pennsylvania legislature. The
conservative Republican Attorney General of the United States, Richard
Thornburg, was U.S. Attorney in Pittsburgh before he became governor
and is a major pro-lifer.
          The general is also a loud advocate of the federal death
penalty. Many black Pennsylvanians are beginning to question his
sincerity as he preaches the pro-life gospel on one hand and the death
penalty on the other.
          The Pittsburgh NAACP groups raised the same questions when
Thornburg nominated Bill Lucas to head the civil rights division at
Justice. Several black Pennsylvania politicians, close to Thornburg,
were in Detroit trying to drum up support for Lucas. They failed.
          These Pennsylvania politicians were singularly ineffective. First,
they were unaware Thornburg had taken a stand on the federal death
penalty. Second, they were not knowledgeable about the civil rights
connection with capital punishment and knew next to nothing about the
death penalty generally.
          A few days ago in Birmingham I discussed capital punishment in
Alabama before an audience of blacks and whites. Only the blacks were
uncomfortable. Shades of Detroit!
          I recited the following facts in Birmingham.
          There are 106 people under sentence of death in Alabama. Fifty-one
percent of Alabama death row inmates are black, though we comprise
only a fifth of the-population. Eighty percent of death row sentences
were imposed in cases with white victims. Alabama has never executed a
white person for a crime against a black; regardless of how outrageous
or brutal the crime. Seventeen death row prisoners received the death
sentence from a circuit judge who overruled a jury recommendation of
life without parole.
          Alabama has five women on death row, the largest number in the
nation per capita. Two juveniles are under sentence of death. At
present there are approximately 126 people charged with capital murder
awaiting trial or sentencing in Alabama. Ten people have been
sentenced to death in the last six months.
          Since Alabama resumed executions, six people have 

been put to death
at Holman Prison. The pace of executions has escalated in recent
months; there have been three executions since May of 1989. Arthur
Julius is currently scheduled for execution on November 17, a few days
away.
          If the foregoing facts make you nervous, don't blame me. Blame the
truth.
          I am often amused by certain blacks with certain jobs--in Alabama,
Pennsylvania and elsewhere--who will blame me for reciting or
publishing the foregoing facts but will voice no opinion on the
process that produced those facts. My critics are often classic
frauds.
          The western Pennsylvania NAACP membership was hardly unanimous in
approving my visit or anticipated speech; otherwise the visit wouldn't
have been worth the trip.
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
        
          Portraits from Slavery.
          Reviewed by Campbell, Emory S.Emory S. Campbell
          Vol. 11, No. 5, 1989, pp. 15-16
          
          Winslow Homer's Images of
Blacks by Peter H. Wood and Karen C.C. Dalton (University of
Texas, 1989. Paper, 144 pp. $19.95.)
          Until the civil rights movement of the 1960s, the Civil War and
Reconstruction years were the most significant period of events for
freedom and equality in the history of African-Americans. The rise
from the brutality of slavery, through the efforts of abolitionists
and eventually the destructive Civil War, to freedom produced a
tremendous challenge, for the African-American themselves and for the
nation. It is one as well for the recorders of history.
          Although the Civil War and Reconstruction have been well
documented, Winslow Homer's Images of Blacks reveals another
outstanding dimension to this pivotal period in American history, and
particularly African-American history.
          Winslow Homer was an American artist who is best known for his
paintings of the sea and symbols of rugged individuals of the
sea. Born in Boston in 1836, Homer was employed by Harper's Weekly
during the Civil War to illustrate war scenes. But his interest in the
plight of black people began during his childhood, when discussions of
slavery and the abolitionist movement were very much a part of his
daily life.
          Peter H. Wood, professor of history at Duke University, and
C.C. Dalton of the Menil Foundation, carefully and learnedly explain
the life of Homer and his paintings of African-Americans. The authors,
in examining fifty-eight very graphic paintings, have in essence
produced a fitting eulogy for both Winslow Homer, who was obviously a
compassionate artist, and the portrayed African-Americans as they
struggled to achieve freedom and self-determination.
          Wood, whose earlier work, Black Majority, is proudly
acclaimed by both black Americans and scholars of black history, and
Dalton, an equally enthusiastic and accomplished historian, not only
bring light into a dark period with their interpretations, but explore
the development of Homer the artist through childhood and young
adulthood. Homer's parents encouraged "his interest in drawing from
an early age," and, although his parents moved to Cambridge
(nearer to Harvard) from Boston to give him a chance to attend
Harvard, "Win wanted to draw," and elected not to attend
Harvard.
          Wood and Dalton skillfully point out that Homer's motivation for
drawing images of blacks, and their struggle for freedom, could very
well have come from his own personal experience while working "for
the Boston lithographic firm of John Buford and Saws where he
undertook a tedious apprenticeship that lasted until his 21st
birthday"; ..."and since the day he left it, he has called no
man master."
          Homer's parents were opposed to slavery and were members of
Boston's Hanover Street Congregational Church, where Lyman Beecher,
father of Harriet Beecher Stowe, was the preacher. The Rev. Beecher,
who was oblivious to slavery, moved his flock to Bowdoin Street, and
was later replaced by a popular younger clergyman 

named Hubbard
Winslow. Mrs. Homer also transferred her membership to Bowdoin Street
and named her infant Winslow, "in accordance with a common practice
of the time." But when in 1837 William Lloyd Garrison began "to
organize a Children's Antislavery Crusade," ironically the
clergyman for whom Winslow Homer was named denounced the organization,
and the Homers moved to Cambridge with abolitionist Thomas Wentworth
Higginson.
          Perhaps the strength of the authors' text lies in its
interpretation of Winslow's sensitivities to the subject, as they
relate events to appropriate paintings. For an example, they see two
possible interpretations of the painting, View of Mount Vernon and
North Colonnade, of 1861. One, that Homer's only objective was to
display the exterior view of the dilapidated home of the nation's
first president, at a time when a national fund drive to purchase and
preserve it gave way to a "struggle to preserve the Union itself." But
another, they say, may have been Homer's main purpose. They propose
that since small, remote, figures are coming from a dark cellar, Homer
was describing the fact that "enslaved persons were beginning to
emerge from beneath the large and darkened structure of plantation
society."
          The authors puzzle over the painting, The Baggage
Train: Was Homer, they seem to ask, likening freed citizens of
color to "excess baggage--men who refuse to pull their own
weight?" Then, as if to present the other side, Wood and Dalton
interpret Homer's Blossom Time in Virginia--a young boy
proudly plowing a field, "in preparation to planting" -- :
"this springtime scene embodies the hope born in Afro-Americans
after the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment."
          This book is more than a scholarly interpretation of the works of
one of the nation's famous artists. It is also an excellent guide for
learning about the events leading to the Civil War, the Civil War
itself, and the Reconstruction era. I for the first time was able to
see real character in African-Americans during and after the Civil War
era. Heretofore, I envisioned confusion and despair among the
contrabands. Indeed, the paintings exude tremendous emotions: hope,
joy, and a sense of direction and place. And the accompanying text
produces a welcome array of interpretations that reach other
dimensions.
          For those who enjoy art without assistance in interpreting the
artist's subjects, the comments by Wood and Dalton could be annoying
and even boring. Sometimes the obvious is explained. On the other
hand, those same readers will enjoy the authors' meticulous comparison
of Homer's images with those of other artists: e.g., Thomas Nast's
He Wants a Change Too with Homer's
Carnival, pointing out distinct differences.
          Although Peter Wood's Black Majority could be considered the
pinnacle of most historians' careers, readers of this book will be
glad that was not his last work. This book rightfully belongs in every
American home, especially if one is of African-American descent. It is
a wonderful reminder of the great achievement of black people from
slavery to freedom.
          
            EMORY CAMPBELL is director of the historic and still
vibrant Penn Center of the Sea Islands, on St Helena Island, South
Carolina.
          
        
      
    
  