
          A Sampling of Other Catalogs 
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, p. 15
          
          The Land's End catalog is only one of many with racially
discriminatory model selection. The following catalogs were received
at one middle-income Alabama household over the past few months. While
they obviously are not a comprehensive sampling of all the catalogs
published in the U.S., they nevertheless show the pervasiveness of the
problem.
Sporty's Preferred Living Catalog Christmas 1988. Sporty's,
based in Batavia, Ohio, sells a line of aviation equipment and
accessories, but also has a catalog featuring household gadgets, games
and gifts. Minority models: None.Eddie Bauer Gifts, 1988. Clothing, shoes, linens, gifts. Based
in Seattle, Washington. Minority models: a few appearances in a
124-page catalog.L.L. Bean Winter Values 1989. Clothing, shoes, outdoor and
recreational gear, gifts, items for the home. Based in Freeport,
Maine. Minority models: None, although fewer of Bean's product
illustrations feature models than most catalogs.McRae's Trends 89, and McRae's Spring Rewards from
Haggar. McRae's is a Jackson, Miss., regional department store
chain. These particular circulars feature women's and men's
fashions. Minority models: None (although McRae's does use black
models in its newspaper supplement advertising).Lillian Vernon Christmas 1988. Gifts, novelty and seasonal
items from a Mount Vernon, N.Y., company. Minority models: None.Gayfer's and Jantzen Swimsuit Circular, March 1989. Gayfer's
is a department store chain; Jantzen is a leading swimwear
manufacturer. Minority models: None.Gayfer's Daisy Sale (newspaper supplement, March
1989). Minority models: Estimated 5 percent.Service Merchandise Sale Catalog (Fall 1988). Service is a
Nashville-based discount merchandiser with more than 320 stores
nationwide. Minority models: None (Page 26 does include photos of both
black and white Ken and Barbie dolls, and there is an illustration of
a "Michael Jordan Lil' Sport basketball goal.").Service Merchandise Spring &Summer 1989 Catalog. See also
previous entry. Minority models: photo of Bill Cosby is in Kodak ad on
page 85; child appearing with Playskool product on page 68 may be
black; several minority children appear with white children in photos
of playground equipment on page 58; otherwise, none.J.C. Penney Easter 1989 Sale (newspaper supplement). Penney is
a national department store chain. Minority models: Yes, children and
adults.Performance Bicycle Shop, Summer 1989. Based in Chapel Hill,
N.C., this company sells clothing and accessories for
cyclists. Minority models: 1 black male.American Express The Spirit of Spring 1989 Catalog. Clothing,
jewelry, art, furniture, electronics. Minority models: None.
        
