
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 11, Number 2,
	    1989
        
          Symbols and Mail Order Merchandising 
          
            
              Williams, RandallRandall Williams 
            
          
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, pp. 12, 14-17
          
          Obsessions are never simple, and they usually lead to suffering. I,
for instance, am almost reduced to going barefoot, my shirts are
frayed at the collar and cuff, and I'm only thankful it was a mild
winter for I badly needed a new jacket.
          In my attire, you see, I have fallen victim to an obsession; for
many months now I have been unable to order clothing from Land's End,
a mail-order company based in Dodgeville, Wisconsin, that previously
was my favorite place to shop.
          If you have a few minutes, I will share my sad story.
          Land's End sells well-made, sturdy, reasonably priced, low-key
clothing. I'm a low-key guy; I silently cheered when Land's End made a
point of having no horses, alligators or other animals on their
shirts. At one time Land's End must have been a small company, though
I saw a chart recently that put them sixth among U.S. mail order
companies, with 1985 sales of $227 million. When I first saw and
ordered from them years ago they at least gave the impression of
smallness, and their catalogs were informative but nowhere near as
slick as the four-color 150-pagers that now arrive with each new
season.
          Bear with me. The catalog is the point of this story.
          Over the years I have watched that catalog evolve. I don't have any
old copies to prove it, but I think they used to say that all the
models in the catalogs were Land's End employees. That was okay with
me, even reassuring--I don't look like a model myself. I would get the
catalogs, and I would order a few things every now and then. I liked
the merchandise, and I like ordering things by mail, probably because
I grew up in the country and almost everything we had came from Sears
and Roebuck or Speigel. In fact, when I was a child I used to get baby
chickens from Sears and Roebuck, a hundred chirping chicks at the
time, in a cardboard box delivered by our mailman. Also, ordering from
Land's End was easier than going to the mall--it wears me out to go to
the mall, and there are practically no retail stores left in downtown
Montgomery where I live.
          For a long time, things were fine. But as the seasons came and
went, that catalog began to grate on me.
          The catalog that really set me off was Vol. 23, No. 2, dated
February 1987. It arrived in mid-January. I can remember the date
because it was right after a large mob of Ku Klux Klansmen, members of
other assorted hate 

groups, and plain white folks attacked an event
promoted as a brotherhood march in memory of Martin Luther King Jr. in
Forsyth County, Georgia.
          You may remember the incident. The small group of would-be marchers
were removed for their own protection by law enforcement
officers. Their attackers asserted their intention to keep Forsyth
County all-white, as it virtually had been since 1912, when widespread
racial violence in the aftermath of a rape-murder literally drove
black citizens from their homes and from the county.
          
            Signs at the Edge of Town
          
          In the years since, Forsyth, just forty miles from downtown
Atlanta, had been one of those Southern locales which boasted signs
saying, "Nigger, don't let the sun set on you in ____ County." We've
all seen the signs, heard the stories, laughed or cringed, depending
on our view or our color. Of course, that was twenty years ago. Now
Forsyth has lost much of its rural feel and is growing fast because
many people, white people, don't mind working in black-majority
Atlanta but prefer to live farther out, in suburbs which are said to
resist plans for rapid transit because of fears of making access too
easy for black criminals.
          Two weeks and a media blitz after the first march, there was a
second march. An estimated twenty thousand people from all over the
United States marched to make a statement against the latest display
of raw bigotry in one little backwater of America. Gradually the
situation eased, the task forces wrote their reports, the reporters
went home. To this day there are no blacks living in Forsyth
County.
          It was against this backdrop that the February 1987 issue of the
Land's End catalog arrived on my desk, and that I grasped what had
been irritating me about the excellent work done by Al Shackleford.
          Al is the copy director for Land's End advertising and he has the
hands-on responsibility for the catalogs. I know this because I called
Land's End one day and his was the voice that finally got on the
line. Al sounded like a good person, and it's obvious that he does
good work.
          But, no matter how good he is, if he had told me in advance what he
was going to do in the February 1987 catalog, I would have laughed in
his face and told him it was impossible.
          I would have been wrong.
          A few years ago Land's End began using documentary photography to
tell stories about some aspect of their products: hand shoemaking in
New England, wool gathering in the British Isles, and such. For the
February 1987 issue, a first-rate photographer named Archie Lieberman
was commissioned to do a photo essay on U.S. cotton production, to
make a point about the 100 percent cotton clothing sold by Land's
End.
          
            A Turn in the South
          
          Lieberman traveled through California, Arizona, Texas, Tennessee
and Georgia, and his pictures of workers in the fields, gins, and
mills are gorgeous and evocative.
          Of the twenty-nine people in his essay, there isn't a black face
among them--one Native American and two Hispanics from Arizona, but no
blacks. And as I rapidly thumbed through the rest of the catalog, I
saw consciously what I had been realizing all along, that of the
hundreds of models in the Land's End catalog, every single one was
WASP.
          Seeing those photos just a few hours after reading about an attack
on a brotherhood march, I had to ask, what is the difference between
the view of America held by a rock-throwing mob in Cumming, Georgia,
and the view held by a huge retailer with offices in Dodgeville,
Wisconsin, and Chicago? Not much, obviously.
          What had been bothering me about Land's End was its aggressively
white image of America. Of course we are talking about marketing,
meant to sell a particular line of products to a particular
audience. But I don't dress that differently from black men of my age
and occupation--or from Hispanics or Asians who live where I do, shop
where I do, play and work where I do. I couldn't believe that a
company like Land's End would be opposed to selling its goods to
non-whites. [For additional discussion of media' marketing
stereotypes, see Southern Changes, July 1979.]
          I quit ordering from Land's End, but I continued to get the
catalogs.
          By now, my obsession was interfering with my work. No matter what
kind of deadline I was under, as soon as the mail brought a new
catalog, I ripped through it looking for non-white faces. Eventually a
couple of Asian child models appeared in the back pages, but this only
intensified my 

concerns.
          One day I dialed Land's End.
          When I got Al on the phone, I introduced myself and said:
          "...so I decided what the hell, I'd just pick up the phone and
call and ask. I'm just curious to know whether it's editorial policy
or just coincidence or what, that essentially there is nobody in your
catalog except white folks."
          There was a short pause, and then Al replied:
          "Yeah. It's not really editorial policy, Randall. It's something
we are aware of and we are working to correct. About the only thing,
we have had Hispanic, Oriental, we've had kind of different ethnic
groups represented in sort of an editorial context. In that sense,
it's not--that's kind of a hard question to answer, but it's not, you
know, we realize that we are pretty, you know, about 99 percent
Caucasian catalog. Let's put it that way. And we are going to correct
that."
          "Do you have any black customers?"
          "Oh, I'm sure we do. It's hard to say how many, but I know we've
gotten--we just got a letter from a black family in California, pretty
much, you know, kind of asking the same question you are asking and so
I have no way of knowing how many black customers we have, but I'm
sure we do have black customers. And I realize that if you are a black
Land's End customer and you get the catalog, you're probably
rightfully offended by the lily-whiteness of the catalog."
          Then I explained to Al how I had gotten his cotton photo essay
right after the Forsyth incident:
          "You know, I'm from here and grew up here and my people raised
cotton and stuff like that and I just would have thought that it was
pretty much impossible to do a piece on cotton production in the South
without any black people in that piece. And yet, ya'll managed to do
it. Do ya'll discuss this kind of thing within your company?"
          "We do. I don't really know what to tell you because it's like a
real sore point with a lot of us. Usually, when I get a call like this
I would just refer it to our P.R.--the guy that's in charge of our
P.R."
          What does he say?"
          "I really don't know, to tell you the truth. I don't know what
the standard Land's End response to this is, but I don't see how it
could be a very good one."
          "Is there somebody in the company that if ya'll were to do a
feature with black faces in it, or if you had a black model come
along, would they say no?"
          "Well, I tell you, I don't want to get into that, really. You
know, there have been quite a few people that have raised this point
with us."
          "Inside your company as well as without, I take it?" 
          "Yeah. Oh yeah. But, I mean, it's a regular--we defi-

nitely get
feedback from our customers kind of wondering, talking about the same
thing that you're talking about. It's just an area that we realize
that, or at least most of us realize, that we haven't done a very good
job. We are really looking forward to the day when you can get a
Land's End catalog and it represents America as it really is, rather
than just like a select group of America." 
          "Yeah, well, I have to say in ya'll's defense, ya'll are not the
only ones. I've become kind of obsessed by catalogs since I've been
considering this." 
          Yeah. Do you get the L.L. Bean catalog?" 
          "yeah." 
          "I think L.L. Bean's argument is that they only use their own
employees as models. Being in Maine where, you know, let's face it,
there's probably about 99 percent white, so that's kind of how they
rationalize what they do. You know, if you---"
          "How about ya'll's work force? I assume ya'll, you know, given
you are partly in Chicago---"
          "You know, actually, yeah, we have black employees. Our main
operation though is up in Dodgeville and I'd say that's probably 95
percent of the company is up there." 
          "Is that mostly white up there?" 
          "Yeah. Mostly white. Rural farm country." 
          "If I wanted to pursue this a little further, who would I ask
for?" 
          "Probably the guy to talk to is our vice president of public
relations, whose name is Terry Wilson." 
          So Al and I said goodbye, and I called Wilson, introduced myself,
and explained that I had already talked to Al and why.
          "Well, let me try to be as direct as you've been. It is not a
conscious policy on our part. In fact, we do not have a policy about
who appears or who doesn't appear in a catalog. A lot of these people,
as you probably have deduced as you've been looking at it and have
been a customer for a number of years, are customers of ours, some of
them are employees, some of them are models, obviously, but we try to,
our main objective is to make them look like real people who buy and
use the clothes. Now at the same time, and in addition to that, we
sell and we solicit customers all across the board, regardless of
background or color or ethnic persuasion, or religious persuasion. We
send our catalog to anyone who wants it. We solicit business from
everyone we can find who we think is a potential customer. I'm not
going to try to deny that what you say is true. The only point I would
like to make is that it has not been a conscious effort. I think you
and others have pointed this out to us. It bothers some of our
customers like you and we do pay attention to these comments. It's
something we are looking into and that's about all I can tell you at
this point." 
          "...What do ya'll do when yell get people who comment like
this?" 
          "Well, we monitor all the comments that we do receive from
customers--positive and negative--and try to direct them to the people
in the company whose area of responsibility the comments relate to, in
this case, primarily the people who select the individuals who model
the clothes in the catalog." 
          "Do you think it's a problem? What kind of an image do you think
it presents in terms of what this country is supposed to be about and
so forth for ya'll to have a catalog like that? Now I'm not suggesting
ya'll are the only ones, mind you. I'm not saying that." 
          Frankly, I don't know whether we are or not. I can tell you
that's not the way we look at the catalog, either ours or anyone
else's. We haven't and I don't think we will start to count people who
are so-called party poops. I get the same comments from the
handicapped. I get the same comments from racial groups now and
then. As I say, we are certainly out encouraging and soliciting
business from anybody we think we can attract as a customer,
regardless of who they are, where they are, or what color they
are. It's a marketing question as much as anything else and it's
something we are going to have to deal with." 
          "Do you think you have customers that would be offended if you
had black models?" 
          "Oh, I don't think any more than are offended that we don't. In
fact, as I say, we do not have a policy about who's in the catalog and
who isn't. We don't select our models because of color or minority
question. We select them for a number of other reasons which may or
may not be valid, depending on the eyes of the individual who is in
your shoes, the customer. We are trying to market our clothes as well
as we can to as broad a group as we can and that includes blacks and
[unintelligible], and handicapped and everybody else who can wear
them. We make clothes to fit people, not their colors. All I can tell
you is about that. At the same time, you are not the first person who
has commented on the situation..." 
          
            Comments from Customers
          
          "About when did ya'll start getting comments like this?" 
          "Oh, gee, that I can't honestly tell you. I haven't been with
the company that long to go back in history, but there are a few every
now and then and I suppose there probably have been. Although I can't
say for sure." 
          "But it's not like these comments like mine just started during
the last six weeks or something?" 
          "No." 
          "And yet, up to this time, despite these comments, there have
been no--you know, the catalogs haven't changed, because I've been
consciously paying attention. I guess I was unconsciously mindful of
it for some time, but I've been consciously paying attention to it for
two years now." 
          "Again, I don't argue with what you say, but at the same time we
receive a large number of comments on a large number of subjects and
we try to, as I said, evaluate each one in terms of what's best for
the business and what's best in terms of trying to attract as many
customers as we can. I get comments all the way from 'why don't you
sell larger sizes,' 'why don't you sell petites,' and they run all
over the lot so I assure you we pay attention to those. I don't want
to start repeating myself. That's where we are." 
          I didn't want Terry to repeat himself, either, so I gave him my
Forsyth County/Land's End comparison and asked whether he saw the
connection.
          "I'm not that familiar with the situation that you mentioned,
but I don't know whether they are totally analogous because we are not
out running people out of communities where they have a perfect right
to go or we are not running them out of our property or burning
crosses. We are not 

overtly endeavoring to do harm to people
psychologically or .. physically. We are trying to simply present a
line of clothing the best way we know how. The only thing I can fall
back on is we would welcome as many minority customers as we could
get." 
          "Right, but you are not ready to put them in the catalog."
          "Well, you will have to draw your own conclusions about that,
obviously. I think we have been making a little bit of progress. There
have been, in the last few issues, a couple of minorities." 
          "There appear to be two Oriental children in this issue, for
example." 
          "Yeah. So progress does not always come over night. I understand
your concern. I know where you are coming from, and I appreciate your
calling it to our attention. Ill make sure it will be discussed."
          I assured Terry I would try to help him, and for the past few
months that was the end of it.
          Yesterday, I got a new Land's End catalog, Vol. 25, No. 3, March
1989. On page 147 there's an Asian child. The same child is also on
pages 146,143 and 139.
          And...guess what. There, on page, 92, big as life, is an entire
black family from Queens, N.Y., with a nice little story about
them.
          Well, it's a start, Al and Terry.
          I only wish that--given the unfortunate circumstance of blacks in
Forsyth County being forced to leave their homes in 1912 and the
historical and contemporary rhetoric by white supremacists who want to
send blacks and (recent) immigrants "back to where they came
from"-that you hadn't used your first black models to illustrate a
feature on luggage.
          
            Randall Williams is the managing editor of the Southern
Regional Council's publications, including Southern
Changes. From 1981-85, he was the director of the Klanwatch
Project of the Southern Poverty Law Center, a tenure which contributed
to an obsession with racial images already well-defined by living in
rural Alabama for most of his life.
          
        
        
          A Sampling of Other Catalogs 
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, p. 15
          
          The Land's End catalog is only one of many with racially
discriminatory model selection. The following catalogs were received
at one middle-income Alabama household over the past few months. While
they obviously are not a comprehensive sampling of all the catalogs
published in the U.S., they nevertheless show the pervasiveness of the
problem.
Sporty's Preferred Living Catalog Christmas 1988. Sporty's,
based in Batavia, Ohio, sells a line of aviation equipment and
accessories, but also has a catalog featuring household gadgets, games
and gifts. Minority models: None.Eddie Bauer Gifts, 1988. Clothing, shoes, linens, gifts. Based
in Seattle, Washington. Minority models: a few appearances in a
124-page catalog.L.L. Bean Winter Values 1989. Clothing, shoes, outdoor and
recreational gear, gifts, items for the home. Based in Freeport,
Maine. Minority models: None, although fewer of Bean's product
illustrations feature models than most catalogs.McRae's Trends 89, and McRae's Spring Rewards from
Haggar. McRae's is a Jackson, Miss., regional department store
chain. These particular circulars feature women's and men's
fashions. Minority models: None (although McRae's does use black
models in its newspaper supplement advertising).Lillian Vernon Christmas 1988. Gifts, novelty and seasonal
items from a Mount Vernon, N.Y., company. Minority models: None.Gayfer's and Jantzen Swimsuit Circular, March 1989. Gayfer's
is a department store chain; Jantzen is a leading swimwear
manufacturer. Minority models: None.Gayfer's Daisy Sale (newspaper supplement, March
1989). Minority models: Estimated 5 percent.Service Merchandise Sale Catalog (Fall 1988). Service is a
Nashville-based discount merchandiser with more than 320 stores
nationwide. Minority models: None (Page 26 does include photos of both
black and white Ken and Barbie dolls, and there is an illustration of
a "Michael Jordan Lil' Sport basketball goal.").Service Merchandise Spring &Summer 1989 Catalog. See also
previous entry. Minority models: photo of Bill Cosby is in Kodak ad on
page 85; child appearing with Playskool product on page 68 may be
black; several minority children appear with white children in photos
of playground equipment on page 58; otherwise, none.J.C. Penney Easter 1989 Sale (newspaper supplement). Penney is
a national department store chain. Minority models: Yes, children and
adults.Performance Bicycle Shop, Summer 1989. Based in Chapel Hill,
N.C., this company sells clothing and accessories for
cyclists. Minority models: 1 black male.American Express The Spirit of Spring 1989 Catalog. Clothing,
jewelry, art, furniture, electronics. Minority models: None.
        
        
          Lawsuit Alleges Bias in Real Estate Ads 
          By StaffStaff 
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, p. 14
          
          In New York, a lawsuit involving the absence of black models in
advertisements for housing is pending against the New York
Times. The suit was filed by the New York Open Housing Center
and the NAACP, although the NAACP subsequently withdrew from the case
saying its internal policy of negotiating before suing had not been
followed.
          The complaint, filed January 12, charges that display real-estate
advertising in the Times has essentially used only
white models for more than 20 years.
          A spokesman for the Times disputed the charges and
said the newspaper had written in 1988 to real-estate advertisers
urging them to comply with discrimination laws regarding ads for
housing.
          "Pictures of only white people give a message to
Times readers that is loud, it's clear, and it's
discriminatory," said Betty Hoeber, director of the Center. A
statement announcing the lawsuit said the plaintiffs wanted an
agreement with the Times similar to an understanding
reached in 1986 with the Washington Post, which now
requires commercial real-estate advertisers to have a minimum number
of black models in ads that use models.
          The plaintiffs are represented by the Washington Lawyers' Committee
for Civil Rights. Call Cheryl Packwood, 212-848-4980, for more
information.
        
        
          Excerpts from the 1988 Lillian Smith Awards Presentations 
          By RJNRJN 
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, pp. 20-22
          
          In 1966 the Southern Regional Council established the Lillian Smith
Book Award in honor of a life member of the council who had made great
contributions to improving human relations in the South. Lillian
Smith, a native of Clayton, Ga., wrote a number of very important
works on the subject of race and gender relations. Among the most
widely read and appreciated were Strange Fruit, a novel
set in a small Southern town that dealt with an interracial love
affair; and Killers of the Dream, a psychological
analysis of the Southern system of racial separation. Killers
of the Dream became a classic of sectional understanding and a
ringing demand for liberation of white and black Southerners from the
bonds of segregation.
          Lillian Smith also devoted much of her time to practical
concerns. She wrote tracts and speeches; she participated in seminars
on human relations; she walked picket lines; she served on the boards
of national human rights organizations; and she worked in her own
little town to help her friends and relatives cope with their
lives. All these labors of love and duty interrupted her writing, but
they also rounded out her experience and made her the great
humanitarian we honor by this award.
          One purpose of the Lillian Smith Book Award is to keep alive the
memory of Lillian Smith. We want to keep it alive so that people will
read her books, take courage from her crusade for human rights, and
translate her struggle in terms appropriate to our own lives. A second
purpose is to honor authors like her, who have written books, that in
one way or another, help us to understand--perhaps give us the courage
to join--the enduring struggle for human rights. We want to honor the
authors not so much for their own sakes, although that is appropriate
and pleasant, but so that others will, because of the award, learn
about and read their books.
          In selecting the winners of the Lillian Smith Award, the SRC tries
to choose works that reflect the spirit of Lillian Smith. We look for
serious works, with artistic and/or scholarly integrity, and we also
look for high craftsmanship. We want books that contribute to an
understanding of the human problems which concerned Lillian Smith, and
are also central to the concerns of the Southern Regional
Council. This year's awards were made at the SRC Annual Meeting in
Atlanta in November 1988.
          Since 1968 thirty-five books have been honored with the Lillian
Smith Award. The winners have included a few major best sellers and
many minor classics; every one has made its own powerful statement for
the ideals of justice and human dignity that Lillian Smith herself
struggled to uphold.
          This year we considered more than fifty books, and most of them, in
one way or another, were worthy of Lillian Smith's ideals. It was not
an easy task to make a choice of two winners but neither was it an
onerous task to read some remarkably good books. I should note that,
while we received a number of very good books to consider, we had
relatively little difficulty in deciding on our two award winners. The
judges were, in fact, all of one mind about the best choice in each
category.
          
            Excerpts from the 1988 Lillian Smith Awards Presentations.  The
Award for Non-Fiction: Separate Pasts: Growing Up White in a
Segregated South by Melton A. McLaurin (paperback published by
University of Georgia Press, 1988, $7.95,167 pages). 
            By Norrell, Robert J.Robert J. Norrell
            Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, pp. 21-22
            Melton A. McLaurin's autobiographical work, Separate Pasts:
Growing Up White in a Segregated South, must be placed on the
same shelf with the remarkable collection of revealing autobiographies
of 20th-century Southerners, a shelf that would hold, among other
works, Virginia Durr's Outside the Magic Circle; Will
Campbell's Brother to a Dragonfly; Theodore
Rosengarten's All God's Dangers; William Alexander
Percy's Lanterns on the Levee; and even Booker
T. Washington's Up From Slavery.
            Separate Pasts is the story of Melton McLaurin's
youth in a little eastern North Carolina village called Wade. McLaurin
gained a remarkable insight into the interaction between blacks and
whites as he worked at his grandfather's store, which was situated
near the boundary of the village, amongst the local black
population. There he had daily conversation with blacks of both
genders and all ages. He tells us that he found black people to be
generally more interesting than white people; that their conversation
held his attention more than the mundane gossip of the many whites who
frequented his grandfather's store.
            At the store he heard in the idle conversation of whites the common
racist stereotypes of blacks. But he also encountered individual
blacks whose character and behavior belied the stereotypes. Perhaps
the most influential black in McLaurin's experience was the man called
Street, an itinerant handyman and Jehovah's Witness
missionary. Street, the village eccentric, revealed to
MacLaurin his keen intelligence and his sharp critical
judgment about the world they both inhabited. The message for the
teenaged Melton in his relationship with Street was that blacks were
capable of intelligence equal to--and in Street's case, superior
to--the whites of his acquaintance. The discovery of this reality--the
fundamental equality of intelligence, judgment, and sensitivity
between blacks and whites--is the overriding theme, which Melton
McLaurin reveals through a series of profiles of blacks he knew in
Wade.

            The awareness of black people that McLaurin gained in the store
seemed to prepare him to challenge the barriers dividing blacks and
whites in Wade. One message of Separate Pasts might be that when white
Southerners established close relationships with blacks, they were
often preparing themselves for the recognition of the injustice of
segregation, and for a commitment to changing the system of human
relations in the South.
            I am struck by the stark honesty of McLaurin's memoir. He opens his
memory wider than I myself could contemplate having the confidence and
courage to do. Few among us who know the reality of conflicts within
families over racial matters would have the courage to put into print
these deeply felt and often painful memories. Any of us who has
cringed at the open bigotry of a parent or a sibling, and then
struggled with the anger that often cannot be vented, will find much
in Separate Pasts that rings true. He has ruthlessly searched his
mind, it seems, to examine his own motives and feelings about race
relations at the most basic of human levels. He apparently has
withheld little from his readers. He tells us, for example, about his
own youthful lust for a black girl, Betty Jo, with whom he was
acquainted from behind the counter of his grandfather's
store. McLaurin's sexual attraction to this girl and other black women
had a natural, liberating effect on his racial attitudes. When he
realized that black women had the same appeal to him as whites, he
began to recognize the equality between the races at the most basic of
human levels.
            I believe that much of the power of Separate Pasts
comes from the sense that this describes the most commonplace of
Southern white experiences. So many of our great autobiographies of
Southerners are the stories of uncommon people. As much as we love and
admire Virginia Durr or Nate Shaw or Will Campbell or Lillian Smith,
their experiences made them uncommon. But Melton McLaurin's early life
seems to me as regular and everyday as cornbread and cotton picking
and country music. I think it is from the sense of its being a
commonplace experience that the book derives its greatest power. It is
McLaurin's awakening in the midst of daily, regular, mundane
relationships that gives his memoir such authority of meaning. How
many regular, smalltown Southern boys grew up in circumstances similar
to Melton McLaurin's? Probably millions, though he alone, as far as I
know, has explained how those circumstances gave rise to his keen
sensitivity to the costs of racial separation and alienation. It is a
great pleasure to honor a signal achievement with the Lillian Smith
Award.
          
          
            Robert J. Norrell is author of Reaping the
Whirlwind and director of the Center for Southern History and
Culture at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa. Anne Jones is an
associate professor of English at the University of Florida. Serving
with them on the 1988 Lillian Smith Award Committee were Mary Frances
Derfner of Charleston, S. C.; Paul Gaston, a professor of history at
the University of Virginia; and Anthony Dunbar, of New Orleans, La., a
writer and lawyer, as well as the 1971 winner of the Lillian Smith
Award for his book, Our Land, Too.
          
          
            Excerpts from the 1988 Lillian Smith Awards Presentations.  The
Award for Fiction: The Avenue, Clayton City, by
 C. Eric Lincoln (paperback published by Ballantine Books, 1988, $3.95,
 275 pages). 
            By Jones, Anne G.Anne G. Jones 
            Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, pp. 20-21
            In what after the 1988 political campaign seems as much a prophecy
as a memory, Lillian Smith wrote nearly thirty years ago In
Killers of the Dream about her childhood' experience fifty
years before that, when she heard the singsong voices of
politicians...telling us lies about skin color and a culture they were
callously ignorant of--lies made of their own fantasies...--forcing
decayed pieces of theirs and the region's obscenities into the minds
of the young and leaving them there to fester. Listening [as a child]
I'd see my little colored friends on the rim of the crowd silent and
big-eyed and vaguely smiling, not knowing what else to do; or maybe
the Negro doctor who moved with dignity and spoke with quietness might
be standing there; or far back, a few of the colored millhands--and a
slow horror would drain the blood from my throat and I would think, He
is saying these things not caring that they hear, as if they were not
human! And then would come the tearing dialogue: Well,
are they? are they? of course they are! they're just like me! but are
you sure? of course! then why are they not in our church ? why are
they not in our school ? why can't we keep playing together? what is
wrong what is wrong--
            Eric Lincoln's brilliant new novel, The Avenue, Clayton
City, should have been there for Lillian Smith. What Lincoln
accomplishes in this first novel, by no means his first book, is to
present the human world of those children and mill hands and
especially of that doctor as it existed in the small-town South just
before the second world war.
            Dr. Walter Eldridge Pinckney Tait's story is the story of a man who
aims to "learn" from the world he finds himself in. He is an observer
by nature, someone who keeps himself apart. What he learns first, what
we learn as readers, is a world of incredible richness--of people,
language, desire, imagination--and of repeated, remorseless
destruction, all the varieties of destruction, mental, emotional,
physical, 

that come out of racism.
            Dr. Tait lives on The Avenue of the title. The Avenue is like Toni
Morrison's Not Doctor Street. It's got an official name, Booker
T. Washington Avenue, and a name that the people use. It's also got a
different name when it goes to the white neighborhood--Morrison
Avenue--from the name it has when it loses its pavement and becomes
the major artery in the classiest neighborhood in the black
community.
            What you remember mainly from the novel, though, is the people
whose lives connect to The Avenue. First there are the teenage boys
who stand under the streetlight "talkie' that talk," playing the
dozens. Dr. Tait sees the dozens as a "teenage rite of passage"
that he says "undercuts the white man's style of black denigration
by presupposing it... they had said it
first!"
            Guts Galligan runs the Blue Flame and longs for a call from God to
preach to the boys and get them to quit talkie' that nasty talk. Mish
is a bright and eager high school boy who writes Victorian medieval
poetry to a white girl and signs it, "Black Knight." Coley wants to
move onto The Avenue and uses or misuses a shell-shocked black war
veteran to carry out his plan with tragic effect. There is Vernon,
whom God messes over bad. And there is Pank Hall who tells Vernon's
story and almost loses his faith in telling it. There is Paris
Appleby, the white girl who bears a black man's baby and
disappears. There is Maybelle Yancey, the preacher's wife, who takes
the baby to raise. There is Big Walking Man, devoted to his surprising
love. And there are Goochie and Louella Peebles, whose house is
located right where some rich white people want to develop property,
and which suddenly begins to act like it is haunted.
            It is not only blacks who are haunted by the racism of Clayton
City. Eric Lincoln includes the story of a Jewish girl who is rejected
by her fiance's family, and of a Japanese teacher whose eagerness to
help is rewarded by the FBI and deportation. So deep in Clayton City
runs the fear of difference.
            And sexual difference? Like Lillian Smith, who observed and
reported on the links between racism and sexism, Lincoln shows story
after story of people who hurt women, and women who hurt themselves
because of racism. The novel begins with Jip Jipson, who proves his
manhood by bragging in her hearing about what he plans to do with
Poochie later that night. It ends with a pregnancy and a killing that
make it quite clear that black women are the battleground on which the
power struggles between white and black men are inscribed.
            Dr. Walter Tait ends his learning by seeing his own part in playing
the dozens. When he does this, he chooses to speak differently, to
speak out and to say no to the world he has inherited. I urge you to
read this brilliant, powerful novel and to learn for yourselves what
happens when Dr. Tait leaves the past, the dozens, and The Avenue
behind. Congratulations to Eric Lincoln.
          
          
            Robert J. Norrell is author of Reaping the
Whirlwind and director of the Center for Southern History and
Culture at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa. Anne Jones is an
associate professor of English at the University of Florida. Serving
with them on the 1988 Lillian Smith Award Committee were Mary Frances
Derfner of Charleston, S. C.; Paul Gaston, a professor of history at
the University of Virginia; and Anthony Dunbar, of New Orleans, La., a
writer and lawyer, as well as the 1971 winner of the Lillian Smith
Award for his book, Our Land, Too.
          
        
        
          Doug Marlette . . . on Marlette 
          By Marlette, DougDoug Marlette
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, pp. 7-9
          
          EDITOR'S NOTE: The following comments by Doug Marlette
are--with a few recent additions and editing--taken from a 1985
interview conducted by Terry A. Schmitt for Target: The
Political Cartoon Quarterly, which has since ceased
publication. Marlette's words and cartoons are pubIished here with his
kind permission.
          I was born in Greensboro, N.C. All my people lived in Burlington,
which was a mill town. I grew up in Durham, and Laurel, Miss., and
Sanford, Fla. My dad was in the service, so we moved around. The
values and the attitudes that I see in my cartoons have to do with
going to Sunday School at the Magnolia Street Baptist Church in
Laurel, and taking civics classes at D.U. Maddox Junior High School. I
always think of the attitude expressed in my cartoons as fairly
conservative, fairly basic, coming out of that background.
          When I got into high school and started thinking about a career, I
thought that I would like to be some sort of artist. I didn't know
that you could be a cartoonist, although I was never serious in my art
classes. When I had to draw a still life, I was always having the
banana saying something to the apple. But nobody encourages you to be
a cartoonist, nobody wants the responsibility for that. It's like
telling somebody to be an actor, "Go to New York, live in an attic,
starve... " Nobody wants that on their conscience.
          So I aimed broadly at commercial art. My mother encouraged that but
my father was skeptical--you know, he grew up in the Depression, which
taught you the importance of making a living. Editorial cartooning
became interesting to me as I got to be a senior in high school. I was
starting to focus more on a career, plus this was the middle of
Vietnam and the Civil Rights movement, and I lived in the South during
all that.
          My people were classically Southern--mill workers, cotton farmers,
tobacco farmers, and very poor. The South 

was hit by the Depression
much earlier and harder than the rest of the country. A lot of the
most ardent New Dealers came from the South--that was where it first
caught on, because they realized that something drastic and radical
had to be done.
          My grandfather voted for Franklin Roosevelt four times. He thought
he was the greatest President we ever had. I asked him why that was,
and he said, because Franklin Roosevelt was the only President we ever
had who cared anything about poor people. But, ironically, in that
same conversation, he followed that up by saying the only mistake
Roosevelt ever made was he "should have let Hitler kill them
Jews."
          I was always so impressed by my grandfather's Populist sentiments,
and then it was so contaminated by the racism. That kind of
contradiction was so vividly played out in my family and in my
background. That's not just in the South; it's in the entire country,
that racism. But it was on the surface in the South and expressed more
clearly and it gave the rest of the country something to point at.
          People think of the South as being a very reactionary area. But
there have always been these pockets of radicalism, and a contrary,
anti-authoritarian streak that runs deep.
          My grandmother was bayonetted by a national guardsman on a mill
strike. I only learned that a few years ago. I'd always wondered where
all these impulses in me come from, because all my family is just so
conservative. Where did this rebelliousness develop? And then I find
out that my grandfather was president of a union, and, maybe there are
rebellious genes in me.
          The questioners or challengers of the powers that be tend to be
better cartoonists. You can have conservative cartoonists, but they
will be challenging their own establishment. They'll make the
establishment Tip O'Neill or the Democrats, or whatever they see as
the big, bad boogeyman. They're going to be in tension with whatever
they see.
          I mean, it's hard to do good cartoons that say "three cheers for
the status quo," you know, "hooray for the way things are!" Cartooning
is a vehicle of attack. And so the best cartoons just have a rage. The
satirists--Swift, Mark Twain, Joseph Heller--are disappointed with the
way things have turned out, and they express a basic rage in their
work. The trick is to channel that rage in a constructive way.
          Everyone, it seems, imitates somebody early on and then progresses
to their own style. I just had so many influences that there was never
one that dominated. I was influenced by people like Don Wright, and
some of those Mad cartoonists. But I look back on the stuff I did in
college and it looks, more or less, like what I'm doing now. Although
it's been refined a lot.
          When I started, the Vietnam War was changing the face of political
cartooning. Cartoons were getting more inter-

esting. Pat Oliphant was
introducing that Australian, or European, style of cartooning. I was
raised, like other people in my generation, on TV, and movies, and
comic books. What I saw in Oliphant that was so exciting was that his
political cartoons looked like Mad Magazine. It looked
fun and it was satirical and the draftsmanship was exciting unlike the
old style of Uncle Sams trudging in the swamps, rolling up their
sleeves, and John Q. Publics with a lot of labels all over things--you
know, clouds labeled "cloud," and swamps labeled, "the budget."
          The task is to get in touch with what is essentially your way of
seeing things. That's the mistake imitators make. They think that, "If
I could just do it like them. . ." I know this from my own experience,
because, when I was younger, that thought dominated me. And when you
thought up ideas, you thought, "Well, this sounds like a Conrad, or a
Wright, so it must be good." What's sad about the imitators and
copiers is that they all think that the magic is in somebody else. You
know, Conrad did not learn how to be Herblock, he learned how to be
Conrad. And Herblock didn't learn how to be D.R. Fitzpatrick, he
learned how to be Herblock. That's what everyone's task is.
          Creativity is not just talent. Talent is not enough. Seed isn't
crops. There has to be a passion, a soul, a prism through which things
go. And there is no "correct" way. It's just whether you are being
effective, and evocative, and saying something worth saying.
          I like showing the banality of evil. I like to show that these
goofy, mundane people are doing these horrible things--punching in the
time clock at Auschwitz. I like turning symbols upside down and inside
out, and playing with those things, so that it's not
predictable. That's something that appeals to me and it's some thing
that I do instinctively.
          I did this thing when Jesse Helms was re-elected [1984] and I had
him at the window, with the Capitol in the background, and he was
bending over and his pants were down and it said, "Carolina moon keeps
shining." I think none of the editors at my paper, except one--the
edit page editor--wanted to run that. But they did run it, to their
credit. And I would have gone to the mat on it. I tell you why I liked
that cartoon. It does not have to do with showing somebody with their
pants down. It's easy to do cartoons that get reactions, if you
want. It's easy to hack people off, but that's not something I'm
particularly interested in. What I liked about that cartoon was that
the metaphor, or the image, was so accurate.
          Helms stopped talking to the paper after that cartoon. Our
reporter, Bill Arthur, wanted to talk to Helms about which committee
Helms was going to chair. And he ran into the Senator in the hall and
Helms said, "I'm not talking to you," and Bill said, "Well,
why not?" Helms said, "You know why not." And Bill said,
"No, I don't. I've been trying to call your office and nobody ever
returns my call." And Helms said, "You know why not--that
cartoon." Bill said, "What cartoon?" He had not seen the
cartoon at that time. And Helms said, "You know what cartoon. And
you can tell Rolph Neill," the publisher, "that until I get an
official apology from the Charlotte Observer, I'm not
going to talk to you."
          I thought that was revealing about Helms's personality, I mean,
someone who dishes it out, and can't take it. He's real good at
dishing it out...
          But, what's also interesting about that image is that Helms and I
are a lot alike. In both cases, you've got these righteous people with
causes or ways of seeing things that they want to impose on the rest
of the world. And they want to show their asses. That's why I knew
that cartoon was so accurate. Because I'm a lot like that and
cartoonists are a lot like that.
        
        
          On Homelessness 
          By Kozol, JonathanJonathan Kozol
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, p. 17
          
          I met a homeless man in San Antonio who could stand in for many. He
fits none of the stereotypes. Wasn't crazy. He wasn't lazy, he wasn't
a drug user, or an alcoholic. He was a former auto worker. He'd lost
his job at Chrysler in Detroit when the auto industry turned
down. Lost his job, then his benefits, then his health insurance, then
his home, and then his wife. Family split up; that happens often under
the stress of homelessness. Came to San Antonio, looking for a job and
lower rent, found neither. At the time I met him he was selling his
blood twice a week to buy his children food. There are plasma centers
now in almost every American city. Used to be, maybe twenty years ago,
you'd see one place like that in a run-down neighborhood where the
traditional homeless, the old alcoholic, would go to sell blood, but
now you see those places all over the country. In some cities there'll
be two or three of them. Where the poor who have little enough to
spare sell their blood to buy their children food. It's just terrible
to see that in America.
          What's gone wrong in this good country? What's happened? We've
always had poor people, but never in my lifetime have we had homeless
people on this scale and never, not even in the Great Depression, so
many homeless children. What's happened?
          Three significant changes since 1980. Rents, first of all, have
doubled, in some cases tripled, in major cities across America. In my
hometown, Boston, rents have virtually tripled in just eight
years. The same years have seen the transformation of the labor
market. Two million jobs that paid good wages, high wages, in the auto
industry, in steel, textiles, oil, manufacturing industries; two
million of those jobs have disappeared every year since 1980. And
those were jobs that paid often as much as $14 or $15 an hour. Half of
all the jobs created since pay poverty wages. And of course, those are
jobs that don't bring health insurance. With rents up and wages down,
the federal government picked this decade to cut AFDC benefits. Aid to
Families with Dependent Children, the major form of welfare in
America, is down 35 percent in real dollars since 1970. Restricted
food stamps. Tightened eligibility for Medicaid. Cut back on WIC, one
of the most precious programs in America, another program which dates
back to the Johnson years--Women, Infants, and Children, emergency
nutrition, one of the last weapons in the fight against premature
birth, and brain damage. WIC was cut $5 billion by the White
House. And, most important in the current context, slashed funding for
low-income housing by $25 billion. Low-income housing subsidies
dropped from $32 billion down to $7 billion and this year dropped
another billion.
          Nobody in the United States can claim to be deceived--President
Reagan was very honest about his intentions. Though I disagree with
him on many issues, I have to concede, he was honest.
          
            Courtesy of the Texas Observer, from a
speech Kozol made February 2 at the LBJ Library in Austin. Kozol is
the author of Rachel and Her Children, a study of
homelessness published last year by Crown.
          
        
        
          Winthrop Rockefeller and Executions
          By Kirby, MartinMartin Kirby 
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, pp. 10-11
          
          In the continuing debate over the death penalty, it is fitting to
invoke the name of Winthrop Rockefeller, who was Governor of Arkansas,
my home state, from 1967 to 1971. He managed to overcome the awful
moral burden of immense wealth and lesser burdens of personal
weaknesses to become, as Governor, a genuine moral leader, whose
record looks better and better as the years go by. His career took

place in a small state, and he has been dead a long time now, but his
position on the death penalty presented the rare spectacle of a public
of official actually living up to the Golden Rule, against
opposition.
          No one was executed in Arkansas while Rockefeller was Governor, and
before he left office he commuted all thirteen existing death
sentences. He also appointed a committee to review each case and
recommend the apparent best alternative to a death sentence.
          Rockefeller then issued a statement, saying: "What earthly
mortal has the omnipotence to say who among us shall live and who
shall die? I do not. Moreover, in that the law grants me the authority
to set aside the death penalty, I cannot and will not turn my back on
lifelong Christian teachings and beliefs merely to let history run out
its course on a fallible and failing theory of punitive
justice...failing to take this action while it is within my power, I
could not live with myself." (Quoted in The Arkansas
Rockefeller by John L. Ward, LSU Press, 1978.)
          This position seems self-evidently clean, pure and worthy of
emulation, but in fact scarcely any public issue brings out the craven
and trollish in both politicians and voters like the death penalty
issue. Many politicians seem to perceive the voters uniformly as
lusting after the blood of criminals like sharks in a feeding frenzy
and to think, therefore, that the way to gain office and stay there is
to throw them as many victims as possible. Too often these politicians
are right. The situation reminds me of that which formerly existed in
the South when politicians used to compete in the force and cleverness
of their efforts to persecute black people. Winthrop Rockefeller was
not willing to cater either to Southern racism or to the national
predilection for capital punishment.
          He died in 1973, not long after losing his third-term election,
which he might have won if he had been willing to wreak some official
violence, and he had many opportunities to do so. But his stand on the
death penalty was consistent with his attitude toward violence in
general. He could have permitted executions, and most of the voters
would have cheered. He could have sent the State Police to shoot up
the prisons on several provocatory occasions, and most voters would
have applauded. He could have dealt violently with any number of
public demonstrations, and a significant percentage of voters would
have fawned on him. But he did none of these things.
          Still, there was an irony inherent in Rockefeller's career. In
volatile times, he was successful at keeping the lid on violence of
all kinds in Arkansas, and was therefore generally perceived not as
heroic, but as soft. Why? Consider this snatch of song: "Texas John
Slaughter / Made 'em do what they oughter. / 'Cause if they didn't,
they died."
          This prescription was part of the theme song of a Walt Disney
television series which I watched as a teen-ager. I've never been able
to forget it. It is a near-perfect expression of the attitude that
efforts at compassionate reform must overcome--the immense popular
appeal of whatever seems practical, simple and tough. The last factor
is often decisive. No compassionate reform is "tough" in the popular
sense, which is a major reason why governors as well-intentioned as
Winthrop Rockefeller are as rare as Bachman's warblers.
          Rockefeller was tough enough to use his office to do good; his
stand on the death penalty was only one part of an administration that
was humanitarian and ethical to a degree unprecedented in the history
of Arkansas, and not exactly common elsewhere.
          Someday, the death penalty not only will be abolished but generally
regarded as something barbaric that people used to do, like
worshipping oak trees and segregating races. In that future, I suspect
that the moral heroism which was Winthrop Rockefeller's will be
recognized only as normal human decency, a mild confusion which I
think would have pleased him.
          
            Martin Kirby was a newspaper reporter in Arkansas during
the last years of Winthrop Rockefeller's governorship. He now lives in
North Augusta, South Carolina.
          
        
        
          Winning the South 
          By Johnson, KenKen Johnson 
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, pp. 1, 3-4
          
          For Democrats, the Solid South is history. This, having been true
for the national party for some time now, is becoming the case for
Democrats at the state and local level as well. Yet, despite the
arguments that are being made with renewed vigor by many Southern
white officeholders and party leaders about the need for a change of
direction, close examination of the 1988 election results from one
thousand racially segregated voting precincts from seventeen major
Southern cities suggests that the Democrats can win in 1992.
          Democrats can actually win a majority of the Southern states in the
next presidential election with only a modest increase in Southern
white support if--and it's a big if--black and Hispanic registration
and turnout equals that of whites in 1992.
          That surprising conclusion emerges from a recent study by the
Southern Regional Council of the 1988 presidential returns and county
and statewide data. The evidence suggests that a coalition victory of
the Democratic Party in the South may be much closer than many
Democrats believe if the region can remove the barriers of race and
national origin from the political process. With equal levels of
registration and voting and continued strong minority support,
Democrats need only a 5 percent increase of white support--little more
than their 1988 gains--to win six Southern states, a majority of the
region's votes, and the next Electoral College.
          In such a scenario, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South
Carolina and Texas would move to the Democratic column.
          In the eleven states of the Old South, black and Hispanic
registration and voter turnout have generally been between 10 and 12
percent below white levels in 

recent years. No exact data is available
because registration and turnout information is notoriously unreliable
in some Southern states and is not broken down by race in
others. Moreover, surveys such as the one taken every two years by the
Census Bureau probably overstate black registration and voting.
          How can such predictions be made in the face of recent arguments by
many white Southern Democrats that the party must adapt itself to the
conservative nature of white voters if it ever wants to win the
presidency again?
          The answer is that Democrats in the South actually did better in
1988 in gaining new white voters than they did in turning out black
voters. Our study of one thousand Southern voting precincts shows that
Democrats increased their white vote by almost 4 percent over 1984,
but lost more than 20 percent of black voters.
          The analysis shows that Democratic gains in predominantly white
precincts were canceled out by a sharp decline in votes since 1984 in
the majority black precincts. In fact, in all but eight of 458
precincts with 90 percent or more black voters, Michael Dukakis got
fewer black votes in 1988 than Walter Mondale did in 1984.
          The point is tricky, so listen carefully.
          Data from the SRC study agrees with the exit polls that there was
no significant decline in the percentage of blacks voting Democratic
from 1984 to 1988. In fact, a precinct-by-precinct analysis shows an
amazing sameness in the percentages of Democratic support over the
four years. In Little Rock, for instance, the percentage of Democratic
votes cast in black precincts was 86.96 percent in 1988, compared to
85.77 percent in 1984. In Birmingham, nineteen majority black
precincts showed a level of Democratic support of 96.85 percent in
1988 and 96.17 percent in 1984. See Table 1.
          
            
              Table 1: Percent of Democratic Voting in Black Precincts in
Presidential Elections 
              
                City
                Percent Democratic
                Voting
              
              
                
                1984
                1988
              
              
                Birmingham
                96.17
                96.85
              
              
                Huntsville 
                93.66 
                92.12
              
              
                Montgomery 
                98.10 
                96.71
              
              
                Little Rock 
                85.77 
                86.96
              
              
                Miami 
                95.24 
                94.35
              
              
                Atlanta 
                95.10 
                94.65
              
              
                Augusta 
                97.11 
                95.99
              
              
                New Orleans 
                94.59 
                95.82
              
              
                Jackson 
                95.38 
                96.80
              
              
                Charlotte 
                95.70 
                95.34
              
              
                Greensboro 
                96.29 
                96.49
              
              
                Columbia 
                86.52 
                97.51
              
              
                Chattanooga 
                83.55 
                83.90
              
              
                Memphis 
                96.47 
                96.40
              
              
                Houston 
                96.90 
                97.19
              
              
                Norfolk 
                90.88 
                89.45
              
              
                17 City Total 
                95.10 
                95.30
              
            
          
          
            Black Registration Fell
          
          What changed? The answer is that fewer blacks registered and fewer
blacks went to the polls.
          In eleven of seventeen major cities surveyed, black registration
has declined since 1984, and in sixteen of seventeen cities, black
voter turnout also fell sharply. At the same time, white registration
in some Southern cities increased, with a smaller drop--about 5
percent--than blacks in actual voting.
          Democratic gains among white urban voters in 1988 in the South were
nullified, by and large, by the party's failure to increase the actual
number of black votes. In Houston, for example, an increase of about
5,000 Democratic votes in predominantly white precincts was allowed up by a loss of about 24,000 black votes.
          Although the Democrats carried no Southern state, their ticket made
actual gains among white voters in Southern cities between 1984 and
1988. In fifteen of the seventeen surveyed cities, the percentage of
white votes for Dukakis was higher than the percentage for Mondale. In
Miami, the Democratic vote in predominantly white precincts increased
from 21.65 percent in 1984 to more than 27 percent in 1988. In New
Orleans, the increase was from 19 percent to 25.45 percent. Even in
Houston, George Bush's hometown, the Democrats increased their
percentages of white voters from 22 percent in 1984 to 28 percent in
1988, and in all 95 white precincts, Dukakis got a larger percentage
than did Mondale. In Greensboro, N.C., all fourteen white precincts
enlarged their Democratic support and three of the white precincts
were carried by Dukakis.
          
            Suburban Registration Gains
          
          However, countywide data also reveals that registration in
predominantly white suburban counties of the South--where Republicans
show strength--increased at a much faster rate since 1984 than the
rates in urban and rural counties--where Democrats do well. These
trends indicate that suburban counties which vote heavily Republican
will become the most substantial voting influence in statewide
elections in the South in the near future because their registration
rates are increasing even faster than their population, in comparison
with urban and rural areas.
          Steve Suitts, the executive director of the SRC, suggests that
"Republicans appear to understand the politics of Southern numbers
better nowadays than do Democrats. Not only have the Republicans
sponsored more aggressive registration efforts in areas of their
voting strength, but they seem to understand the critical importance
of minority voting in the South's future presidential
elections."
          South Carolinian Lee Atwater, the new Republican National Chairman,
has said that his first priority is to win blacks to the GOP.
          "Our analysis suggests that this interest in black votes is
probably not the result of a political party's soul-searching decision
to seek a kinder, gentler, and more integrated constituency as much as
it is a realistic political strategy to win future presidential
elections in the South," said Suitts.
          The SRC analysis finds that if Republicans increase their minority
support in the South by 6 percent, Democrats would have to increase
their Southern white support by 11 percent--at current levels of
minority voter participation--to win most of the Southern
states. Obviously, such gains 

by Democrats in the South seem unrealistic.
          New Democratic National Chairman Ron Brown understands these
issues, because he was chairman of the party's task force on voting
rights and voter participation in 1987. The task force report called
for substantial improvements in voter participation among minority
groups. However, Brown has been so far a lightning rod for white
Southern Democrats who claim that he is a symbol of the reasons why
white Democrats are defecting to the GOP.
          Democrats must take a hard look at the bushwhacking they got on
Super Tuesday. The nation's only regional primary did not prompt
especially high levels of participation by Southern voters. Instead,
it allowed "the illusion of a mandate for its candidates, while
whites who stayed home on March 8 were far more willing to turn out on
November 8," said Suitts.
          In some Southern cities, white voting in the general election was
three times larger than on Super Tuesday. In thirteen of seventeen
cities the turnout in white precincts in November was more than double
the turnout on Super Tuesday. Meanwhile, in only one city did the
black turnout increase by 100 percent or more. "Quite clearly,"
says Suitts, "Super Tuesday did not coalesce white voters for any
candidate in the Democratic Party."
          
            Black Votes Can't Be Taken for Granted
          
          It seems just as clear that Democrats cannot take black votes for
granted; even if blacks continue to lean toward Democratic policies,
the Democratic Party cannot assume an actual increase in support. As
in the past, Democrats must address the issues of registration and
turnout of their most loyal voters if they are to depend on them, in
part, for victory at the polls.
          At a time when the Republican Party has made black support a
priority, the party of George Bush must realize that it begins that
effort with more of a disadvantage than did Ronald Reagan, whose
unpopularity among blacks now works against Bush.
          The Republican voting strength in the South has been established
solidly in suburban areas, and voter registration in the South has
accelerated over the past four years. In fact, at current rates of
registration growth, the suburban influence in Southern states will
only increase.
          The Democratic Party's future in the South in presidential politics
hangs on urban and rural areas, on the party's ability to increase
minority political participation to a level equal to that of white
voters, and on attracting a small percentage of additional whites.
          It is a future which the party has not yet fully recognized despite
current Republican efforts to foil such a strategy before it takes
root. It is a future that is entirely possible for the Democrats in
1992, though their past performance suggests they will have great
difficulty in realizing it.
          
            The complete report, "Winning the South in 1992: A
New Analysis of the 1988 Presidential Election," with all tables,
charts and notes, is available for $35 from the Southern Regional
Council, 60 Walton St., NW, Atlanta, GA 30303. (404) 522-8764. The
report is by SRC staff members Ken Johnson, Steve Suitts, Betty
McKibben, and Dorothy Dix.
          
          
            Ken Johnson is program director of the Southern Regional
Council and the co-author of "Winning the South in 1992: A New
Analysis of the 1988 Presidential Election." His article is adapted
from that report.
          
        
        
          Cartoonist Jumps Ship in Atlanta
          By HRWHRW
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, p. 6
          
          Doug Marlette, the Pulitzer-winning political cartoonist lured from
the Charlotte Observer when Bill Kovach became editor
of the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, has become the
latest big name to leave the papers in the wake of Kovach's
resignation [see Southern Changes, December 1988].
          Marlette, who joined Newsday in New York, said that under Kovach's
leadership the Atlanta papers had enjoyed "shimmering integrity and
quality" and "rose to finally claim their rightful place."
          In his resignation letter, Marlette thanked the Constitution for
"giving me such a great opportunity" and said he had tried
"to find a way to stay here." Instead, he wrote, "Like many
Southerners before me, I head north with a sense of sadness and
longing for what might have been."
          Elaborating on his leavetaking in an essay he published in Newsday
and in the Charlotte Observer, Marlette said he wasn't
sure how the move "will affect my work and the way I see things,
but I'm sure they will be affected. Artists are emotional teabags. We
have a semi-permeable membrane for skin. Everything gets under our
skin and eventually finds its way into our work."
          On the bright side, Marlette said he expected to find~ plenty of
familiar themes in New York:
          "I have long suspected that Malcolm X was right: The South is
south of the Canadian border. The problems of my native region--the
racism depicted by the jarring 'white' and 'colored' signs on the
water fountains of my youth, the poverty and ignorance that crippled
the spirit of the region--were just vivid symptoms of a disease that
afflicts the nation as a whole. It's not very far, it turns out, from
Forsyth County, Georgia, to Howard Beach.
          "Growing up in the South in the Sixties, we were the nation's
scapegoat and whipping boy--we wore our private demons and public
neuroses on our sleeves--and the world had something to point
at. However, I have noticed over the last few years that the South, as
it homogenizes itself into the Sunbelt, has slowly relinquished its
title, giving up its role as America's designated punching bag.
          "New York City, Bonfire of the Vanities, has claimed that
position in the demonology of America's collective unconscious. New
York-bashing is a national sport now. New York is the new
Mississippi--New York Burning.
          "For all its glitz and glamour, and opportunity, the problems of
modern life in the city have grown to such a scale and
magnitude--drugs, homelessness, greed, corruption--that New York has
become what Mississippi was in the Sixties--America's problem child,
the scapegoat, a mess.
          "The issues loom large in this urban crucible. The problems are
clear and easy to see. Like the setting of my Southern childhood, the
contradictions and ironies and hypocrisies are vivid. It's all a
caricature--a cartoon, really. New York City is Toontown. This
Southerner should feel right at home."
        
        
          A Southern Exposure for Spring Planting 
          By HRWHRW
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, pp. 5-6
          
          As soil is being worked and gardens laid this Spring, it may be
useful to remember that all seeds are not created equal, and that
there are alternatives to agribusiness and hybridization.
          Southern Exposure, a seed exchange and gardening center in North
Garden, Va., is one such alternative. (No relation to the Institute
for Southern Studies' journal of the same name.)
          Begun in 1982 by Jeff McCormack, a botanist who previously ran the
greenhouses at the University of Virginia, Southern Exposure is a
leader among the growing movement to preserve genetic variation in
agricultural crops. McCormack has been called a vegetable historian,
and he and his wife, Patty Wallens, began their seed exchange from
their kitchen table as a means of protecting some traditional
varieties of garden crops from extinction.
          They soon began receiving unsolicited donations of seeds from
like-minded individuals who were enamored of particular plants that
had been grown in their families for, sometimes, several
generations. Today Southern Exposure has expanded to include hundreds
of vegetable varieties, flowers, and fruit trees, many of which are
not commercially available and some of which were feared to be
extinct.
          The Southern Exposure operation now includes a twelve-acre organic
testing and demonstration garden; a lab and environmentally controlled
seed storage; a customer list that is doubling every year; and a
catalog full of seeds, gardening and seed-saving supplies, and general
tips and advice. The business also has an unlisted telephone; to get
their catalog, send $3 to P.O. Box 158, North Garden, VA 

22959. Those
who place orders automatically receive future catalogs.
          McCommack writes in his 1989 catalog, "Non-hybrid [seed]
varieties introduced prior to 1940 are defined as heirloom
varieties. After 1940, hybrids began to displace traditional
varieties, and many became scarce or lost. We define a special class
of heirlooms as 'family heirloom varieties.' These have been handed
down within families for generations."
          These heirlooms are described and sometimes illustrated in the
Southern Exposure catalog.
          For example, the Large Early Greasy variety of pole bean is
"from the mountain area of Mars Hill, N.C. Pods have medium
strings, are flattened when young...grow 4 to 6" long, and contain 6
white seeds per pod. Though not suitable for green shell out, it makes
a high quality green bean when picked small. As is typical of many
home saved seed of mountain people, there is some variation in this
variety as to pod and seed size, shape, and maturity. The name
'greasy' refers to the lack of 'fuzziness' (plant hairs) on the
pods. Has been grown for generations as a drought hardy, cornfield
bean."
          McCormack says he is "concerned about the erosion of genetic
resources and the trend toward replacement of standard or
open-pollinated varieties by hybrids. Unless we have genetic diversity
in our food crops, our whole food supply is vulnerable to
epidemics...For this reason, we offer a diverse selection of
open-pollinated varieties to help ensure a genetic reservoir of
resistance to disease, regional adaptability, cultural and flavor
qualities, and to ensure that the traditional varieties remain
available to gardeners and farmers.
          "What a shame it would be if we lost varieties such as
'Stowell's Evergreen' corn or 'Tappy's Finest' tomato. We would lose
not only unique taste and quality, but also part of our agricultural
and cultural heritage."
          Finally, there's the Old Time Tennessee cantaloupe, which one
gardener told McCormack is so fragrant he can find the melons in his
garden in the dark-obviously healthier and even more entertaining than
a trip to the refrigerator for a beer.
        
        
          Hightower Chooses a Populist Agenda 
          By Davenport, ElaineElaine Davenport
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, pp. 4-5
          
          Jim Hightower has a way forward for the Democrat. Party. In order
to pursue his strategy, Hightower has decided to run for re-election
as Texas Agriculture Commissioner rather than challenging Republican
Phil Gramm for a U.S. Senate seat in 1990, as was expected.
          "While a run against Gramm might put me in the Senate, and while
it would be good fun for me, campaigns are necessarily egocentric,
leaving little behind in the way of a cohesive base that could elect
not just me but others, ultimately to form a populist majority and
produce populist politics," Hightower wrote in The
Nation, February 6, 1989. "And while I might be able to
gather as much as $10 million, I would have to spend more time in the
living rooms of the wealthy raising money than I could out in the
communities raising issues, raising hopes and raising hell."
          Hightower wants to form a party within a party--a populist alliance
that begins in Texas and spreads to the rest of the country. He wants
nothing less than to "change the way politics is conducted,"
starting with the Texas Democratic Party, and let that serve as a
national model.
          To do so, he proposes to rally progressive, populist forces already
in place, expanding the concept that he and his staff have practiced
within the Texas Department of Agriculture for the past six
years. That has been to work "shoulder to shoulder with local
communities to protect the environment and health of people associated
with agriculture," says Hightower. "We are challenging
ourselves and the 

state's farmers to build a diversified,
consumer-oriented, sustainable agriculture. We have tapped the
aspirations of everyday people, removing barriers to their economic
endeavors and freeing their enterprise for the benefit of Texas. With
the support of the legislature and the help of other agricultural
institutions, we have offered the simple tools of self-help to build
food processing facilities, to sell everything from grain sorghum to
honey in the international market, to open up the $3 billion
dollar-a-year organic foods market to Texas producers, to assure safer
pesticide practices, to protect communities from toxic waste
contamination--in general, to give people the means to get hold of
their own destiny."
          Something akin to the old Farmer-Labor Party with an infusion of
modern technology, the new alliance would encompass speakers' bureaus,
small-donor solicitation programs, policy development centers,
campaign training, a network of progressive and populist elected
officials in all areas, and a candidate recruitment program. Hightower
is already talking with the state AFL-CIO, the association of trial
lawyers and community organizations throughout the state, and seeking
advice from organizations outside Texas such as the Legislative
Electoral Action Project in Connecticut and Citizen Action in
Chicago.
          While running against Phil Gramm in 1990 would have been "more
fun than eating ice cream naked," Hightower has decided to eschew
high-dollar, high-profile politics and "put my political capital
into the more fundamental task of plowing the ground, scattering the
seeds and nurturing the growth of a broad-based, grass-roots populist
politics out of which a progressive government can arise."
          The question, says Hightower, is not whether the Democratic Party
should go to the left or to the right, but whether it will go again to
people themselves.
          
            Elaine Davenport is a freelance reporter and audio
producer who divides her time between Austin, Texas, and London,
England.
          
        
        
          Bundy Killing No Cause for Celebration 
          By Collins, LeroyLeroy Collins 
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, p. 10
          
          Since I have a long record of opposing the death penalty, I have
been asked what my reactions are to the Theodore Bundy execution.
          I have made very clear my reasons for opposing the death
penalty. In the first place I believe it is no deterrent to
crime. There are many who do not accept this, but almost all the
criminologists who have studied this issue and even the U.S. Supreme
Court have concluded that the theory of deterrence cannot be
supported. In confirming this I would point out that while many of our
states have the death penalty, others do not, and the indications are
that the crime rates of those who have no death penalty are no higher
and in a majority of these the rates are lower, than in states that do
have the death penalty.
          Take two states--Texas and Massachusetts. In Texas since the death
penalty has been reinstated, the murder rate has gone up, whereas in
Massachusetts where there is no death penalty, over the same time the
rate has gone down.
          Now I don't contend that if we in Florida abolish the death penalty
our murder rate (which has recently increased rapidly) will come down
because of that fact. But the fact remains there has been no plausible
study that could lead one to conclude that having the penalty deters
would-be murderers.
          Now the Bundy execution, I accept. He was guilty of a long series
of gruesome, heinous murders of innocent young children and women. The
death penalty is a part of our law, and if anyone has ever deserved
it, he did. And I felt with our citizens generally, a sense of relief
that he can never, under any circumstances, kill again.
          As a citizen, however, I felt ashamed and embarrassed over some of
the macabre demonstrations of jubilation. The shouts of joy, the
parties and epithets that were screamed, were indeed reminiscent of
the Roman spectacles of passion by the crowds eagerly assembled to
witness executions of that period. I couldn't imagine anyone feeling
joyous in the act of our state destroying a human life.
          I am quietly accepting the execution of the law of our state. I
learned this being governor and having the sworn duty to enforce the
law, whether I liked or approved of a specific law or not. In fact, as
governor I recommended the abolishment of the death penalty. But the
majority of the legislators, representing the people of Florida too,
saw it differently and declined to accept my recommendation. I did not
try to put myself above the law. In fact, the state executed more
people during my administration than in the administrations of all the
governors combined who have succeeded me. Yet with every signing of a
death warrant, I was distressed.
          So Bundy has been executed. He was given the full penalty provided
under the law. By his multiple heinous crimes, he deserved such under
that law.
          The execution saddened me. I do not exult in it. I think the
exuberance and joyous party atmosphere it stimulated in some quarters,
was in itself the reflection of a sickness.
          The English experience remains impressive to me. With all their
problems, they abolished the death penalty many years back. Their
crime rates, their murder rates, are very small in comparison to those
of the United States.
          I am still opposed to the death penalty. This form of society's
revenge runs counter to my nature. After all, we are all children of
God, even the sickest among us.
          
            LeRoy Collins served as governor of Florida from
1955-1961. A life fellow of the Southern Regional Council, he writes a
weekly column for the St. Petersburg Times, where these
comments originally appeared.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth 
          By Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 11, No. 2, 1989, pp. 24, 22-23
          
          I am proud of America and proud to be an American. Almost no other
nation in the world would have waged a civil war to abolish slavery,
enact the Thirteenth, Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments and pass
civil rights statutes in 1964 and 1965. America did these things
solely because they were the right and proper things to do. We have
quite a ways yet to go, but by golly we're getting there!
          Last issue, I wrote about the January installation--more than two
decades after the protests that led to passage of the Voting Rights
Act--of the first black commissioners in my home of Dallas County,
Alabama. There are many good and decent people, black and white, in
Selma, as there are across the country. There are honest, decent
whites who are genuinely interested in fair, unfettered progress by
black citizens.
          On the other hand, there are whites who fraudulently claim an
interest in our welfare and progress but don't really mean it and are
somewhat difficult to deal with. One can easily fight an enemy, but,
pray tell, how does one fight an alleged friend whose subterfuge is
both socially acceptable and institutionalized?
          Many of us detest awards for "doing good" in the field of race
relations. Once an elected official, business man, preacher or
whatever gathers a roster of "human relations" citations, it is next
to impossible to convince him--or the public--that he is really an
insincere, foot-dragging impostor and that more often than not is the
case.
          Such people are examples of the "thinking man's prejudice." By
definition, they think for themselves but often harbor a deeply seated
and secret emotion that tells them they can't really believe in honest
equality for blacks. That feeling or emotion is irrational but
real. Thus, many "do-gooders" (thinking people) are really ambivalent
on most of matters of race.
          And that is one of the reasons why some otherwise good people have
half-heartedly and quietly accepted so many racist onslaughts by
bigots against black people. It is also a tragedy in America generally
and in Dallas County in particular. Of course there are always other
social and business pressures working in the white community.
          The white Dallas County School Board members are thinking
people. They know it would take a miracle for the Supreme Court to
even consider their silly eleventh hour appeal to forestall
redistricting. They also know maintaining this legal charade is a
gratuitous insult to the black people of this county; nevertheless'
they voted in a racial bloc to continue. They are victims of the
thinking man's prejudice. They are also politicians in the cheapest
sense.
          The white majority on the Selma City Council consistently votes in
a racial bloc on all matters of substance. Councilman Edwin Moss is so
frustrated he has questioned his own utility in conversations with
this writer. He wouldn't believe what I tried to tell him years
ago. The white councilpeople are victims of the thinking man's
prejudice. In a very narrow sense, they even mean well.
          As to the county commission, blacks have no doubts whatsoever
concerning one of our white commissioners--they know who and what he
is. They had the wrong idea about the other one because we endorsed
him and black voters made the narrow margin for his victory.
          However, some of us understood from the beginning that he is a
thinking man. We also understood what that meant in terms of white
bloc voting; the two white commissioners have yet to split their
vote. Only one of the three black commissioners has been so blind; the
other two have kept the faith.

          The Selma daily newspaper is unlikely to take editorial issue with
white, bloc voting on the county school board, county commission, city
council, or anywhere else. We can expect, however, a hypocritical
editorial commending Erskine Minor for breaking up the only black
majority in local government to favor a white majority. Thinking white
people run the newspaper.
          The local white establishment would, if they could, cower the new
black county commissioners from doing anything for blacks out of fear
of being called racist. No self-respecting black person should give a
tinker's damn about being called racist by such people.
          Nevertheless, in response to the controversy about courthouse
patronage following the recent election, two of the black
commissioners said publicly that the replacement of two white
employees with black employees was not racial. That is
disappointing. I had hoped the race of the replacement employees' was
at least as important as their qualifications.
          How else is equity to be done in a situation where blacks have been
systematically discriminated against in terms of jobs for a century?
Assigning two top-level jobs has nothing to do with "two wrongs making
a right." Rather it is a simple, direct attempt to reduce the
discriminatory effects of long-standing white racism in the Dallas
County courthouse.
          Proposing a naked, "color blind" mentality to the black
commissioners as the solution to centuries of white racism is
contemptible, dishonest and morally bankrupt. It is the rough
equivalent of confusing a method for preventing the spread of a
disease with actual treatment of the festering effects of that
disease.
          I am told the black female replacement employee had helped train
the now displaced white female who was her boss under an earlier
(white) administration's patronage. That is a familiar story all over
Dixie. Racism is the primary reason more than a few whites became boss
and their black counterparts didn't. Qualifications are of course
relevant but so is the fact that being black is often a permanent

disqualification.
          Whites have virtually all the top jobs at the courthouse and city
hall. Both school boards are majority white and so is the city
council. Most major jobs in both school systems are held by whites
with one exception. The local court systems and support staff, with
one exception, are white. Blacks are usually placed in second- and
third-line positions. We became the assistant to the assistant who is
somebody's deputy.
          But, in 1989 a black majority on the county commission replaces two
top white employees with black people and that act is described as
racist, contemptible and a few other names. That is white arrogance at
its naked, disgusting worst.
          The recent Selma newspaper editorial entitled "Appoint the Best"
illustrates the point. The editor self-righteously pontificated that
county commissioners should appoint the best" person to the office of
county attorney regardless of race. Pompous and hypocritical issue was
taken with a simple, realistic and truthful assessment by commissioner
Perry Varner that most blacks expect the new majority black commission
to appoint a black lawyer to that office.
          Candor in matters of race is hardly the rule in Dallas
County. Racist facts are systematically ignored or rationalized.
          The white commission members who appointed the previous county
attorney, a white, would not have even considered appointing this
writer or any other black lawyer. No editorial appeared telling these
white commissioners to be "color blind" and appoint "the best." In
vivid contrast to Varner's candid assertion, the racist fog was so
complete when the commission was all-white the appointment of the most
competent black lawyer on the planet was unthinkable.
          Lawyers for both local school boards are white. The lawyer for the
City of Selma and every municipal board is white. The lawyer for the
Craig Field Authority and everything else is white. These arrangements
have nothing to do with these lawyers being "the best"; they are white
and have connections. No editorial objection has or will be written in
regard.
          In like manner, the newspaper only belatedly objected to the
fifteen-year litigation designed to keep blacks off the county
commission, and the editor never really mustered the courage to flatly
call that sordid legal effort racist. With the same jaundiced eye, the
editor now sees danger if a black majority commission appoints a black
county attorney.
          It is hypocritically clear that when whites appoint whites, that it
is simply seen as getting the best. When blacks pick blacks, that is
racism. This crude double standard is a rather revealing example of
white arrogance at its worst. Lord help us! A thinking man's
prejudice.
          It is also clear that editorials on the importance of a color blind
selection process are only written when blacks have the power to
appoint. Whether dealing with a school principal, legal advisor or
whatever, the admonition to "rise above color" is only heard when
blacks have the power of appointment and white-e are on the receiving
end. It is almost beyond hypocrisy when the Selma Times-Journal
presumes to lecture Dallas County blacks on racism.
          Little wonder my dear wife received four irate telephone calls
about the editorial before breakfast. Rev. Charles P. Thrash came to
the office to say he no longer wanted the newspaper in his home--not
even the Sunday edition that carries my column. I will have to talk
with him immediately. Believe me!
          We are told we can't move beyond the "dark past" (that phrase
itself is unintentionally racist) if we become more polarized. The
editorial writer was apparently too hypocritical to say racially
polarized though that is what he obviously meant. It doesn't matter
because there is no way we can become more racially polarized.
          Pregnancy, as they say, is not a matter of degree. Similarly,
racial polarization is not a matter of degree. "You is or you ain't,
baby!"
          Additional foolishness somewhat akin to the polarization nonsense
is the claim that ". . . actions similar to those by the county
commission will surely separate us further." What a claim in the
land of racially segregated churches, private schools and all that
rest! My goodness. The separation is already complete.
          Black people often say to each other how tired they are of phony
discussions about racism and discrimination being ills of the
past. Pick a black citizen at random and he or she can relate more
than one contemporary racial horror story. Black Alabamians are filing
as many complaints with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission as
ever.
          In any event, black people do not always share the non-questioning
loyalty and blind respect some whites have for decisions made by
white-dominated institutions. A century of unspeakable discrimination
against blacks by these same institutions has imbued blacks with a
necessary preference for realism over self-serving fantasy.
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
      
    
  
