
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 11, Number 6,
	       1989
        
          An Unending Stream: History One Day at a Time.
          Reviewed by Dunbar, LeslieLeslie Dunbar
          Vol. 11, No. 6, 1989, pp. 20-23
          
          The News
and Observer, Raleigh, North Carolina, (Friday, November 17,
1989, five sections, $0.25).
          We are swamped by information. The least of us knows, sort of,
things that the wisest of old could hardly imagine; nor the most
pessimistic know to dread. Historians are the reporters of what of the
past is important to keep in memory; news reporters are historians of
the instant, digesting for our minds each day's memorable
happenings.
          I am a word man myself, and so I get nearly all my "news" from
reading, not from television. I suppose, though, it is all the same:
the stream is unending and unrelenting. Usually we take it passively,
absorb what we can or want to and go on about our business. Every now
and then, however, the weight of it jolts one into awareness. It is
like catching a cold in the winter; there are germs swirling about all
the time, but only sometimes are we vulnerable. The news of November
17 may not have been more overwhelming than on many other days, but it
was one of mine for being vulnerable.
          My morning paper is the Raleigh News and
Observer. It is a good newspaper. Compared with what was for
years my daily, the New Fork Times, it covers
local and state news more adequately and its editorials are typically
more intelligent and stimulating (even when wrong or
annoying). National and international news it mostly cribs from the
big national dailies, and does that very well. It carries probably too
many columnists, and as the contemporary preoccupation with "balance"
demands, selects them from a range of opinions; also in contemporary
style, it pretty well ignores the left. Conservatives such as Safire,
Kilpatrick, and Georgie Anne Geyer are not truly "balanced" by a
centrist such as wicker--more closely by the occasional Mary McGrory
but she is outnumbered several to one. Admittedly, America political
opinion has not much "left," but it should not really be hard to find
pro-labor or pacifist or Marxist commentators. Nevertheless, the News and Observer is a paper of quality, has a
manifest integrity about itself, and no one outside its home-town owns
it; not yet at any rate.
          Back to November 17. Look at the day's front page, the mounting of
the flood that was to break over me. The "top" story was that five
Jesuit priests plus a lay one (later we would also learn that he was
Jesuit), their cook and her daughter, were murdered in San Salvador,
almost certainly by thugs in the employ of our side in a civil war
which seems on the brink of turning El Salvador into another Lebanon,
where death is an individual's and the national society's realistic
expectation.
          There was more on the front page. In one of the state's towns, a
twenty-year-old black mother of three children, ages two months, one
year and two years, killed them all with a steak knife; no one seems
to know why. In East Germany, non-communist parties entered the
Cabinet; in South Africa beaches were de-segregated; and in the United
States the House of Representatives "balances" reforms of its ethics
by pay increases.
          A political horror. A private horror. An advent of liberty. A small
murmur for equality. A decaying of a once 

proud American
institution. The news of November 17, 1989, would go on this way; one
could sense history trembling in order to rise and claim it all.
          In the following pages, George Bush, Jesse Helms (in the manner of
a playbill, I am picking up characters in order of appearance), the
five Senators who took the coin of a rotting savings and loan, Admiral
Poindexter (does anyone believe that the subpoena he got, as this day
reported, for Mr. Reagan to testify at his trial will actually be
fulfilled?), Phillip Morris (that's a corporation which will subsidize
the government's celebration of the Bill of Rights' bicentennial), and
Ms. Donna Bazemore--all these stride toward us.
          Ms. Bazemore, not so incidentally, is a black woman of Ahoskie,
North Carolina, who told a Congressional subcommittee what they (and
probably the rest of us) would just as soon not hear; our enormous
poultry factories are unsanitary places. Picasso came into the news,
too; one of his paintings brought $40.7 million. (We were later to
learn that a Japanese businessman was the buyer.) Congress surrendered
to Mr. Bush on abortions for poor women, and Democrats there abandoned
expanded child care for this session. The Navy was insistent--in a
gloss on the meaning of loyalty--that one of its own seamen, not
itself organizationally, caused the deadly blast on the USS Iowa, an
old battleship brought out of its mausoleum by the Reagan
administration to parade around the planet, "projecting power."
          I stop, even though I am only at page 14 of the first section. Read
farther, and there will be news of Israelis and
Palestinians. Bulgaria. Lebanon. Brazil. China (as I am swamped by
news, that country is awash in too many
cabbages). Nicaragua. Afghanistan. Lech Walesa. There will be
editorials about oral sex, national youth service, and a state
officeholder straying among the flesh pots of NewYork. Columns about
Mr. Helms, Mr. Walesa, France's children's policies, fetal tissue
research; and there will be Mr. Safire chortling over the USSR's
reported economic difficulties. There will be a cartoon about
Mr. Bush's "secret" plan to overthrow Noriega, another reminding us
that it was labor unions which brought about change in Poland.
          One "Letter to the Editor" affectionately remembered the Rev. James
Reeb, murdered in Selma, Alabama, at the time of the 1965 march;
another lamented threats to the state's environment implicit in the $9
billion--that's it: billion--road building
program adopted by the legislature earlier this year; another by the
manager of the huge Shearon-Harris nuclear power plant near Raleigh
assured all that, as regards a recent fire at the plant, "at no time
was the public in danger."
          Then there are Sports--lots--and Business. But it is enough. On the
other hand, I suppose I should not leave out that there was a panel
discussion of business ethics at the University of North Carolina,
with several very important persons participating in this the
concluding session of a conference on international competitiveness;
or that Burroughs Welcome, a British company which has a big
laboratory in the state's Research Triangle Park, reported 

a bullish
year, much of its profits coming from its AIDS drug and its antiviral
drug for genital herpes; or that the Navy suspended IBM (!) from
bidding on new contracts because of the revealed fraud of selling used
equipment for new.
          As said, enough, even though I am omitting the most interesting
section of the whole paper today: the local news. But a reviewer
should not tell everything. Buy the book.
          How does this belong among book reviews?
          First, for readers who want to know about the present United States
or its southern region, what book would tell more? Granted, that from
the above, and the yesterdays' editions, everyone must be his or her
own historian, must give it shape and meaning, must somehow contrive
the formula that would put it all into understandable equation.
          Second, the daily newspaper--if a good one such as the News and Observer--is in fact a standard of
measurement, or seen from another angle an evaluator of the
non-fiction that analyzes and interprets our place and time; for
fiction too, that attempts that. The maddening complexity the journals
report stands as a measure of what a book ought to represent, to
"stand for." A book cannot embrace it all. Somehow, though, the good
book has to reflect an awareness of that same impossibility
complicated, often chaotic and hurtful, occasionally fine, always
on-rushing world and region which the good newspaper
reports. Contemporary Southern writers, of both fiction and
nonfiction, are often so intent on depicting (and typically these days
unlike past ones, celebrating) the uniqueness of the South that any
very lively sense of the region's immersion in a larger world drifts
and vanishes. Possibly that is a holding action, a clinging to what is
still here yet is firmly on a one-way passage away.
          A dozen or more novels could be made from the local news--the
Section C news--of this day's papers: University of North Carolina
student precariously perched atop a radio tower protesting the CIA;
eight North Carolina State University wrestlers on trial for brutally
assaulting two men and a woman annoyed over having their lawn urinated
on; an FBI agent convicted for drunk driving after wrecking an
FBI-owned car; more on the trial of Eddie Hatcher, of Robeson County
newspaper office fame; a citation of Duke Power Co. (!) for toxic
contamination of ground water. Novels could be written, and no doubt
similar ones will be. Their quality will depend on how well they
connect their stories to the world beyond Section C, how well they are
"of this world" as well as at home.
          Third, the fact is there is some awfully good stuff in the region's
papers. I have for the past two years been a judge in the Institute of
Southern Studies journalism competition. Some of the "feature" writing
and investigative reporting around the region, from Texas to Virginia,
is 

outstanding, and some series are (as I've wearily discovered) of
almost book length.
          And so finally, and for all these reasons, Southern Charges
herewith invites reviews of your local newspaper. A friend--one who is
often subject to fits of dear and therefore indignant observations of
society--angrily remarked to me recently that there are three bodies
of people who are never told to go jump in the lake (he used a more
vivid expression; federal judges, foundation executives, and the
editorial board of the New York Times. I'll pass on the accuracy of
what he said about judges, affirm that he is right about foundation
executives (I was one for fifteen years, and no one--or hardly
anyone--during those years spoke a cross word to me), and cannot here
do anything about the Times. But if you, our readers, want to submit a
review talking about your local newspaper, praising or damning, we
shall read what you send to us, in the hope we may publish it. Can you
write clearly and interestingly about the home-town paper, and not too
lengthily? If you can and are moved to do so, we would like to see
your work.
          Encores, of November 17, 1989.
          A crew of Marines rescued in bad weather five men from a sunk
tugboat, eight miles at sea off Cape Lookout. Brave men there are
still.
          An old Woolworth's lunch counter once sat-in in Salisbury, a
videotape of the historic Greensboro sit-in of 1960, and a videotape
of the killing of five by the Klan in Greensboro in 1979 are joined
with an original draft of the Constitution in an exhibit at the
state's Museum of History.
          The family of an Israeli soldier killed by Palestinian guerillas
donated his heart to an Arab; the widow said, "If it is possible to
save a person, I think it is a religious commandment."
          Hope is still ours by right of such as these, and of that young
man, 175 feet aloft.
          
            LESLIE DUNBAR is the review editor of 
Southern Changes.
          
        
        
          An Insider's Account of Race and Politics in the Delta.
          Reviewed by Cooper, MichaelMichael Cooper
          Vol. 11, No. 6, 1989, pp. 17-19
          
          Even Mississippi by Melany Neilson (Tuscaloosa:
University of Alabama Press, 1989. xiv, pp. 199).
          Part memoir and part campaign history, Even
Mississippi is worthwhile reading for its insider's account of
race and politics in the Mississippi Delta of the early 1980s.
          Melany Neilson grew up in the turbulent wake of the civil rights
movement, but her earliest childhood memories are surprisingly similar
to those of previous generations of white, well-to-do Southerners. She
recalls the droves of black field hands working the family cotton
plantation and lovingly remembers the family's warm-bosomed black
maids. Her father, Ed Tye, was a planter turned lawyer. The men of the
family had been lawyers and planters in the same county for several
generations.
          The Neilsons were one of the prominent families of Lexington, the
county seat of Holmes County, which is on 

the eastern edge of the flat
alluvial plain known as the Delta. Welfare, cotton, and pulpwood are
the country's economic mainstays. Three-fourths of its 23,000
residents are black.
          The civil rights movement redrew the lines of segregation in Holmes
Country. Neilson remembers her third grade teacher, with trembling
voice, telling the class that the following year, 1968, colored
children would be coming to the school. That was the year that
Neilson, along with nearly every other white child in town, enrolled
in newly-formed Central Holmes Academy. The year 1968 was also
significant because Mississippi seated its first black legislator
since Reconstruction. He was Robert Clark from Holmes County. His
election and public school desegregation added to the tension that was
as palpable as the Delta's August heat. "Every man in town, white
and nigra," Neilson recalls her father saying, "is hating
someone for something."
          While growing up, Neilson recognized the schism between blacks and
whites, but she accepted the status quo and anticipated living her
life as a traditional belle. But her life changed dramatically while
she was a graduate student in journalism at Ole Miss when, pretty much
on impulse, she applied for a job in Robert Clark's 1982 campaign for
Congress. In Ed Tye's opinion Clark was a "good nigra," but that
didn't keep Neilson's mother from asking, "Will you have to ride in
the same car with him?"
          Despite her mother's and her own apprehensions, Neilson joined
Clark's campaign just days before the Democratic primary, a contest
against two white candidates which Clark won with an encouraging 57
percent of the vote. In the general election Clark faced Republican
Webb Franklin, and race was the dominant unspoken issue. Responding
off the record to a reporter's criticism that he was too timid with
whites, Clark replied, "A black man reaching for a white woman's
hand'll scare a lot of 'em. So will talking about race."
          While Clark couldn't make race an issue, his opponent could and
did, in ways subtle and not so subtle. Franklin began a stump speech
before a mixed audience with the comment, "I didn't just fall off a
watermelon truck." One of his campaign posters featured his
photograph next to one of Clark with the caption, "The choice is
yours for Congress." Part of the inspiration for this poster came
from a poll which found that a quarter of the voters didn't know Clark
was black.
          But, hearteningly, the book shows that modern-day Mississippi
politics isn't divided completely by race. At a fundraiser in a posh
home in Biloxi, Clark pressed the flesh with a crowd of successful men
and women, white and black, who contributed some $5,000 to his
campaign. In the Delta, at an all-black fund raiser where the fare was
fried catfish and hush puppies, the hat was passed and filled with
sweat-darkened dollar bills. The contributions were enthusiastic but
meager until two white farmers drove upend handed over two checks for
$500 each.
          These and other insider accounts of race relations and politics in
the Delta make Even Mississippi interesting
reading. But readers interested in Deep South politics may be
disappointed that there is so little about Robert Clark's
fourteen-plus years in the state legislature. Neilson's summary of his
legislative career reads like a press release. Clark is a pioneer
black politician who has been a state legislator now for more than
twenty years. A book that is in part about his political aspirations
should have said more about his record.
          Another bothersome aspect of the book is that Neilson's prose
doesn't always make the reader feel the gravity of her
experiences. Much of Even Mississippi is about
the emotional trials of a young white woman from an old Delta family
who violates deeply-rooted race, caste, class and gender taboos by
going to work for a black politician. Not long ago, such behavior
would have meant, at best, life-long ostracism. The Delta is an
insular world that few outsiders understand.
          Even Mississippi is strong, though, on
recognizing human decency and courage. Neilson's work for Clark took a
heavy toll on her family. In the dead of night they received
threatening telephone calls. Ed Tye's law practice lost
clients. Mrs. Neilson, tired of the condescension, quit the Garden
Club. Her parents had misgivings, but they didn't try to rein in their
daughter. Ed Tye even endorsed 

Clark in a television commercial.
          Despite solid victories in the primaries, Clark lost two bids for
Congress, in 1982 and 1984. Webb Franklin won both elections because
of a low turnout of black voters and his appeals to racism and
conservatism. But in Clark's defeat there were hopeful signs for the
future.
          In 1982, Neilson was the only white staffer working for Clark. His
campaign also attracted a few white volunteers from northern
colleges. In 1984, she was one of two white staffers, and they were
aided by many volunteers, including several local whites. Having
Mississippians work for a black candidate was a significant change and
contributed to the overall pioneering effect of Clark's two
campaigns. His trail blazing probably helped Mike Espy defeat Franklin
in 1986 to become Mississippi's first black congressman in the
twentieth century.
          In its description of race relations and politics in the Delta,
Even Mississippi provides a good sense of how slowly racial attitudes
are changing. That point is painfully clear in the book's evocative
epilogue, which describes Neilson's wedding, at which Clark was a
reluctant guest.
          On her wedding day, Neilson recalls, everything in the church, its
trappings and the guests, was glaringly white--except for Clark
standing uncomfortably in the back row, neither speaking nor being
spoken to. At the reception in the Neilson's white-columned home, he
entered the back door. The only other black people there were the
maids. Clark chatted briefly with the police chief, met Mrs. Neilson
for the first time, and then slipped quietly out the back.
          
            MICHAEL COOPER is researching the life of Hazel Brannon
Smith, former editor and publisher of the Holmes County
Lexington Advertiser.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By 
            Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 11, No. 6, 1989, pp. 24, 23
          
          The unspeakable and cowardly Sunday morning bombing and slaughter
of the four children in Birmingham's Sixteenth Street Baptist Church
is like it happened yesterday. It will always remain so in the minds
of many.
          Scores of my associates cannot recall many days since that bombing
when our lives, directly or indirectly, were not in some form of
jeopardy. A black leader in Dixie whose life has not been seriously
threatened at least twice is either ineffective or a fraud or both.
          The current bombings are not a new problem for black leaders. The
attack on white judges is new but hardly eliminates racism as a
motive. A suspected drug connection also does not put racism to rest,
all other things considered.
          Since the first slave ship docked in America, it has been a
life-threatening ordeal to offer or provide effective leadership to
black people. It is perfectly safe to mislead blacks. In fact, that is
how some blacks survive.
          Martin Luther King Jr. knew he could not sit safely with white
leaders in a quiet room and effectively negotiate racial progress in
Dixie. Obviously, an apostle of nonviolence would have preferred a
quiet, negotiated approach if it had held any hope of success.
          Black progress in Dixie is always seen and defined as a diminution
of white power, privilege and money; thus any black progress
immediately becomes a classic power struggle between blacks and
whites--a struggle almost never amenable to meaningful
negotiations.
          King discussed those very points in speeches and was even more
vivid in private. Precisely because he understood, this apostle of
non-violence consciously placed his life and family in serious
jeopardy by assuming effective leadership of the Montgomery Bus
Boycott. As expected, his home and many others were bombed.
          His life remained at great risk until it was taken on a hotel
balcony in Memphis. That, too, was not really unexpected.
          No person in America understood white power better than King. Few
Presidents understood it as well. King knew he could become
instantaneously rich, safe and even "honored" by every white leader in
America if he would deliberately become ineffective as a black
leader. He often laughed about it.
          Ineffective black leaders are absolutely safe in America. No civil
rights leader of late has been killed or even threatened (except the
poor black lawyer the other day in Savannah) because collectively and
singularly they are almost wholly ineffective. They surrendered our
most effective weapon (direct action) and we have been ineffective
ever since. And, of course, they have been safe. There will be no
motel balconies for them.
          If King had lived it would be as dangerous in 1989 t' be a civil
rights leader as it was in 1965, because he would be waging a struggle
as effectively now as he was then. He would not be selling his people
out for nickle jobs, empty titles and superfluous
positions.
          The next black leader who comes forward at a crucially tactical
moment to nervously suggest "bi-racial negotia-

tions" or "dialogue,"
ask him to detail his past accomplishments for black people along
those lines. Find out how safe and secure he is with white
leaders. You might also ask what titles, jobs and positions have been
given him.
          On the other hand, unless you have lived in a cave isolated from
everybody and everything you already know the answers to those
questions.
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
        
          The Pittston Strike
          By Thompson, Charlie D.Charlie D. Thompson
          Vol. 11, No. 6, 1989, pp. 1, 3-6
          
          AFTER CROSSING THE Clinch River and heading into the extreme
southwestern corner of Virginia, the terrain begins to close in around
you. The rolling farmland to the east gives way to steep mountains
with valleys barely wide enough to fit both a road and a house
side-by-side. It is the Clinch River which also informally marks the
boundary to that separate region known as "the
coalfields." It is here that the black veins of coal,
intertwined with the backbones of these ridges, are thick enough to
extract. Since 1892, coal companies and the mountain people they hire
have bitterly collaborated in this task.
          The bloody history of Appalachian mining is central to
understanding this region. Isolated behind the physical barrier of the
mountains from the rest of the world and even from the states which
claim jurisdiction here, the people of the coalfields have continually
struggled for economic survival with little recognition from the rest
of the country. Outside ownership of the region's resources drains
away much of the region's wealth, causing unemployment, disability,
and poverty which perpetually exceed national averages.
          YET IN THE coalfields, as in many oppressed areas of the world, the
human spirit blossoms. Appalachian people throughout coal-mining
history have contributed much to the labor movement's struggle for
justice. Coal miners and their union, the United Mine Workers of
America, have perhaps the most coura-

geous and hard-fought story of
organizing in our history, as the films Harlan County, USA and Matewan
have depicted. Now another chapter of this story is unfolding.
          The UMWA is fighting again for basic human rights against powers
which attempt to discredit and even destroy it. Since April 4,
seventeen hundred miners employed by the Pittston Company of
Greenwich, Conn., have been on a "selective
strike." The remaining UMWA members throughout the region
work to support them with 2 percent wage deductions.  "The strike
is not about economics," said Bill Patton, a sixty-two-year-old
miner and former Dickenson County Supervisor. "It is about social
justice." Wages are not an issue in this strike--miners are
satisfied with their average salary of $15 per hour. The major
concerns at the picket shacks and in miners' homes are health care and
job security. The company has proposed measures which weaken pensions
and decrease health care benefits for fifteen hundred retirees, widows
of pensioners, and disabled miners. Pittston also wants to relinquish
the company's responsibility for lifetime care for retirees and their
spouses.
          The strike, though necessary for maintaining all that thc union has
worked for, was reluctantly called. After fourteen months of attempted
negotiations, during which the UMWA ignored its own policy and worked
without a contract, the union walked out.
          Osborne Debert, a thirty-two-year-old miner from Lebanon, Va.,
states simply the reason: "They want to take a whole lot from us
that we have already fought for." In one of the world's most
dangerous occupations, miners virtually count on adverse effects from
their occupations. Black Lung or other mining ailments will attack
almost all miners at some stage in their lives. Previously, they had
some consolation in knowing they and their families were to be cared
for when the trouble came. Now without a contract, the Pittston
miners, both active and retired, are again at the mercy of a resistant
absentee owner when their work takes its toll.
          The Pittston Company wants other major changes in long-standing
labor rights including the repeal of the right to an eight-hour
day. In other words, mandatory overtime would be a requirement. If
Pittston gets its way, miners would be required to work seven days a
week if thc company chooses. In Appalachia, where church and family
ties are still very strong, this is particularly onerous. Still more
examples of new "flexibility" proposed by Pittston include allowing
for increased numbers of non- union workers in Pittston mines and
subcontracting to other non-union companies (which are in some cases
subsidiaries of Pittston, for work which is now done by union
members.
          Clearly the union had reason enough to head to the picket
lines. With a resistant company refusing to bend on what it knows to
be the undoing of standard labor practices, the strike was
inevitable. Pittston surely knew this would occur--the contractual
violations against the union challenge the most basic of rights. The
company's tactics seem to have a larger and more significant
agenda. This challenge to the UMWA appears to many rank and file
members to be a litmus test for not only the miners' solidarity but
for all of American labor. Bill Patton said, "They're trying to
break the 

union's back and if we lose on this one we've lost
everything." The U.S. labor movement is indeed at a critical point
in its history and this strike will demonstrate much about how unions
will fare through the next decade.
          The UMWA has shouldered this responsibility with impressive
commitment and inspiration with a pledge to strike until their rights
are reinstated. Sentiments like the following are expressed daily on
the picket line: "We'll be here as long as it takes" and "It
ain't over till we say it's over." Some like Elizabeth Cook,
beautician, strike support worker and miner's wife, promise to give
all to help the cause. "I have to be honest with you," she
said, "I'd die for this union. I ask the Lord to help me be like
Job in the Bible and endure to the end." An overwhelming majority
of the miners are steadfast with only one union member crossing the
picket line during the entire strike.
          Though spirits are high, no one dares believe the fight is almost
over. Entire communities, pulling together for the long haul, are
finding renewed closeness, a stronger sense of purpose, and new
political awareness. Support from groups around this country and
abroad adds significance. Elizabeth Cook, tired but determined, said,
"This strike has been hard but it has been good for us."
          In November the town of Grundy, Va., elected local union president
Jackie Stump to the House of Representatives by write-in ballot. The
man he beat is the father of a circuit court judge responsible for
numerous fines against the union. Even with only two weeks of
campaigning, Stump won by a two-to-one margin against a legislator
thought by some to be the most powerful in the state.
          At Bill and Jan Patton's home the police scanner blares out the
latest police check of the picket lines. Every union home now has this
tap into the activities of the Virginia 

State Police and Vance
Security guards who keep constant surveillance on the union. "We
used to respect the law here," Bill Patton admitted, "but never
again will the troopers get any support from any of the people in this
community." A large sign outside the M and R Store just a few
miles away reads, "We respectfully refuse to serve State Troopers
during the period of the UMWA strike." Everywhere in the Virginia
coalfields people have been shocked to find the state so blatantly
supporting the company through the use of escorts for non-union coal
trucks and thousands of striker arrests for small or nonexistent
offenses. The union has been fined $32 million for practicing civil
disobedience tactics like sitting in the road to block coal trucks.
          On a bedside table in the Pattons' home is Taylor Branch's Partinq
the Waters. All union leaders have been asked to read this account of
the civil rights movement to learn more about the use of non-violent
strategies. Minds are being broadened. Not a single union member has
been arrested for violent offenses during this strike. Meanwhile,
Pittston continues to guard its property with automatic weapons. At
one mine a makeshift "pill-box" atop an equipment shed protects
security guards. Scenes like this are ominous reminders of the
presence of the hired outsiders some are again calling the
"gun-thugs."
          In a small cove near Clinch River is a union campground known as
"Camp Solidarity." A community resident donated the property to
provide lodging for the union's support-

ers during the strike. A gravel
road leading to this refuge winds through the hills for miles. Here
the mountaineers mingle with union members and supporters from as far
away as Poland, Czechoslavakia, England, and even the Soviet Union, as
well as many thousands from around the United States.
          There is no official record of visitor numbers, but this small
haven has provided up to sixteen hundred a place to eat and sleep in a
single day. Liz Cook describes the operation of the union's daily food
service: "Pittston tried to shut us down by getting the kitchen
here closed. But the Lord provided a way out and we started fixing
food in our homes and bringing it in. I fixed forty pounds of macaroni
salad in my kitchen in one day." Union members who normally
construct the wooden mine supports used their carpentry skills to
build a permanent bunk house at the Camp just in time for winter.
          Five miles from Camp Solidarity is the Moss #3 Coal Preparation
Plant. For four days in September it was occupied in protest by
ninety-nine miners and a clergyman. Nearly five thousand people stood
outside blocking the gates. The picket shack is calm now, but the
occupation is still referred to as an example of the power of unarmed
people to physically overtake and control property and economics
without force. High on the metal structure behind the gates new
aluminum paint covers the bold words written during the takeover:
"UMWA is here to stay." Now, like the painted-over words, the
occupation is not easily visible, but the results linger in the hearts
of the miners. One man whose daily job is to inhabit the small picket
shack outside Moss #3 said confidently, "I ain't a bit afraid of
them. We control things here."
          The Reverend Joe Johnson, an eighty-year-old former miner and
active Freewill Baptist minister, sits quietly in his home with his
wife listening to the latest on the police scanner. He remembers the
days before the union, "I worked in water up to my knees for a
dollar a day loading coal by hand, and if I said anything about it the
boss would tell me, 'If you don't like it, there's a barefoot man
waiting outside ready to take your job.' That's what Pittston wants to
get it back to."
          "I think Christian people ought to be the ones working (in the
union) to get benefits for their people," counseled Johnson,
"The Bible says as you do it
unto your neighbor, you do it unto God. Church people should work to
help those in distress." The State Police that travel the road
past the Reverend's house are not allowed to stop at his driveway and
the nearby Maple Grove Church is a site where miners congregate but no
troopers are allowed to turn around. Another church chained its
parking lot entrance when it learned the state police were using the
site. "We should love our neighbor and do unto them what we'd have
them do to us," said Johnson, "If we all bind together we can
win this thing and I do believe that God's will for us is to have a
decent living."
          The Pittston strike continues as the weather gets colder. Snow has
already fallen on the picket lines. The UMWA in a recent flyer said,
"The campfires are blazing and the soup's on at Camp Solidarity for
the supporters who continue to stream in from around the nation and
the world." The strike seems firmly established in the hearts of
the people of the deep mountain communities surrounding the Pittston
land.
          Results, however, are slow coming. Although Secretary of Labor
Elizabeth Dole has visited the area, no federal action has been
initiated as of this writing. To date, the State of Virginia has done
little but aid Pittston's continued operations. Pittston itself seems
firmly entrenched in its position. The company claims it can last for
another year or longer without a settlement.
          Hidden behind these mountains is a pivotal struggle for justice and
democracy by Americans. Yet many citizens of this country still know
very little about our own current labor issues. In contrast, Lech
Walesa was recently given the Medal of Freedom by George Bush, and the
Polish Solidarity Union is known by every American with a
television. In October, a Solidarnosc official, Jack Merkel, came to
the coalfields without media fanfare and spoke to miners on the
strike. He said, "This is the first time in the history of our
movement that the workers of Poland have been able to support a labor
union in the United States." Before demands of the UMWA are met,
they will probably need much more of the same.
          Crossing the Clinch River is indeed like crossing a foreign
border. This land of rich resources and hidden turmoil is tucked away
from the mainstream. News coverage largely ignores its existence. Yet
a strike of international dimensions is underway. Those who know this
continue to come. Those who have always been here pledge to remain as
solid as the mountains which surround them. They are not about to give
in now.
        
        
          Culture-Bound Southern Baptists and Their Exiles.
          Reviewed by Hendricks, JosephJoseph Hendricks
          Vol. 11, No. 6, 1989, pp. 15-17
          
          Churches in Cultural Captivity, A History of the Social Attitudes of Southern
Baptists by John Lee Eighmy (Knoxville: The University of
Tennessee Press, 1972, revised 1987).
          When John Lee Eighmy suffered a fatal heart attack in 1970, he had
almost completed his important study on the influence of the social
gospel in the life and work of the Southern Baptist Convention. Eighmy
died at a time when the Convention seemed to be emerging from cultural
captivity, and he could hardly have anticipated its dramatic turn into
yet another era of cultural bondage. Fortunately, Samuel Hill has
provided for the revised edition an expanded conclusion that extends
the study to the present time.
          Eighmy contends that the Convention, born amidst the pre-Civil War
slavery debate, has conceived and pursued its mission in a manner that
embraces rather than criticizes Southern culture. He ably demonstrates
how this posture has been supported by Southern Baptist theology, a
perspective radically different from that of the American (Northern)
Baptist, Walter Rauschenbusch, who is often called the father of the'
social gospel in America. Eighmy cites a 1920 proclamation by the
Virginia Baptist Conven-

tion Social Service Committee that reflects
Southern Baptist antipathy toward the social gospel.
          
            
              The Baptist attitude toward all social reform,
work, and service is that unadulterated gospel preached and accepted
solves all social problems, rightly adjusts all industrial
inequalities, remoras domestic friction, adjourns divorce courts and
supplies adequate protection and uplift to the weaker part of
humanity.
            
          
          Such proclamations, however, can be misleading. As Eighmy points
out, Southern Baptists have consistently addressed some social
problems while ignoring others. They have vigorously fought alcohol
consumption, Sabbath desecration, gambling, and obscenity; and,
despite their subscription to a doctrine of separation of church and
state, they have consistently called upon government to prohibit such
practices. For the first half-century of its existence, however, the
Convention-made no effort to extend this social concern to such
problems as racial oppression, labor exploitation, and war which were
deeply rooted in the socio-political structures of Southern
culture--structures, notes Eighmy, that were perceived to be "divinely
ordered."
          In its second half-century, efforts were made to enlarge the
Southern Baptist social agenda. During this period, for example,
W.L. Poteat, president of Wake Forest College, and his nephew, Edwin
McNeill Poteat Jr., challenged the Convention's Social Service
Commission to expand its sphere of social concern. As the Convention
entered its] second century following world War II, the Social
Service' Commission (later named the Christian Life Commission) was
budgeted and staffed. Guided by such leaders as Hugh Brimm, Jesse
Burton Weatherspoon, Aker C. Miller, and Foy Valentine, the Commission
conducted educational programs designed to stretch the social
conscience of Southern Baptists.
          Such efforts required perennial sympathetic diplomacy by these
leaders, and the success of their work is reflected in a 196S
Convention resolution which confessed that Southern Baptists must
share responsibility for the racial strife then sweeping the
country.
          Given the resistance that the Commission encountered, its
accomplishments were impressive, but it must be noted that it pursued
its mission in the wake of dramatic action by civil rights groups,
other ecclesiastical organizations, and the federal government. For
the most part, the Convention followed rather than initiated change;
and, while it began to break with some outmoded traditions, it has
never gained sufficient detachment from the culture to mount a
sustained prophetic critique of it. Following Eighmy's death, as Hill
points out, the Convention leadership has turned to an alliance with
the New Right, purged the Christian Life Commission and other agencies
of progressive leadership, and replaced them with administrators who
have returned the agenda to personal rather than structural social
concerns.
          There is another part of the story, however, that does 

not fall
within the purview of Eighmy's book. As was often the case with Israel
and has been with the Church, the Southern Baptist prophetic social
mission has been pursued more by its exiles than within the Convention
itself. Innumerable Southern Baptists have departed from their
denomination to pursue vocations in other churches and secular
organizations. Two of the most formidable Southern prophets of social
justice, Clarence Jordan and Will Campbell, were reared and baptized
in rural Southern Baptist churches. Both were challenging Southern
culture long before the civil rights movement gained momentum, and
both were either nudged or driven out of the Southern Baptist fold.
          Jordan, founder of Koinonia Farm, preached unrelentingly against
the evils of war, wealth, and racism; and he devoted much of his later
life to translating portions of the New Testament from Greek into the
Southern vernacular. Campbell, who has been accurately called the
chaplain of the civil rights movement, has challenged both the
moderate and the fundamentalist factions of the Convention to learn
from the sixteenth century Anabaptists--who are their spiritual if not
their ecclesiastical ancestors--who found their identity in faith
rather than a culture that had captured the Church.
          These prophets and their lesser known sister and brother exiles
have been anchored in Scripture and a tradition that recognizes the
importance of not confusing culture and faith. Resisting seduction by
secular or ecclesiastical institutions, they have served both the
institutional church and the state by proclaiming the criticism they
so desperately need. Through the lives of such exiles the Convention
might catch a glimpse of how to be faithful in Southern culture
without being of it.
          
            JOSEPH HENDRICKS is chair of Interdisciplinary Studies at
Mercer University, a Southern Baptist, and a long-time active
challenger of injustice in Georgia and the South.
          
        
        
          We the Baptists: Trading Away a Birthright.
          Reviewed by Finlator, W. W.W. W. Finlator
          Vol. 11, No. 6, 1989, pp. 14-15
          
          The Southern Baptists: A Subculture in Transition by Ellen Rosenberg (Knoxville: University of
Tennessee Press, 1989, 240 pp.).
          There are times when the publication of a book is greeted with a
Glory Be, Welcome Thrice Welcome, Amen and Amen! Such is my response
to anthropologist Ellen Rosenberg's The Southern Baptists, A
Subculture in Transition, and I am sending her a letter of
thanks for writing it and letter of congratulations to the University
of Tennessee for publishing it.
          Here is the story told in depth, in truth, and, perhaps in spite of
the author's clinical approach, in compassion, about what is happening
to the Southern Baptist Convention, written by a Yankee scholar from
far-away Western Connecticut State University. As Will Campbell
observed: "We the Baptists. Ellen Rosenberg has shined a needed
spotlight on us all."
          Not that we traditionally would have minded. Southern Baptists have
a long history of indifference to what the outside world thinks of
us. We have never yearned, with Robert Burns, for some Power the gift
to give us to see ourselves as others see us. Why should we? In terms
of what we gauge as success, we have been preeminently successful:
growth, numbers, influence, power, popular appeal, wealth, etc., while
just look at what's happening to those Protestant "main line"
churches!
          But now with the takeover of the Convention by the Fundamentalists,
which Rosenberg traces so vividly and so accurately, and which I
regard as a sad but well-deserved nemesis, our attitude toward outside
opinion has undergone a sea change. Southern Baptists have fallen in
love with the TV evangelists, and the Right is having a love affair
with both. From these dangerous liaisons the national political
landscape is being reshaped, remolded nearer to the heart's desire of
religio-political zealots who want to proclaim this a "Christian
Nation." The South is just not going to, the South has risen again. With the surging Fundamentalists at
the heart of resurrection, you can bet your bottom tithe that Southern
Baptists are now looking 

over their shoulder at world opinion,
beginning with the White House. We may preach "Blessed are the Meek,"
but no one can accuse our "subculture" of meekness.
          The author's shining spotlight is on us unmercifully at this
point. Whether we are moderates, conservatives, or fundamentalists, we
have long been mired in compromises, veerings and vacillations,
rationalizations, evasions, self-deceptions, and hypocrisies making
ourselves vulnerable for the eventual takeover. All this she exposes,
sometimes with the tenderness of a Matthew Arnold saying "Thou ailest
here and here," sometimes with relentless objectivity, and sometimes
like Amos the prophet.
          And she knows whereof she writes. Connecticut may be her home, but
she has dwelt among us. She has been on the campuses of our faltering
seminaries, worshipped in our churches, attended state and Southern
Baptist Conventions, read our publications, studied our documents,
detected our chicaneries, probed our theology, questioned our
bureaucrats, felt our agonies and our ecstasies, and come up with this
timely and most creditable book which rejoices my heart and should be
read far and wide. But it won't be. How sad never to learn the message
of a book that tells us so eloquently how we have traded our Baptist
birthright of free speech, free conscience, protection of privacy and
dissent, church-state separation, and rejection of creeds for the
pottage of conformity, control, authority, inerrancy, status, power,
and bigness.
          And, oddly, just what the country most needs in this hour we
Southern Baptists have forfeited.
          
            W. W. FINLATOR, from his several North Carolina
pastorates and especially until 1983 from the Pullen Memorial Baptist
Church of Raleigh, has been a prophet--with and sometimes
without--honor among Southern Baptists. Annually, the Ware County
Civil Liberties Union confers on some worthy defender of Civil
Liberties (1989's was to Claude Sitton, editor of the News and
Observer) the "W.W. Finlator Award." Has any other Southern Baptist
preacher been so honored?
          
        
        
          The Court and the Black Community
          By Chambers, Julius L.Julius L. Chambers
          Vol. 11, No. 6, 1989, pp. 8-13
          
          EDITORS' NOTE: The following essay is an edited version of a talk
presented November 15, 1989, as the second lecture in the Grace Towns
Hamilton Lecture Series, sponsored by the African-American And African
Studies programs at Emory University in honor of retired Georgia State
Rep. Grace Towns Hamilton. Southern Changes expresses
its appreciation to Prof. Delores P. Aldridge, AAAS chair and
organizer of the Hamilton Lecture Series.
          THIS IS A MOMENT in which I think we ought to pause and ask what
have we been able to accomplish through the use of the law in
improving black empowerment in this society. What kind of problems do
we face today and tomorrow in advancing this objective? What role can
each of us play in facing this challenge?
          As most of you know, the Legal Defense Fund was organized in 1939
as an arm of the NAACP. The objective then was to set up an entity
that could receive tax-exempt status and carry on the legal efforts of
what was at that time a fledgling civil rights organization. There was
a question whether law could be used as a means for empowering black
people in this society. But, in fact there was not really much
choice.
          We had appealed to Congress, but Congress from the early to
mid-twentieth century was dominated by Southerners. There was an
interest in preserving a segregated society, because it allowed even
low-income whites to say that they were at a higher status than other
Americans, particularly black Americans.
          In that era there was no opportunity to use the executive
branch. President Roosevelt was telling the civil rights community
that he could not do anything because he needed the votes of the
Southern senators and representatives to advance his economic goals
and war efforts. Even in the face of the rising number of blacks who
were lynched, President Roosevelt was telling the civil rights
community that the executive branch of government had no power to
provide protection.
          The only avenue that offered some means for black empowerment was
through the courts and the law. There was a basis for that because the
Reconstruction Congress had provided, through amendments to the
Constitution, that all citizens in the United States were entitled to
equal protection and due process of law--rather amorphous terms, but
that same Congress directed the federal courts to decide what those
terms meant.
          Could the courts be used to evolve interpretations of the
Constitution that would provide protection for minority Americans? The
Supreme Court had already held with regard to due process and equal
protection that the Constitution permitted a racially segregated--in
the Court's terms, "equal"--society.
          Here, we pause to think about the rigidly segregated American
society we faced in that period. Black people were relegated to
second-class status. Schools, jobs, housing, voting, indeed all
aspects of life were about like what we know of South Africa today. In
fact it was worse, because South Africa tells us that it has made some
changes. For black Americans in that time there was little opportunity
for advancement. There was very little value placed on their lives
because of the practice of white Americans--particularly white
Southern Americans--of taking the life of any black person who
threatened the existing arrangement.
          
            Devising Strategies for Change
          
          In the 1930s a group of lawyers got together and talked about
strategies for effecting changes in the Court's interpretation of the
equal protection and due process clauses. We think of Charles Houston
as the architect and of Thurgood Marshall and Bill Hastie and others
as lieutenants who implemented or carried out those strategies.
          The effort was to convince the Supreme Court that the equal
protection clause and the due process clause imposed a responsibility
on the part of the federal government to insure that all citizens
would be treated equally. Segregating people by race was not treating
people equally. The federal government must insure that no state or
federal practices were condoned which would force the separation of
people solely on the basis of race or color.
          Today we do not think of that as a particularly tall order. But in
the '30s it was considered a very difficult, perhaps impossible,
mission. The strategies included picking away at how the courts
interpreted the equal protection and due 

process clauses until the ultimate issue was presented.
          We ultimately achieved the goal in Brown v. Board
of Education with the Court holding that the equal protection
clause prohibits a state or the federal government from segregating
people solely on the basis of race or color. Although Brown was a case
involving education it was soon applied to other aspects of our lives
such as voting, housing, and employment.
          When Brown was decided in 1954, I remember how
it was received in my community in North Carolina, how many people
thought that the court had suddenly written an end to segregation and
the pervasive racism that we knew. How we hoped that American society
would quickly adhere to that decision and would proceed to implement
practices that would eliminate segregation in the schools as well as
discrimination in all other aspects of our lives. We were made aware
quickly that the immediate implementation of that decision was not to
be had. It was going to continue to be a long and difficult process.
          We had achieved a major goal in convincing the U.S. Supreme Court
to interpret the equal protection clause differently. Growing out of
that decision we have seen some major changes in our society. But that
decision left many problems unsolved. Just as we employed a number of
strategies to achieve a decision like Brown, we
would have to employ strategies to affect the courts' determination of
what Brown really meant.
          
            A Continuation of Old Problems
          
          So today we are continuing to face problems that reflect the ills
of our society. For example, when the Court holds that no state may
implement policies that segregate people on the basis of race or
color, what does it mean by state or state action? What does the Court
mean by intentional segregation or discrimination? If a practice
disproportionately affects a particular group or an individual even
though not "intentionally" discriminatory, do such practices violate
the equal protection clause? Does the clause apply to blacks only?
Does it apply to whites? Does it apply to religious groups? To the
poor? Are there still possibilities for further evolving principles
under the equal protection clause that would provide such
protection?

          Does the equal protection clause impose an affirmative obligation
on the part of the federal government and on the part of the states to
insure that all citizens or that all people within the country are
accorded equal protection of the law? Do affirmative action plans that
are designed to remedy past discrimination violate the equal
protection clause because of discrimination against white
Americans?
          Does the equal protection clause or the Fourteenth Amendment or our
concept of federalism prohibit the federal government from reaching
private practices of discrimination?
          Finally, how are these questions relevant to black empowerment
today and for the future?
          An issue that now limits the effectiveness of equal protection is
whether it limits the ability of courts or the legislatures to
implement affirmative action or minority set-aside programs. Do such
programs unconstitutionally discriminate against non-minorities?
          Last term our U.S. Supreme Court imposed almost impossible
standards governing the use of race-based remedies. That decision,
coming out of Richmond, has some major implications for the South as
well as the nation. Richmond, a city that is approximately 50 percent
black and 50 percent white, had major problems in insuring that black
people would be able to enjoy benefits under city contracts. So, like
the federal government, it proceeded to implement a minority set-aside
program designed to insure that 30 percent of city contracts would go
to minorities. Just as the City of Atlanta has attempted to do to
insure that minorities would be able to participate in city
contracts. Those plans were race-based because they were designed and
specifically provided for blacks to participate in city contracts.
          Does the use of race in those plans violate the constitutional
rights of white Americans? In the City of
Richmond case Justice [Sandra Day] O'Connor said yes, unless
Richmond (or any other city) demonstrates that the plans were designed
to provide remedies for specific victims or identified victims of
discrimination. If that is to be the test we will get very few
benefits from minority set-aside programs or affirmative action
programs.
          The Court said that Richmond will have to come forward with very
stringent standards of proof that minorities had been deprived of
benefits that were accorded by the cities and the states. What it did
was to impose cost requirements such that Atlanta, for instance, now
is spending over $500,000 trying to comply with this new requirement
by demonstrating that slavery once existed and discrimination was once
practiced in the United States.
          
            What Happens If...?
          
          And Richmond is not limited to set-aside programs or to affirmative
action programs. What happens in Louisiana if LSU or Southern
University, pursuant to state directives, increase the college
admission requirements and those increased requirements
disproportionately exclude black students? Can LSU or Southern
implement an affirmative action plan that will address this impact or
would such efforts violate the Constitution?
          What happens when the University of Mississippi, in providing
increased opportunities for minorities or the State of Mississippi
with similar objectives, decides that black colleges can no longer be
maintained? If it proceeded to desegregate by closing black colleges,
would such prac-

tices violate the Constitution? What happens in the
University of Mississippi or the University of Alabama if black
students insisted on an African-American or an African studies
program? Would singling out race in those instances violate the
Constitution? What happens when the NCAA decides to increase
requirements for students to participate in intercollegiate sports?
Does Proposition 42 or Proposition 48 violate the Constitution?
          As presently interpreted each of these questions arguably would be
answered against the interests of those who would ensure equal or
effective black participation. The majority of the present Supreme
Court could easily hold that race-based or set-aside programs pose an
insurmountable problem under the Constitution. We would have a problem
then of trying to develop effective remedies that would insure fair
and equal protection of minorities. Although we have Brown v. Board of Education we would have new
barriers that would perpetuate the same kind of practices we were
trying to address before Brown.
          
            To Reach Private Discrimination
          
          There is a further problem that is left open by Brown: whether Brown limits
discrimination by private entities.
          Why is private discrimination important? Private discrimination
affects in increasing importance what happens in employment, housing,
health care, education. Private education plays a vital and pervasive
role in our society today. Not only is there a question of the reach
of the Fourteenth Amendment, there is also the question of the ability
of Congress to act under the Fourteenth Amendment to reach private
conduct and practice.
          Did Congress overreach by enacting Title II of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 prohibiting discrimination in places of public accommodation?
Did Congress overact in 1964 when it enacted Title VII? If one looks
at six of the decisions of the Supreme Court the past term
interpreting Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 one begins to
see a Court questioning how far Congress can reach in trying to
protect individuals against private discrimination.
          In 1971 the U.S. Supreme Court decided Griggs
v. Duke Power Co. that applied Title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964. The Court held that if an employer uses a practice which
disproportionately affects blacks or minorities there is a burden of
proof that the employer will have to meet in demonstrating that the
use of that practice was necessary for the successful operation of the
business or was necessary to determine one's ability to perform the
job successfully. The burden of proof was on the employer. This year
the U.S. Supreme Court held that it did not really mean what it said
in 1971; rather it left the burden of proof of discrimination with the
victim.
          What the court in effect did was to change the cost for an
individual litigating such a case in federal district court from
$5,000 in 1987 to over $100,000 in 1989.
          The Court also decided a case this term interpreting the 

1866 Civil
Rights Act which was designed to prohibit public and private
discrimination. The Court said that the 1866 statute only prohibited
an employer from refusing to hire. Once the person was hired the
employer could do what it wanted. A black person can now be hired,
harassed, called names, and his or her life made unbearable with no
legal protection under the Act.
          But the present Court went further, holding that the 1866 Act not
only provided no protection after one was hired but the act itself was
of limited use in challenging practices by state or local
governments.
          In short, the U.S. Supreme Court in interpreting statutes that
Congress had enacted to provide protection against private
discrimination has proceeded to limit the reach of those statutes.
          
            Extending Protection to the Poor
          
          There is another issue that affects us today with regard to how the
Supreme Court has interpreted the equal protection and due process
clauses. It has held that those clauses provide no protection against
discrimination by a state against individuals because of their
economic status. If Georgia decides to discriminate against people
today because they are poor, the poor may have no constitutional
protection. The effects of these holdings are shown in public
education where, for example, Harlem schools, primarily black, receive
less dollars per student than schools in east Manhattan, primarily
white. In Hartford, Connecticut, where concentrations of poor blacks
and Hispanics are surrounded by higher income suburban white areas,
several studies have found that it is impossible to insure an equal
educational opportunity for poor children--white or black--if these
children are concentrated-segregated--in one school by economic
status. At present, this kind of discrimination, based on economic
status, does not violate the Constitution.
          In Alexandria, Virginia, the city in developing its housing
practices provides no protection, or very limited protection, for poor
people who cannot afford middle and upper income housing. In Boston,
blacks have been run out of the city as whites, deciding to move back
in, have converted housing from low income to middle and upper
income. Again, there is no protection for the poor. In Mississippi,
black people are having difficulty in getting health care because the
state provides limited protection for the poor.
          [The Legal Defense Fund thinks] that there must be efforts to
insure that poor people are trained and employed. We along with other
groups are pressing the federal government when it gives out its
contracts to Boeing or McDonnell Douglas to make these companies set
aside a certain percentage of their contracts for training and
employment in those facilities.
          Is it possible to evolve principles today that would convince the
Court that like race and, recently, gender, the poor are in need of
protection under the Constitution?
          Can we today, as in the 1930s, map strategies to convince a
U.S. Supreme Court to extend protection to minority Americans and now
to others who are disadvantaged and who have no protection under the
Constitution?
          It is the mission of the Legal Defense Fund to pursue just that
kind of effort. We believe that it is possible to use the courts, even
in the 1990s, to achieve that kind of goal. We also believe that
whatever interpretation is reached by the Court and whatever
empowerment is won will 

come about through a collection of efforts and
not just litigation alone.
          David Garrow has written that he believes that the great advances
in civil rights were achieved almost exclusively by demonstrations and
public protests. I believe that demonstrations and political efforts
will go only so far. It was important in 1954 to have a standard set
by the Court that would enable those who were engaged in
demonstrations and those who were involved in the political process to
help in effecting change.
          As we look at the possibility of further interpretations of the
Constitution we have to engage those same factors in effecting the
kinds of changes we would like. We are now drafting a bill that will
address all of the decisions of the Supreme Court in civil rights in
1989. That bill will reverse the present Court in interpreting Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and in interpreting the 1866 Civil
Rights Act that I have referred to. We are also drafting a bill that
would reverse what the court has done in interpreting the Fourteenth
Amendment in Richmond with the minority set-aside programs.
          
            Using the Political Process
          
          Whether Congress enacts those bills will depend on what you and I
do in using the political process for advancing and enhancing minority
empowerment. If we do not convince the Congress to act we will have
even fewer resources for effecting change in the future. The
U.S. Supreme Court today is a much different court than it was in
1954. But we also know that we have more resources to turn to in the
1990s than we had in the 1930s and the 1940s. We have state courts and
state legislatures. We have a U.S. Congress that is much more
responsive than the Congress of the 1930s and the 1940s. We have black
mayors and now a black governor. We have black legislators. It is
extremely important that we turn to them. We have the right to
vote. It is important that we use it.
          One of the things that I think we ought to all appreciate is that
there have been shifts in population since the 1980s and, according to
a recent report by the Southern Regional Council that describes the
potential impact of these shifts, perhaps as many as thirty to fifty
congresspeople who today are sympathetic to causes of minorities and
women may be lost from Congress in the 1990s and replaced by more
conservative congresspeople. It is incumbent that we try to work to
limit the impact of those population shifts and insure that people are
elected to office who believe in the type of agenda that we are
talking about.
          Here I might add that a number of organizations like the Legal
Defense Fund and the Lawyer's Committee, the ACLU, the
Mexican-American Legal Defense Fund, the Voting Rights Project of the
SRC--just to name a few--are gearing up now to provide assistance in
litigation if redistricting plans are devised following the 1990
census that unfairly dilute the voting strength of minorities. There
are political efforts underway to deal with that issue and there are
organizations capable of providing legal protection.
          
            Facing the Dangers of the '90s
          
          Over the years all of us have been involved in the struggle to
effect change and to empower black Americans to improve their
opportunities in this society. We have made some progress. In the '90s
we face a much graver danger than we were trying to address in the
1930s. A danger in terms of complacency. A danger in terms of people
believing that they have done enough to help the disadvantaged.
          But there is reason for optimism. I was never so impressed as in
the past three months getting about the country to talk to people
about the need for reversing what the Court has done. In my opinion
there is a groundswell of reaction not only in the black community but
across racial lines.
          As we attempt to make progress toward a better society for all
Americans, the caution I would raise is this: we cannot limit that
effort to race alone. We cannot ignore the plight of the poor. We
cannot ignore the conditions of gays and lesbians. We cannot ignore
the plight of the elderly. All across the country we have to
accommodate a diversity of groups. We are going to have a
multicultural world in the coming years. We must expand the reach of
equal protection to make sure that it is inclusive of all groups who
seek equal participation in society.
          
            A former president of the Southern Regional Council and
one of the country's foremost civil rights attorneys, Julius Chambers
has served since 1984 as director-counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense
and Educational Fund in New Fork. Chambers's work in the Charlotte,
North Carolina, school desegregation case is considered at length in
Frye Gaillard's The Dream Long Deferred (Chapel Hill:
Univ. of North Carolina Press, 1988). Readers may also want to look at
Chambers's "The Collapse of Enforcement" in Southern
Changes for March/April of 1985.
          
        
      
    
  
