
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 12, Number 3,
	       1990
        
          Letting Loose of Liberalism: Some Thoughts on Cultural Work and
the Limits of Polite Discourse
          By Whisnant, David E.David E. Whisnant
          Vol. 12, No. 3, 1990, pp. 1-11
          
          IN Walker Percy's story "The Last Donahue Show," the topic of the
day is "sexual preference." Midway through, the show is interrupted by
three intruders: a black-cloaked Calvin-like spokesman for the old
culture of Puritan New England, handsome Col. John Pelham, a paragon
of the gallantry and chivalry of the Old South, and a Cosmic Stranger
from another planet. Calvin finds the concept of "sexual preference"
completely incomprehensible, and Pelham considers the discussion
unnecessary because "a gentleman knows how to treat women."
          Looking for all the world like Harry Truman, the Cosmic Stranger
sees the self-indulgent maunderings of Donahue's guests and audience
as a symptom of a profound cultural disorder. Earthlings, he says, are
"D.D.s" (dingalings, deathdealers, and deathlovers) who face an
imminent apocalypse--explicitly atomic but implicitly historical and
cultural. He confides that the only place of refuge is a cave in Lost
Cove, Tennessee, which is stocked with corn, grits, collard greens,
and sausage. The story ends with a question ("If you heard this
Donahue Show, would you head for Lost Cove?") 

and a box to check yes or no.
          This story may seem an odd point of departure for thinking about
the arts and humanities in the public sector. But to me it seems
usefully provocative in this second (Bush-Quayle) phase of an era
characterized on the one hand by Reagan's narcolepsy, William
Bennett's meanspiritedness, the Valdez, fading ozone, and 82nd
Airborne democracy, and on the other hand by Walesa, Mandela, Havel
and falling walls everywhere. A bit less cosmically than the Cosmic
Stranger, I read the story partly as a parable about vital small-scale
vs. alienated mass culture--about soul food and straight talk vs. lean
cuisine and Donahue drivel. In any case, you should know that the
voice you are hearing comes to you as much from Lost Cove as from
anywhere else.
          I was raised, after all, not on what is usually called "good
literature" and "good music," but on the Reader's Digest, late-night
country music shows from WLS, WCKY, and WWVA, and the gospel music of
the Southern Baptist church. Later, scouting the margins of elite
culture, I spent years singing German lieder and Italian art songs in
a thousand voice lessons, Monteverdi in madrigal groups, and Bach and
Mozart and Brahms in oratorio societies. Still later, in my first
timorous return to Lost Cove, it was Carter Family and Blue Sky Boys
songs in a string band, and more recently it has been romantic and
political songs from Latin America. I count myself fortunate to have
realized in a few blessed moments of clarity that I can love it all,
that I do not have to choose.
          MY most transcendent cultural experiences have ranged across many
boundaries: one was standing as a Georgia Tech freshman in an
illfitting rented tuxedo in the top balcony of the Fox Theater in
Atlanta and hearing the humming chorus from Madame Butterfly during
the annual spring visit of the Metropolitan Opera to the Sahara of the
Bozarts; another was hearing Cajun music for the first time as the
Balfa brothers and Nathan Abshire sailed into "Pine Grove Blues" at
the University of Illinois where I was a seared new assistant
professor; another was hearing six aged black men from Port Deposit,
Maryland, sing "I Don't Care Where They Bury My Body" on the
thirty-fifth anniversary of their performing together as the Little
Wonders gospel 

quartet; still another one was watching my daughter and
a Peabody Conservatory classmate perform the Bach double violin
concerto on two violins I had built; another was feeling myself almost
literally lifted from my seat when I heard "Dove song" from The
Marriage of Figaro at the Staatsoper in Vienna; and--having grown up
as monolingually as one possibly could--I was moved beyond words in
any language when at the age of forty-eight I was finally able to read
Gabriel Garcia Marquez's Cien anos de soledad in Spanish.
          Thus whatever I have come to think about the politics of culture or
about cultural programs and policy is grounded in my sense that all of
this is good, that all of it is evidence of the magnificent creativity
of the human spirit, and that if we are to keep our bearings, we have
to read both Garcia Marquez and Faulkner, and to listen to both Mozart
and Merle Haggard--not the "Okie From Muskogee" Merle who fascinated
Nixon, but the Merle of "Mama's Hungry Eyes," who beneath the jingoism
knows the cultural score.
          My own work during the years I was stumbling through to learning
these things has focused on the social and cultural history of the
southern Appalachian region, on the music and culture of marginalized
people, and upon the politics of culture, first in Appalachia and more
recently in Nicaragua. In the public sector I have worked with
folklife festivals and museums, state humanities commissions and
national endowments, Foxfire and Highlander, film makers and record
producers.
          Through it all, my own evolving cultural politics have drawn from
the most disparate of sources: from a San Francisco carpenter and
shipwright; from a powerful Appalachian composer-singer who learned
about Percy's D.D. culture by watching family members being killed in
coal mines and her sister becoming a prostitute on the streets of
Baltimore, and who wrote songs about both; from Shaker cabinetmakers
and Cremona violin makers; from a Sardinian who worked out much of his
politics in a Fascist jail cell; from a North African psychiatrist, a
Nicaraguan poet, a Uruguayan novelist, and a Quiche woman from the
Guatemalan highlands. That is to say, I have learned in the first
instance from those who have scribed indelibly the line between good
work and poor work, but beyond that from those who have engaged with
the 

politics of their circumstances, faced the contradictions,
defiantly asserted their otherness, risked speaking their outrage, and
crafted beauty and made sense out of their pain.
          So how do things look to me in this arts and humanities sector of
the public policy arena? Whose lips are really worth reading, whose
tunes worth dancing to?
          Obviously it is a good news/bad news situation. The good news is
that the past twenty-five years have witnessed a long-delayed but on
the whole healthy legitimation of the arts and humanities in the
making of public policy in the United States. That process has
paralleled a global resurgence of culturally energized political
movements of both a progressive and a reactionary character: in the
middle east, in the Baltic republics, in northern Ireland, in eastern
Europe, in Tibet, in Latin America, in Africa, in the United
States. Those movements have resonated to the rhythms of rockabilly,
of Tex-Mex and nueva cancion, of rap and reggae, and more recently of
long-forbidden national anthems.
          All of that is good. But if you will permit me, I will focus--like
the Cosmic Stranger--more on the bad than on the good news, for that
is where the most vexing problems and demanding challenges lie, both
conceptually and programatically.
          One has to say at the outset that the social, political, and
economic climate is not especially hospitable for our work, and that
in some important respects it grows less so daily. At the same time
that the data show increasing social and economic inequality, distress
and dislocation, we find ourselves in the second Reagan-Bush decade of
dramatic reductions in public expenditures for social programs of
whatever character. The entire social infrastructure has been
decimated. Sliding SAT scores, rising infant mortality, ugly racial
incidents, a slew of toxic waste dump controversies, and new brands of
cigarettes aimed at vulnerable young women and the Third World poor
remind us that many of the promises of the sixties--relative to
education, civil rights, the environment and women--have been deferred
or reversed. Here in North Carolina, a university system that has no
money to buy library books or xerox paper can afford a six-figure
buyout for an arrogant, sleazy basketball coach, and a nation that
can't afford a few billion to feed or house the homeless can afford to
buy out savings and loan sharks to the tune of hundreds of
billions. In U.S. foreign policy we see a resurgence of culturally
based jingoism, bellicosity, self-deception and simple-mindedness (in
Grenada, Nicaragua, and Panama), of arrant cynicism (in China), of
penuriousness (in eastern Europe), of timidity and temporizing (in
South Africa and Lithuania).
          In the cultural arena, public funds are drying up. Changes in the
tax laws (as in the Tax Reform Act of 1986) are reducing private
donations at the same time that the fact (and necessity) of increased
dependence upon such donations threatens to make cultural institutions
responsive primarily to well-heeled constituencies and corporate
donors.1 Most public cultural programs are operating on bakesale
budgets, and finding their work increasingly complicated by rising
Helms-style censorship and intimidation, as was evident in the recent
National Council for the Arts board meeting in Winston-Salem. An era
in which the reactionary wife of the reactionary Secretary of Defense
is head of the National Endowment for the Humanities is an era of
serious threat to the work we are trying to do.
          So what can and should we do in these hard times? I suggest that as
a first step we admit that the liberal analysis and strategies we have
long used to guide and shape our work are unequal to the tasks we
face. What do I mean by "liberal analysis and strategies"? What are
their limitations, and why are those limitations unacceptable?
          At the risk of caricaturing rather than characterizing fairly, I
will try to put it briefly: Within the usual liberal paradigm,
cultural policy amounts principally to obtaining, allocating and
monitoring direct public subsidies for established cultural
institutions, which in turn build public collections, mount public
exhibits and produce public 

programs. Characteristically, culture is
thought of as a more or less self-contained sector, or as a
superstructure. "Culture" means "the arts" (or more restrictedly, the
"fine" arts), which are produced by "artists" and consumed by a
listening/viewing/reading public. This public needs to be given
information about, have "access" to, and "learn to appreciate," the
arts. Providing that information and "access" and engendering that
"appreciation" is assumed to have a soothing, enlightening and
together bringing effect--producing a unified public sensitive to and
unthreatened by its own "rich cultural diversity." Tacking on "the
humanities" alters the paradigm only slightly, especially if by the
humanities one means anything close to the National Endowment's bland
Shakespeare-Columbus-and-the-Constitution, great- works-and-great-men
version of them.
          It is no wonder that except for the Jesse Helms fringe, legislators
don't worry themselves unduly about the culture crowd. We can be
thrown a sop; we can be tricked into scrambling for a few scraps; we
can be depended upon not to challenge or upset the status quo in any
serious way. Meanwhile, our low-budget exhibits and programs cast a
comforting and legitimizing glow over business as usual.
          So I suggest that the bland, essentially credulous liberal paradigm
is pitifully unequal to the task if one conceives of the task in even
moderately broad and sophisticated terms. Much tougher-minded analysis
is called for if we are to get beyond these limits--even within our
customary theaters of operation, to say nothing of within some larger
and quite unfamiliar strategic arenas into which events are thrusting
us.
          So how do we get beyond these limits? What clarifications are
possible?
          In the first place, I submit that the arts (or fine arts) and
humanities conception of culture has long since outlived its
usefulness as an oasis for policy formulation, if indeed it ever had
much. Culture is how people hold their babies, plant a garden, cook
their food, answer the telephone, sing and dance. A little less
palpably but even more importantly, it is how people love and raise
their kids, and what they think is worth explaining to them. But most
importantly, culture is also the basic orientation people have with
respect to fundamental questions, the terms they use to make sense 

of
things--like, for example, what they think it means to be male or
female. Even more problematically, it is how people recognize and name
what they love and hate and fear. It is how they decide who is us and
who is them.
          So why does this matter to us? It matters because if this is what
culture is, it is therefore as productive of conflict as of harmony,
as likely to divide and engender conflict across borders as to unite
within them. We must therefore subject to serious scrutiny our
habitual liberal confidence in the various forms of polite
discourse--our touching confidence that multiethnic festivals and
roundtable discussions and got-together "community dialogues" will be
very serviceable. We must question our naive liberal expectation that
when people come together to discuss their differences they will
discover that they really don't have very many, or that the ones they
have aren't very important, or that there are some low-cost solutions
to them. Music may in some vague way be a "universal language," but
Pinochet killed Victor Jara for singing his songs nevertheless.
          What I am saying--to take an example closer to our political and
social realities here in the Southeast--is that the world of textile
managers and their superiors in the boardrooms of the multinationals
is not the same world as that of textile workers; the world of Alaska
fishermen is not that of big-oil CEOs who build single-hull tankers
because they are cheaper. And neither is their culture. The world of
Bill Bennett and Jesse Helms is not our world, and we are not going to
dialogue it out--not in a weekend seminar, and not in a thousand
years.
          Hence given the choice between arranging a "public dialogue"
between any group of haves and any group of have-nots, or figuring out
some way to help the have-nots understand the structural (and
therefore inescapably cultural) relationships between the two, I would
always choose the latter. There is no way of avoiding, it seems to me,
the possibility that serious cultural work will sometimes lead to
divisiveness, tension, and conflict. And the probability of conflict
is directly proportional to the seriousness of the work.
          Part of what this means, in turn, is that the familiar and
reassuring walls between cultural and "noncultural" policy sectors
must come down, and we must recognize that nearly all policy is
cultural policy at some level: because it increases or decreases the
life chances of some sector of the population, reinforces and affirms
some and destabilizes and shames others, privileges and empowers some
and marginalizes and disempowers others. Hence we must make ourselves
cognizant of every area of policy, concern ourselves with it, and
bring a culturally informed perspective and analysis to bear upon
it. We must therefore conceive of our work as consisting at least as
much in monitoring the cultural implications and impacts of policy in
the noncultural sectors as it does in operating programs in the
explicitly cultural sector itself.
          Conversely, we must bear in mind that any analysis of or
policymaking about culture has inescapable structural implications,
and therefore must be consciously conceived in structural terms. A
decision to fund a certain cultural form, practice, or sector is an
inescapably social and political decision. If one funds elite culture,
one inevitably legitimizes and solidifies the social position, values
and selfunderstanding of the elites who mainly patronize it. If one
funds a black performance or Hispanic folk arts exhibit, one
inevitably affects public understanding (or misunderstanding) of
structural inequality and marginalization.
          Thus we must for example entertain the possibility that the
time-honored practice of busing kids to symphony concerts or exhibits
of oil on canvas may have shaming, alienating and disempowering--as
well as affirming and liberating--effects. In the same way, we must
think about the extent to which folklife festivals or exhibits of
exotic and idiosyncratic folk art--if they present a simplistic and
sanitized version of traditional culture--may confuse and mislead a
naive public about the intensely conflicted and inescapably political
dynamics of cultural survival and change.
          A corollary to what I have just argued is that we must resist and
subject to serious public scrutiny the increasingly prevalent argument
that public funding for the arts and humanities may (or must) be
justified in economic terms. It is common to argue these days that
when one funds culture there are desirable "economic multiplier"
effects--that for example museums and symphony orchestras make an
attractive climate for new industries. Never mind that many of those
industries are runaway ones looking for low wage, nonunion, female
labor in the right-to-work sunbelt.
          The economic justification argument for arts funding is dangerous
and insidious. It concedes the legitimacy of the established economic
and political order and turns culture into its uncritical
handmaiden. It ratifies the facile assumption that economic
considerations are primary and central, and culture superordinate and
peripheral. It predisposes us to define culture in the terms preferred
by managerial elites. Worst of all, it coopts and frustrates the
transformative power of culture. It denies that the most vital culture

is always critical, and more often than not insurgent and
subversive--that it is precisely what scares the Bill Bennetts and
Allan Blooms of the world to death.
          I would go on to argue, moreover, that at the very center of the
cultural policy and programming agenda must be the larger agenda of
social critique and reconstruction. The time for quaint or pretty
diddling around has passed. We are in a serious game, and the sooner
we face that fact, the better. The primary question is not whether
this or that exhibit is going to be mounted, concert held, play
staged, or genteel "dialogue" arranged, but whether we can prove the
Cosmic Intruder wrong.
          We know in our guts that nation states as we have conceived of them
are anachronisms--that they are not necessarily some universally and
transhistorically functional mechanisms. We know in our guts that war
is not a useful or acceptable instrument of policy, and that the
environmental vector points toward disaster. We know in our guts that
present gender definitions are not serviceable (for women or for
men). What we may have less of a gut sense of--but which is profoundly
true--is that all of these assumptions, forms, and issues are at their
deepest level cultural. To the extent that that becomes clearer to us,
our thinking and strategizing about cultural policy will get more
sophisticated and our programming more effective.
          It seems to me to follow, then, that in order to commit ourselves
seriously and effectively to such an agenda of critique and
reconstruction, we must think strategically and globally even as we
plan and act tactically and locally. The days of fortress America are
past; the myth of American exceptionalism has lost all
credibility. After so many years of living mostly outside it, history
has finally thrust itself upon us. Hence our work is not to "bring the
arts and humanities" to people--or vice versa--but to help people
shape and sharpen the analytical tools that will assist them in
understanding their own historical and cultural circumstances.
          Our work, I am suggesting, is about a kind of enlightenment that is
neither conceptually nor practically separable from empowerment. Our
work should be much less to provide essentially rarified aesthetic
experiences for a small elite than to help the great majority of
people come to an awareness of their own insight and knowledge, and of
the links between knowledge and power.
          Consequently our work is not mainly to "provide access"--as in the
old liberal paradigm--but to push toward cultural equity and democracy
in a period of intensifying social/political/economic conflict and the
increasing consolidation of power. It is to demystify in a period in
which obfuscation and public mystification have become such central
functions of government that Dan Quayle signs a Jesse Helms
fundraising letter one week and goes the next as an envoy for
democracy to a Latin America already wracked by years of CIA-style
democracy.
          Finally, we must focus policy and programming increasingly upon
cultural production rather than consumption, upon cultural action
rather than passive "appreciation" or exhibition. This is necessary
because for the culturally marginalized, actively making and doing culture are empowering, while passively appreciating is likely to have
at least the secondary effect of rationalizing, legitimizing and
solidifying the culturally marked boundaries of established power.
          And so if we do all of this--or even some bits of it--will it be
dangerous? Yes. Inescapably. If they begin to think that what we are
doing will really change things very much, they will stop funding
us. Period. It is that simple, for they may be meanspirited, but they
are not stupid.
          If they do stop funding us, there will be some real losses. But
there would be gains, too, so that it is not at all clear to me that
absent the public dollars the situation would necessarily be
hopeless. Our own structural position as well as that of marginalized
cultural groups would at least become clearer. The discourse might

become sharper, more honest and sophisticated, and less bland, genteel
and polite. Some limits would be recognized, and some more apt
analytical paradigms might be discovered and employed. The inescapable
politics of the cultural enterprise would be on the table for
discussion, and we might get through to some further clarity about the
operation of power in the cultural arena. We might even create some
autonomous structures less subject to reactionary political
pressure.
          As we contemplate the risks, we should also bear in mind that
public funds are by no means the only resources available to us. In
the first place we have our own experience and knowledge--the
knowledge we have gained from having conceived and put together scores
of institutions and programs, as well as the negative but useful gut
knowledge that makes us from time to time look up from writing yet
another grant proposal and say (to no one more than to ourselves)
"this is crazy." The latter sort of knowledge tends to be mostly
inchoate, but we have it nevertheless, and we can attach it to some
energies that are also trying to move within us and amongst us.
          There is also some extraordinarily pertinent analysis out there,
bunches of books to be read that will tell us more that we need to
know than shelves full of NEA and NEH annual reports or shamelessly
elitist and ethnocentric tracts like Cultural Literacy and The Closing
of the American Mind. The most useful analysis has been advanced, at
least in my estimation, not by the too frequently alienated and
elitist "theory" crowd, but by grounded, passionate, frequently
self-educated intellectuals: by Paolo Freire and Frantz Fanon, by
Rigoberta Menchu and Domitila Barrios, by Roland Bartes and Raymond
Williams, by Carlos Fuentes and Eduardo Galeano, by Maxine Hong
Kingston and Gloria Anzaldua, by Will Campbell and Vine Deloria.
          We also have available to us the clarifying experience of
marginalized subject peoples all over the world who are showing us how
to use culture for purposes of challenge and liberation: Lithuanians
and Estonians, the mothers of la Plaza de Mayo, blacks and Chicanos
and Native Americans in the United States, Chinese students and
smalltown working people in Michigan. We may end up grantless and on
our own, but so are they. And they are teaching themselves to form
organizations of their own, to stop dancing to the tourist industry's
tune, to talk straight to their opponents, to substitute lawsuits and
injunctions for tediously polite discourse.
          If we begin to do even part of what I have suggested, we will above
all need a lot of historical and political perspective and
considerable wit. Fortunately, there is a lot of it out there. One of
my favorite country singers has the unlikely name of Kinky
Friedman. Kinky is the son of a University of Texas psychology
professor, and his shortlived band was called The Texas Jewboys (after
the legendary Bob Wills's Texas Playboys). Kinky spent a couple of
years in the Peace Corps in Borneo just after college, and when he
came back, he said that "Everybody needs to go to Borneo, wherever
it is for them. A lot of wiggy things happened to me in that jungle,
it anchored my mind to the past." 2
          During his short stay in country music, Friedman wrote some
marvelous songs like "Wild Man From Borneo," "They Don't Make Jews
Like Jesus Any More," "Top Ten Commandments," and the incomparable
"Ride 'em Jewboy," which synthesizes the historical agony of cowboys,
the American West, and the United States itself, as well as the Jewish
diaspora and the Holocaust. All of it is viewed--refreshingly
wiggily--from Borneo:
          
            Now the smoke from camps a-risin'
            See the helpless creatures on their way.
            Hey, old pal, ain't it surprisin" 
            How far you can go before you stay....
            While ponies all your dreams were broken,
            Rounded up and made to move along.
            The loneliness which can't be spoken
            Just swings a rope and rides inside a song.
          
          My own Borneos have been the mountains of the Appalachian South and
Nicaragua--the former of which I was born in but had to learn my way
through almost as if it were some Borneo. Nicaragua I wandered into
after having begun to learn the language beyond the age of forty-five,
and I came to recognize its cultural history as more Appalachian than
I ever would have believed. So I close with a little cultural parable
about my two Borneos, written belatedly from Lost Cove.
          Like many of us who are from the upland southeast, I grew up about
as monoculturally as one could. In those tranquil preintegration days,
the relatively few blacks who lived in that most un-Faulknerian part
of North Carolina stayed docilely in Asheville's small black ghetto
and attended the all- black high school. Most of the city's
substantial Jewish population lived in Biltmore Forest and other
upscale neighborhoods we had no occasion to go to.
          I heard and spoke only English, of course, as did all of my white
Protestant fundamentalist neighbors, and none of us had lived or
traveled abroad. The only other cultural group we knew were the Dutch
who had come over in 1929 to build and operate the rayon plant where
my father worked: the Vanderhoovens, Schilthuises, and Vanderkaadens,
who lived in the bigger houses of the mill village where we lived,
sent their kids to private and parochial schools, and hired us to mow
their lawns. I remember a vague sense of fascination with the way they
talked and the things they had in their houses that we didn't have,
but mostly what I felt was confusion and inferiority.

          Not all the Dutch people in the village belonged to the elite,
however. The Schoonderwoerds lived next door to us, and he was a
mechanic in the mill. While certain theories might predict that our
family would have felt some class solidarity with our working class
neighbor--and indeed my parents were friends with Mr. and
Mrs. Schoonderwoerd--culture appears in retrospect to have been a
decisive (though completely unconscious) factor among us children in
the streets. Their son Pete, who was our playmate, was Dutch,
different, and the conflict between him and us was relentless. Hence
our habit of making lightning guerrilla raids to bombard the fish pond
and fountain his father had built in their front yard--a touch which I
now recognize was for them an expression of their northern European
habit of meticulous and artful custodianship of one's own tiny bit of
landscape, but which for us rowdies of the neighborhood was an alien
object and thus an irresistibly magnetic focus for our resentment.
          Since the white Protestant fundamentalist bubble in which we were
encapsulated kept us apart from all other cultural systems except
those safely remote African countries to which we vaguely referred
when in Wednesday night prayer meetings we prayed that the Lord would
"bless all the missionaries at home and overseas," and about whose
eternal salvation we solemnly strategized in the Baptist Training
Union, I recall no other serious contact with or awareness of another
cultural group throughout my school years.
          My first adult encounter with a culturally distinct group was with
the Hispanics who lived in my freshman dorm at Georgia Tech--Cubans
whose wealthy pre-Castro fathers had sent them there to study. I
didn't know a single one personally, and recall feeling no desire
to. We called them "spics," and virtually all we knew about them was
that they shouted to each other down the halls of the dorm in a
language we didn't understand. We eyed them from behind the cultural
ramparts of the Baptist Student Union and the First Baptist Church of
Atlanta, where ushers with a special color of carnation in their
lapels were stationed as lookouts for any black worshippers who might
try to force their way in in those tense days of the earliest bus
boycotts and sitins. Hence although I spent five years in one of the
biggest and fastest growing cities in the southeast, the cultural
system in which I found myself was still about as parochial as might
be imagined.
          It was in fact nearly twenty-five years later, after many changes
in my life, ideas and politics before I began studying Spanish, which
turned out to be one of the most culturally useful and clarifying
things I have ever done. Why did I start? At some deep level, I think,
my passion to 

do so came out of the same threatened and anxious sense
of cultural inferiority and encapsulation that had made me such a
willing participant in our little hillbilly blitzkrieg raids on the
fishpond. It seemed to me, I guess, that becoming bilingual might be
an appropriate next step in what had by then become for me a
multifaceted effort to deconstruct my own cultural world and break
through to others of which I had previously known absolutely
nothing.
          In any case, I did start to study Spanish in the fall of 1984, and
a little more than three years later I found myself in Nicaragua on a
Fulbright, working on a book on the politics of culture there. During
these past half-dozen years, I have immersed myself as much as I could
manage in Latin American language, history and culture. It has been
the most compelling, totally involving and joyful process of learning
and change I have ever known, including the prior one that paralleled
my Appalachian work.
          More to the point here, it also has had a great deal to do with how
I now think about working with culture in the public sector. Looking
at things from this new angle has brought me to some poignantly ironic
realizations. I will content myself with mentioning only one.
          In 1851 Cornelius Vanderbilt secured an effective monopoly on the
Nicaraguan canal route, turning himself into a power to be reckoned
with in the national economic and political arena in Nicaragua and
helping to shape the first major phase of U.S. intervention into
Nicaragua's affairs. About forty years later, his grandson George
W. Vanderbilt came to western North Carolina, and in a similarly grand
and imperial spirit bought 125,000 acres of mountain land and built a
300-room French chateau which he appointed with the finest European
furniture, tapestries and paintings. His guests approached the estate
through a half-timber and tile English village he built, named
"Biltmore," and outfitted with his own Episcopal 

chapel and curate.
          Shortly after the Vanderbilt mansion opened in 1895, my grandfather
and his brother left their small farm in Rutherford County and went up
the mountain to Asheville looking for work. They found it driving
streetcars--work my grandfather continued to do for the next fifty
years, never returning to the house he had built with his own hands on
the farm and had always meant to go back to live in some day. Many
mornings when he arrived at the "car barn" at 3:30 a.m., he set out to
make the Biltmore run.
          About the time my grandfather died, my high school classmates and I
were taken on a "field trip" to see the cultural wonders of the
Biltmore House-to "expose" us to "great art," of which we in our
culturally benighted hillbilly ignorance presumably knew nothing. All
I remember is feeling dwarfed by the scale of the place, and ashamed
of my clothing and my ignorance. Whether that prepared me in any
specific way to comprehend the concept and the realities of cultural
imperialism years later in Nicaragua--to resonate with them in my
gut--I do not know, but I have a feeling that it did.
          When I was seventeen, however, my awareness of the Vanderbilt link
between Asheville and Nicaragua, and of its significance in some
larger political and social schemes--still lay years in the
future. Standing in the carved walnut, multi-tiered library of the
Biltmore House at that moment, I couldn't have pointed out Nicaragua
on the elegantly mounted globe if my life had depended on it, nor had
I ever heard of the New York and Boston banks and corporations which
had one firmly controlling hand on Nicaragua and were dabbling with
the other in real estate and timber in the part of the mountains I
could see out the window of my house. I didn't even know the name of
John Hill Wheeler, the North Carolinian whom President Pierce
appointed minister to Nicaragua, who presided approvingly over the
outrageous William Walker filibustering episode, and who declared that
"the race of Central Americans have conclusively proved to all
observant minds that they are incapable of self-government."
          I am embarrassed to admit that I began to make these connections
only after spending a dozen years writing about the Appalachian
region, exploring and mapping like a fascinated traveler in Borneo,
and coming to understand it as something of an internal colony whose
patterns of development were after all not that different from the
Nicaraguas of the world. One of my most poignant moments of
clarification occurred when I read that the vessel that carried
U.S. troops from the Canal Zone and landed them on Nicaragua's east
coast to move against the rebel general Sandino in April 1931 was
named the U.S.S. Ashville.3
          Why have I reminisced about my wanderings through this
personal-political landscape? To try to suggest that the dramatic
political and cultural changes of the past little while in Latin
America, in eastern Europe, in South Africa, are presenting us with
yet another opportunity to make the politically and culturally
clarifying connections C. Vann Woodward told us thirty years ago are
there and have to be comprehended: connections between ourselves as
southerners and the majority of the world's people, who have also
known poverty, exploitation, defeat, occupation, submission,
humiliation, and cultural stigmatization. If we can admit and
comprehend them, these connections offer us a splendid if psychically
threatening opportunity for reconsideration, for clarity, and for
realignment.
          Until we get through to that, however, bland liberal strategies
will continue to confuse us, confuse the public, and waste precious
time and energy. Polite discourse with those in whose interest it is
not to be persuaded (and within whose world views our reasons and our
values do not compute) will continue to be at best ineffectual, and at
worst obfuscating and depoliticizing. Unmonitored "noncultural" policy
will continue to wreak its cultural havoc. Such status as our concerns
and activities are grudgingly accorded, they will acquire by virtue of
their perceived usefullness to whatever tawdry local versions of
Trump-like boosters and "developers" happen to be on the scene. And
most troublesome of all, the overarchingly important matter of social
critique and reconstruction will remain outside our orbit of concern
and work.
          I submit, however, that such a scenario is not unavoidable. We know
some things and have some skills and have developed some networks
amongst ourselves that can help prevent it. We do have to question
many of our fundamental assumptions and accustomed paradigms. We do
have to seek new working alliances, thinking systemically and
globally. We do have to accept some risks, and trust our
resourcefulness. And we must continually re-ground ourselves in the
lives of those whose labor and pliant acquiescence have heretofore
been purchased far too cheaply by others who understand all too well
the sector of culture in every equation of power. To the extent that
we ourselves can remain clear about that, we will encounter a whole
array of strategic and tactical possibilities we heretofore thought
closed to us.
          
            NOTES
            
              See for example, Grace Glueck, "Gifts to Museums Fall Sharply
After Changes in the Tax Code," New York Times, May 7, 1989, pp. 1,
17; and William H. Honan, "Arts Dollars: Pinched As Never Before," New
York Times, May 28, 1989, pp. 1, 28.
            
            
              Larry Sloman, "Kinky and the Money Changers," Crawdaddy, April
1975, p. 31. I am grateful to Molly P. Rozum for calling this article
to my attention.
            
            
              Neill Macaulay, The Sandino Affair (1967; Durham: Duke University Press, 1985), 193-97.
            
          
          
            David E. Whisnant is on the faculty of the university of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He has published widely on traditional
culture, the politics of culture, and the history of the Appalachian
region. Currently he is working on a book on the politics of culture
in Nicaragua. This essay was prepared for the southeastern regional
meeting of the state humanities councils, May 19, 1990.
          
        
        
          Politics the Beloved Commune: Arkansas has the opportunity to
learn from the experiences of other Southern states
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 12, No. 3, 1990, pp. 13-16
          
          THE YEAR 1990 may be remembered as a profound moment for Arkansas
politics. This is the 25th anniversary of the passage of the Voting
Rights Act, perhaps the most powerful instrument in the twentieth
century for fairness in the U.S. political process. And it is this
year that the voting rights movement, already spread across most of
the Southern states, has finally come home to Arkansas.
          Since January, the Voting Rights Act has fostered dramatic changes,
as the federal courts have required the redistricting of the Arkansas
Legislature so black voters would have the opportunity to elect
candidates of their choice in at least ten legislative
districts. Another federal court order may create new districts from
which Arkansas state court judges will be elected more fairly and more
substantially with the votes of black citizens. In all likelihood,
this federal court will enforce the Voting Rights Act and create as
many as fifteen judicial districts where black voters can elect the
candidates of their choice.
          These two court cases represent sweeping changes. Yet, they are
only the beginning of a long journey in Arkansas from the politics of
mere participation to the politics of inclusion. The empowerment of
black voters though the creation of effective majority black districts
has only begun. Almost every week the federal court dockets in
Arkansas show more lawsuits against school boards, city councils, or
county governments with election schemes that dilute black votes. No
less dramatic will be the redistricting of the state's local
governments after the new Census data is available in
1991-1992. Recent projections by the Southern Regional Council suggest
that as many as eighty new majority-black districts may be created
through redistricting of the county governments in Arkansas in the
1990s.
          All told, in this new decade, the number of officials elected by a
majority of black voters could triple. Most of that growth will take
place in the Arkansas Delta. So long as the Voting Rights Act is the
law of the land, as it now stands, and so long as lawyers can find a
federal courthouse, this trend is as certain and mighty as the
southward flow of the Mississippi.
          Arkansas will probably have the largest percentage of growth in the
number of black elected officials of all Southern states during the
1990s. Of course, Arkansas will lead this category mostly because so
much of this kind of change has already happened in other Southern
states and so little in Arkansas. Making up for lost time, the decade
of the 1990s may be the decade of unprecedented black political
empowerment in Arkansas.
          These changes, however, will not be easy and will not necessarily
deliver Arkansas to the political promised land. These changes will
not necessarily bring the politics of Martin Luther King's "beloved
community."
          But Arkansas can profit from the experiences of ocher Southern
states over the last two decades. Both black and white Arkansans can
learn from the trials and achievements of other Southern states in
this process of change. Having come upon this historical moment later
than most of the region, Arkansas has an opportunity to make more of
the change than have some ocher Southern states.
          As paradoxical as it may seem, as difficult as it may be, the
political change now under way in Arkansas for the benefit of black
voters will unite the white community more than it will unite the
black community--at least in the short run. With the approaching
political opportunities for black leaders will come painful divisions
within the black community.
          Make no mistake about it. Most of the white community and most of
the white leadership in Arkansas will be united in opposition to this
political change until the very last city council is redistricted and
the very last vote in new redistricting plans is counted. Regrettably,
opposition to change will become an article of faith in many parts of
the white community, such as the Delta. Even white leaders who have
been helpful to black communities in the past will oppose this
political change in silence or with great clamor.
          At the same time the transformation of politics will begin to
divide parts of the black community and much of the black
leadership. This is a rather natural consequence of the political
process. With increased opportunities for political office will come
increased competition among black office seekers. Some blacks will
become candidates because they believe they are the best
representatives of their communities. Some will become candidates
because 

the local white leadership thinks that they will be the best
representatives of the black community.
          In addition, black voters will probably be more reluctant to vote
for black candidates than many black leaders expect. In many places,
black voters will continue to feel themselves too vulnerable to white
incumbents and white leadership to break old patterns of voting. Lest
anyone forget, in the excitement of the moment, a century of white
control of thought and deed does not end with one redistricting
plan.
          Also, some black voters will be underestimated by black office
seekers. While they are probably the least educated voting group in
the South, black voters are also probably the most sophisticated
voters of our region. Unlike their white counterparts in many sections
of our region, black voters often have an ability to look beyond
race. As a rule, they do not support black candidates only because
they are black. Where a white incumbent is, in fact, bringing home 

the
bacon, black voters will often continue their support.
          Another challenge to Arkansas's black political leadership may be
even more ominous. Black political leaders and activists, especially
in places like the Delta, should expect to be put under the
microscope. In state after state in the South, the new politics has
been accompanied by attempts by white officials to identify the
weaknesses and the vulnerabilities of black leaders. At times these
efforts have been aimed to eliminate black empowerment and
entitlements to vote by eliminating black leadership from public
office.
          Recent Southern political history exhibits numerous black elected
officials and unelected activists who have become entangled in a
string of state and federal audits, local criminal investigations,
civil litigation, and federal investigations and indictments on issues
such as voting fraud, taxes, and malfeasance in office. Many of these
inquiries have been groundless, and some have been 

almost
conspiratorial. Federal indictments against voting activists in the
Alabama Black Belt in the mid-1980s are a good example. Of course,
some investigations have been on target, and black jurors have helped
convict some black officials.
          In some instances, this scrutiny may represent a double standard,
but it is a standard that has to be lived with. Even where the
investigation of a black leader or activist was racially motivated,
the chances are that the accused will be convicted if he or she has
violated the law. In essence, the climate requires that black
politicians and activists who seek to take advantage of redistricting
opportunities must avoid even the proverbial appearance of impropriety
if they are to survive.
          Because political power is often intoxicating and campaigns are
often all-consuming, some leaders in the early days of this change may
forget the real limits of political power. While political
transformation, for example, is an essential part of what must change
in the lives of poor blacks and whites in the Delta of Arkansas, that
change alone will not transform poverty into prosperity. In the
beginning days of this change, black candidates will have a tendency
to promise too much and find themselves creating higher expectations
than they can fulfill. Also, many new candidates may not be prepared
to govern when elected. Simply because a candidate can campaign
effectively does not always mean that he or she knows how to govern
effectively.
          Those seeking these new political opportunities will be well
advised not to burn their bridges with those who hold economic power,
even those whites who will not support any efforts to empower black
communities in the politics of inclusion. People change; circumstances
change; and in those changes come the possibilities of new definitions
of self-interest. Common ground is necessary for the definition of
self-interest if economic power and political power can become one
force for moving communities out of poverty. In many cases, old
opponents will have to become new partners for this union of purpose
to take shape.
          Another troubling trend also has become evident in the voting
rights movement elsewhere in the region. There is a tendency for this
movement to become only a lawyers' battle. Because redistricting is
usually required by court order, litigating attorneys have a rightful,
pivotal role. But theirs should not be the primary or only
role. Arkansas must be careful not to allow the creation of majority
black districts by a lawyer's writ to become a substitute for
political activism and efforts to increase voter registration and
turnout. If new districts are to become new opportunities for the
black community, the community or its political organizations must be
on the front lines of the redistricting process.
          Finally, the recent Southern experience is a vivid reminder that
efforts to empower black voters through the creation of majority black
districts are the means, not the end, in the search for the politics
of inclusion. For the sake of both black and white Arkansans, no one
should be I allowed to forget that coalition politics is the ultimate
goal--the politics of inclusion, the politics of the beloved community
where the race of candidate or voter is irrelevant and where the needs
and concerns of all citizens are paramount. Distinguishing between the
means and the end is a political necessity no less than a political
virtue. Throughout this process leaders in the black community must
remember that controlling ten seats in the state legislature will not
allow black voters to pass legislation only through black legislators,
that controlling the Helena city council will not provide it with the
state resources to improve public education, that controlling the
county government of St. Francis County won't necessarily provide the
jobs, training, and opportunities that poor citizens need.
          The political changes now underway are necessary to remove the
burdens of the political participation from black citizens, to move
the Delta and the state of Arkansas from merely allowing blacks to
participate in politics towards allowing blacks and whites to become
partners in using political power. Redistricting is only the means for
arriving et that ultimate good. Therefore, while promoting the
creation of majority black districts, African-American leaders in
Arkansas must also promote the creation of coalitions that allow black
and white candidates to be elected by a majority of white votes as
well as black votes.
          Already, Arkansas and the South have come a long way in the journey
out of segregation. But there's a long way to go. Wouldn't it be a
rare and cherished gift if the 1990s proved to be the time when the
leadership of one Southern state learned from the mistakes and hazards
of racial politics elsewhere in the region and gave to its own
citizens a political future that includes all? Wouldn't it be a
remarkable legacy if Arkansas--so late in coming to the political
empowerment of black citizens--was the first to reveal the promised
land of politics, the politics of a beloved community?
          
            Steve Suitts is the executive director of the Southern
Regional Council. This article is excerpted from is May 1990 speech to
the Arkansas Political Exchange in West Memphis, Ark.
          
        
        
          Human Heroics in Uniting an Old Culture to New Religion.
          Reviewed by Prejean, CharlesCharles Prejean
          Vol. 12, No. 3, 1990, pp. 17-18
          
          Ain't you Got a Right to the Tree of Life? Recorded and
edited by Guy and Candie Carawan, with a preface by Charles Joyner and
an afterword by Bernice Johnson Reagon. (The University of Georgia
Press, 1989, second edition, 240 pp., $29.95.)
          This important book restates the values and updates the chronicle
of a unique pattern of life, one guided, perhaps even driven, by
influences of religion. It is the life story of the people of Johns
Island, South Carolina. It tells of the natural striving of people to
practice the human way in an organized society and under circumstances
of inappropriate human intervention and interdiction. It is the story
of the power and determination of the human will to live fully.
          More particularly and dramatically stated, Ain't
You Got a Right to the Tree of Life? is a story of human heroics
achieved by adherence to norms of a traditional African cultural
folkway fused to a personalized and deeply internalized Christian
faith. Seemingly, the result of this particular union of an older
culture to a newer religion has enabled the people of Johns Island to
transcend proscribed natural and legal rights and privileges.
          This resembled much less humble submissiveness to the abuses of
racism and misguided legal authority than recognition that undeserved
oppression is a reflection of the depravity of the oppressor. Other
people's depravity is not an excuse to abort one's effort to live well
the precious and divinely-given gift of life. The experience contends,
implicitly and explicitly, that life is bearable. It is a position
sustained, from every indication, by what is evidently a highly
developed consciousness of the Divine Presence in daily
living. Endurance and the determination to live well is guided by
belief that God will, so to say, "see them through"; or that
wickedness will eventually succumb to the greater power of
goodness.
          The essential contribution of the traditional African cultural
folkway seems to be ability to energize the human faculties of body
and soul, the whole person, in the act of worshiping and daily living:
worshiping and daily living are the same. It is body and soul in an
ancient motion, tried and proven over the ages.
          The Carawans, perhaps because of their own sincerity,
perceptiveness, and appreciation for the quality of line practiced by
the people of Johns Island, allow them to tell their own stow of life
as they and their ancestry experienced it through the ages and under
changing social orders. And the people do in these pages tell it
through personal statements and songs' lyrics that speak of
difficulties, but even more of hope, faith, and appreciation for the
many munificences of Divine Providence. Their songs' music echoes the
same, with variegated rhythmic patterns manifesting the whole
person.
          Photographs also tell the story of simple but elevated living under
miserable circumstances. Looking at these photographs and recalling
the content of the personal statement, one sees strength of character
and determination being projected, not despair and submissiveness. The
photographs of children at work, play, and as members of a family
structure speak of wholesomeness and hopefulness.
          The manner in which the people of Johns Island struggle, endure and
progress reveal a human constructiveness that can serve for
emulation. The personal statements and the words of songs, though they
sometimes speak of pain and misery, reveal no hatred, bitterness,
vindictiveness, or revenge. The Johns Islanders not only process to
be, but are demonstrating that they are indeed a "New Testament
People."
          Furthermore, given the regularity, spontaneity, and totality of
their worship; the heightened consciousness of the presence of the
Divine in their lives; the apparent ability to appreciate the
preciousness of life, even its existence in those who oppress; the
tendency to love rather than merely to give equal measure to
others--all seem to evidence a people who have not only a highly
developed level of Christian spirituality but also an exceptionally
noble pattern of living, one consistent with our acclaimed ideal
natural ways of the species. It is a life that finds no quarter in
substituting illusions for reality. It is one that finds purpose and
comfort in the unending struggle to have practice conform to
universally cherished and spiritually sound beliefs.
          I would be remiss not to mention the significance of the 

leadership
role of Esau Jenkins in guiding and sustaining the modern growth and
development of this community. He was a "Race Man" in the truest
sense. His concern was for the social, civic, economic, and spiritual
uplifting of the entire community. His leadership reflected the same
quality of selflessness that was evident in the best of that
historical African American leadership which has contributed to the
progressive strides of the race. His leadership was bonded by the
aspirations, traditional culture, and spiritual strengths of the
community. It surfaced and was fed by a combined sense of life's
requirements and of a commonly shared life-force. Esau Jenkins's
legacy can still be observed in the continued civic and institutional
progress of the community.
          It is now the contemporary generation's "watch" and its
responsibility to determine how to incorporate the benefits of culture
and religion in the lives of its members, under the circumstances of
the changed society. Hedonism and materialism in the Sea Island
environs notwithstanding, it is too soon yet to lament the
disappearance of the traditional expressions of culture and
religion. It may be that this influence is simply biding time, before
evolving into an appropriate expression under the changed
circumstances of the contemporary period, just as perhaps was the case
in preceding social orders.
          
            Charles Prejean, longtime executive director of the
Federation of Southern Cooperatives, has been one of the outstanding
leaders of the rural South. He is now teaching political science at
Xavier.
          
        
        
          The Importance of Race in the Classroom.
          
            
              L.W.DL. W. D.
            
          
          Vol. 12, No. 3, 1990, p. 18
          
          RACE, CLASS, AND EDUCATION: The Polities
	       of Second-Generation Discrimination by Kenneth
	       J. Meier, Joseph Stewart Jr., and Robert E;. England
	       (University of Wisconsin Press, 1989, xiv, 194 pp.,
	       $37.50 cloth, $14.95 paper).
          Three political scientists present the case for viewing education
as a "political process." They conclude that the most important
determinant of discrimination against black children is the proportion
of black teachers in the classrooms. "Without the political action
that results in more black school board members, which in turn
produces more black administrators, who in turn hire more black
teachers, second-generation discrimination against black students
would be significantly worse." This is a book that should be
useful to school reformers and administrators, especially those
equipped to deal with statistics.
        
        
          The Need to Pierce Self-Serving Veils of Economic 'Expertise.'
          Reviewed by Howland, JacobJacob Howland
          Vol. 12, No. 3, 1990, pp. 21-23
          
          Communities in Economic Crisis: Appalachia and the
South. Edited by John Gaventa, Barbara Ellen Smith, and Alex
Willingham (Temple University Press, 1990. xiii, 301 pp.).
          Where should economic policy originate? Whom should it serve? What
are its proper goals? The needs of any community include food,
clothing, shelter, health care, a clean environment, and a good
primary and secondary education for everyone as well as reasonable
prospects for decent employment and a rewarding career for those who
enter the job market. For many people throughout our nation, however,
these basic needs are not being met. Why? Communities
in Economic Crisis, which brings together sixteen case studies
documenting instances of crisis and response in areas across the
South, consistently tells a dismal story of negligence and foolishness
(and sometimes worse) on the part of local, state, and federal
governments. These studies show that in the current national and
global economic environment, communities in the South can no longer
place their welfare wholly in the hands of federal representatives and
agencies, governors, mayors, development boards, and chambers of
commerce.
          Perhaps the book's most important message is that ordinary citizens
must penetrate the generally self-serving veil of economic "expertise"
claimed by these authorities by providing themselves with a basic
understanding of the economy and themselves taking a leading role in
the formulation of economic policy. Communities in
Economic Crisis offers proof that this essentially democratic
education is both possible and politically effective. In addition, the
book itself constitutes a substantial contribution to this process of
education. This collection of essays is a detailed study of our
democracy in action, and while it lays bare its past and present
failures it also offers us hope for its future success.
          The editors (respectively, a sociologist and MacArthur Fellow, a
former research coordinator of the Southeast Women's Employment
Coalition, and a political scientist) have assembled contributions
from a diverse group of community activists and academicians, many of
whom played key roles in the political, economic, or environmental
struggles they describe. The book's Introduction summarizes the
general economic crisis confronting the 

South (particularly the rural
South, with the book is especially concerned). Regions dependent on
traditional industries like coal, textiles, and tobacco have been hurt
by diminishing markets, technological innovations, and competition
with cheaper foreign labor.
          During the 1970s, northern manufacturers came to the
"smokestack-chasing" South in search of cheap, nonunion labor, but
many of these firms have since shifted their plants overseas for the
same reason.
          So-called "service" industries have been unable to take up the
slack, since they can provide neither the quantity nor the quality of
employment offered by even low-paying manufacturing jobs: in depressed
rural areas, service employment means waiting on tables, washing
dishes, and the like. The result is a widespread climate of
desperation and fear, in which employers regularly use "economic
blackmail"--the threat of individual dismissal or plant relocation--to
force workers to accept low-paying, hazardous, dead-end jobs.
          Communities in Economic Crisis shows that
southern states have regularly been prepared to sell themselves short
in order to retain existing industries and attract potential
employers. Kentucky, for example, did not allow local governments and
school districts to tax mineral wealth as property until 1988, and had
only a token state property tax on minerals. The mineral
owners--mostly absentee corporations--paid little or no property tax,
and as a result the impoverished communities of eastern Kentucky have
been unable to afford decent schools and roads, and often lack public
water systems and libraries.
          Similarly, the state of Tennessee, Maury County, and the town of
Spring Hill gave General Motors the equivalent of hundreds of millions
of dollars in tax breaks, job training, and the like in order to
entice GM to locate its new Saturn plant in Spring Hill. (Thirty-eight
states had courted GM for this plant some offering over a billion
dollars in inducements.) Tennesseans were shocked when GM announced
that most of the 3,000 jobs at the plant would in fact be filled by
out-of-state technicians. In attracting Saturn, Tennessee paid a high
price for the mere image of economic recovery.
          The book is divided into two parts: "Case Studies of Crisis and
Struggle" and "Visions for the Future." The latter includes essays
contrasting development by corporate design with alternative,
community-based avenues of economic development. The case studies
combine generally careful investigation and research with a
documentary style that often lets us hear the voices of those
afflicted by hardship and involved in the struggle for change.
          The book also includes a number of photographs and two poems
arranged from interviews with a miner and a mine-workers' union
organizer. A coalminer tells us what it is like to be a safety
inspector in a small, non-union mine, a weaver tells us about employer
harassment arising from her support of a union, an illiterate
pharmaceutical worker tells us how it felt to be terminated without
worker's compensation benefits after injury on the job. We also hear
the voices of those who have successfully defended their communities,
like the members of Kentuckians for the Commonwealth, an organization
which helped pass laws imposing property taxes on mineral owners,
forbidding strip-mining without the surface-owner's, consent, and

allowing local governments to ban toxic waste plants. The editors have
included in an appendix an annotated list of community-based
organizations like KFTC.
          The contributors are especially concerned with the plight of women
and minorities. We learn that if present trends continue, almost all
families in poverty by the turn of the century will be women and their
children. Women earn far less than men, and tend to be excluded from
all but dead-end, non-unionized jobs without unemployment
compensation. are articles focusing on women's attempts to break into
coal mining and highway construction and maintenance and on organizing
women for local economic development. The latter strategy seems
especially promising, since it keeps revenues in the community, and
since most new jobs across the nation are being created by small
businesses, not large corporations. There is for example, a chapter on
the Mayhaw Tree, a model business started by women in Miller County,
Georgia, which uses the fruit of local trees to produce gourmet
jelly.
          Southern blacks are especially subject to economic
blackmail. Because they lack the political and economic resources of
their white neighbors, black communities in the South have been
favorite targets for the location of toxic waste dumps, hazardous
industries, and municipal waste-disposal facilities. A chapter
entitled "Environmentalism, Economic Blackmail, and Civil Rights"
documents this trend, as well as "the emergence of a small but
growing cadre of blacks who see environmental issues as civil rights
issues."
          Another chapter concerns women and blacks who have been injured in
unsafe workplaces and terminated before they were able to collect
worker's compensation or unemployment benefits. Many of the case
studies give damning evidence of declining standards in occupational
safety and environmental protection during the Reagan years.
          As one author suggests, the case studies can help teach how not to pursue regional economic development. While
many lessons are drawn in the studies themselves, these are organized
and extended in the book's second part. The essays in this section
focus on demystifying and redefining traditional notions of economy
and development. These are somewhat uneven. One author, for example,
wrongly argues that it was only with the advent of capitalist
industrialization that "women alone began to take on child rearing
and homemaking as their primary roles." On the other hand, there
are strong pieces, such as a beautifully written chapter which allows
us to look at ourselves and our land from the fresh perspective of
Creole tradition. Inevitably, the essays return to the questions with
which this review began. Concrete answers to these questions,
summarized in an "economic bill-of rights," may provide a common set
of goals for citizens' groups across the nation as well as in the
South.
          Communities in Economic Crisis is an important
book of impressive breadth. One especially hopes it will be read by
those who claim to represent the welfare of communities that have
fallen on hard times. Among its many virtues, it provides ample proof
that economics need not be a dismal science, but can, and must, become
a democratic and humane one.
          
            Jacob Howland is on the philosophy faculty at the
University of Tulsa.
          
        
        
          Making Votes Count in Arkansas--Challenge to Plantation-Style
Politics
          By Fleshler, DanDan Fleshler
          Vol. 12, No. 3, 1990, pp. 14-15
          
          Nearly every day this past year, M.C. Jeffers watched news reports
of Eastern European crowds clamoring for meaningful elections, for the
right to run for political office. He heard smug commentators explain
that people in places like Romania yearned for American-style
democracy. And he wondered if real democracy would ever reach the
Mississippi Delta in Eastern Arkansas.
          "I came up during the time of the poll tax," says
Mr. Jeffers, 67, an African American realtor in the Delta town of
Forrest City, "when only a few blacks voted, and when they did,
their votes didn't do any good...Now we don't have the tax but our
votes still don't do any good...Maybe this ruling'll change
that. .. Maybe we'll get what everyone else in the world
wants."
          He was referring to a recent Federal district court decision in Jeffers v. Clinton, an LDF case. After hearing
evidence of the harassment of black voters and candidates, as well as
the manipulation of district boundaries to dilute black voting
strength, the court ruled that Arkansas blacks' voting rights had been
violated. And it ruled that state legislative boundaries drawn in 1981
must be redrawn.
          The ruling, announced on December 5, 1989, called for the largest
statewide redistricting ever ordered under the Voting Rights
Act. Mr. Jeffers, one of 17 black plaintiffs, said he hoped the
decision "would help blacks have real input into
decision-making. Until we get it, conditions aren't going to
change."
          The 14 counties in Eastern Arkansas affected by the ruling have
some of the world's richest farmland, and some of America's poorest
people. Amidst fields abutting the Mississippi that yield abundant
harvest of rice, cotton and soybeans, more than 40 percent of Delta
residents live in poverty. Blacks comprise about half of the area's
population, but the vast majority of land in each town is owned by a
handful of wealthy whites--many of whom are descendants of former
slaveowners.
          "They pay minimum wages when the fields need working," says
Clinton Harris, the black mayor of Wilmot. where unemployment hovers
around 60 percent for macho of the year. "And in the winter, when
the fields don't need working, we just don't have enough jobs."
          The Jeffers trial presented a sobering picture
of the barriers to African Americans trying to change this bleak status quo through the electoral process. Although
blacks comprise 16 percent of the state's population, there is only
one black in the 100-member House. In several majority black counties
in Eastern Arkansas, white legislators have been elected with little
black support.
          The plaintiffs challenged the way in which majority black districts
were carved up to submerge African American votes in larger pools of
white votes by the 1981 reapportionment plan. While this plan created
five legislative districts with majority-black populations, the
plaintiffs argued that as many as 16 majority-black districts could
have been created.
          The court agreed, and ruled that the drawing of current district
boundaries violated Section II of the Voting Rights Act, which
requires proof of discriminatory results for electoral requirements
and practices to be illegal. The decision called for "a new lawful
plan" to be drafted in time for the 1990 elections.
          In finding voting rights violations, the court also relied on
extensive evidence of current "difficulties experienced! by blacks in
electoral politics" in Arkansas.
          For example, the court cited the experience of Roy 

Lewellan, a
black lawyer in Marianna, Arkansas, who "ran for the State Senate
in 1986 against a white incumbent... At about the same time, the
Sheriff and Prosecuting Attorney instituted a well publicized criminal
prosecution against Mr. Lewellan. Mr. Lewellan...gave a number of
reasons for his belief that the prosecution was designed to discourage
him in particular and black political activity in general. We find
this testimony entirely credible."
          Interviewed after the trial, Mr. Lewellan noted that the man he had
tried to unseat, State Senator Paul Benham, is a representative of the
"Old South, from an old farm family, typical of the politicians who
haven't done a thing for black people in this district."
          Mr. Lewellan said that Senator Benham recently voted against a bill
that would have exempted more than 60,000 poor residents from paying
taxes. "His rich friends would have had to pay a few hundred
dollars more in taxes, so he and other white senators opposed it...His
friends know I'm in favor of helping the poor, and that's why they
didn't want me to run against him."
          Many other examples of racially-motivated political harassment were
presented at the trial. Helmet Mayor Harris testified that on election
day in 1986, a gang of whites (including elected officials and a
policeman with a gun) arrived at the polling place and prevented him
and others from aiding illiterate black political voters.
          Mr. Harris calls those responsible for the harassment "the
Godfathers... They own the land, the mill, the bank." He and other
black political activists claim that the white power structure has
openly resisted efforts to improve economic conditions for Delta
blacks: "They don't want industry coming down here, because
factories'll pay higher wages than they give to folks working the
fields..."
          The plaintiffs in Jeffers hope that black
political empowerment gained through redistricting will help to
counterbalance the power of "Godfathers" throughout the Delta.
          Under court order, the Arkansas Board of Apportionment is currently
drawing up new legislative districts, a process being monitored by
attorneys Penda Hair, Dayna Cunningham, and Sheila Thomas of the Legal
Defense Fund; P. A. Hollingsworth of Little Rock; and Olly Neal of
Marianna.
          Arkansas Election Update
          Seven black candidates were nominated in March 29 primary elections
in the ten Arkansas Delta districts affected by Jeffers v. Clinton. In one of those races, a black
woman won the nomination for coroner of Lee County, the first
county-wide electoral success for a black candidate in Arkansas since
Reconstruction.
          In addition to the seven black nominees, an old-line white
conservative was defeated in another race by a white liberal. "The
elections in some of the white-on-white races turned into referendums
on the 'good old boy' political leadership in the region," noted
the LDF's Dan Fleshier.
          And voter turnout increased substantially--by 10 percent or more in
some places--throughout the Delta.
          
            Daniel Fleshler is director of communications of the
NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc. His article is adapted
from Equal Justice: LDF News.
          
        
        
          A White Progressive Sounds the Trumpet from Inside.
          Reviewed by Dunbar, AnthonyAnthony Dunbar
          Vol. 12, No. 3, 1990, pp. 18-20
          
          Hearts and Minds, A Personal Chronicle of Race in
America by Harry S. Ashmore. Foreword by Harold C. Fleming
(Cabin John, Maryland: Seven Locks Press. Revised Edition,
1988. $14.95 paper.).
          It was an exceptional book when it was first published in 1982, and
its 1988 revision, which extends to their finale Ashmore's treatment
of the Reagan years, fills out one man's sweeping view of the civil
rights struggle in America. Harold Fleming has contributed a fond and
substantial Foreword to the revised edition, further enriching the
book. The subtitle of Hearts and Minds has
changed from the earlier edition's "The Anatomy of Racism from
Roosevelt to Reagan" to "A Personal Chronicle of Race in America," a
truer characterizing of the book.
          Although there is enough sound history to make this book useful as
a text, what gives Hearts and Minds its strength are Ashmore's own
glimpses of events and personalities as he knew them over five decades
of living in and observing the South. As a South Carolina journalist
and later editor of the Arkansas Gazette during the Little Rock
crisis, and as an adviser to Adlai Stevenson and Eugene McCarthy in
their runs for the White House, Ashmore offers profiles aplenty of
people in their unguarded moments. I especially liked his picture of
the young and pugnacious Thurgood Marshall.
          Ashmore began his journalistic career at the "delivery end,"
carrying the morning paper in Greenville, South Carolina, the type of
area in transition from farms to factories in which the New South
originated. His own transition toward objectivity about southern
problems began with a two-week trip in 1938 through the Northeast to
produce a six-article series exposing the condition of working people
in New York City, New England, and Philadelphia. It was a defensive
piece--the North is just as bad as the South--and it was
enthusiastically reprinted in a number of southern papers. The
reception made him uncomfortable, for it came to him that he was
implicitly supporting the ill-treatment of southern workers.
          He was a World War II infantry captain in Europe, saw blacks in
service, and concluded in retrospect that their war experience
"marked the real beginning of the civil rights movement." He
was disappointed in his own generation of 

white Southerners who fought
totalitarianism abroad, who then returned home to stand for office and
assert themselves in their communities but, under pressure from their
elders, perpetuated the racial status quo.
          In 1947 Ashmore became editor of the Arkansas
Gazette, the year before Truman's presentation of a civil rights
package to Congress precipitated the Dixiecrat revolt. In those days
Ashmore would argue with Walter White, director of the NAACP, that
"total dismantlement of institutional segregation was a practical
impossibility." Ashmore was close to the Southern Regional Council
and tracks its difficult struggle, under Alexander, Odum, Johnson,
Mitchell, and Fleming, to grapple with defining a position on
segregation that would not cause the withdrawal of supporters who had
clout.
          By 1951 the SRC was, if not denouncing, at least discussing the
irrationality of segregation, and indeed its perhaps most politically
influential whites did proceed to withdraw from the
organization. Ashmore, however, when recruited by the Ford Foundation
to direct a documentation of the racial disparities in educational
programs of the South, which was also a handbook that could be used
for post-Brown desegregation orders, drew upon the expertise of those
who had stayed in the fray, principally John Griffin and Harold
Fleming but other SRCers as well.
          As an editor Ashmore placed his Gazette at the
opposite dole on the spectrum of establishment press from James
J. Kilpatrick's Richmond News-Leader. The Gazette was the primary institutional target of
segregationists during the battle at Little Rock's Central High. In
retrospect Ashmore claims that his own position was easy since, "By
natural process of prior selection most of our close friends shared
the views expressed in the Gazette, and those
whose opinions shaded off to the right or left maintained our company
because they enjoyed arguing with us." He credits a fusion of the
country club set and the black community, more than the presence of
federal troops, for keeping the lid on the city and ultimately keeping
control of the schools away from the allies of Governor Orval
Faubus. Eisenhower, who like Reagan later had power to foster peaceful
change but didn't, is one of Ashmore's special villains.
          Ashmore took leave from the Gazette in
September 1955 to work in Adlai Stevenson's second presidential
campaign as a speechwriter and crafter of positions. He takes credit
for pushing Stevenson toward a clearer position on civil rights, which
might he summed up as, the Supreme Court's decision in Brown is right and is the law. President Eisenhower's
failure to affirm that, or even to convene white and black leadership
to discuss how Brown could he implemented, earns him Ashmore's
contempt.
          Ashmore began pulling up stakes in the South after 1959 when he
became an officer of the Center for the Study of Democratic
Institutions in Santa Barbara, California, and then editor-in-chief of
a revision of the Encyclopaedia
Britannica. Consequently, his blow-by-blow account of the civil
rights battlefield suffers, for he watched it from afar.
          His appreciation of the anti-Vietnam War mobilization and of the
political currents of the 1970s is strong. I would take issue with his
description of the college student movement in the 1960s, as a
disorganized collection of "partially educated free spirits who
expected their further development to result not from disciplined
intellectual inquiry but from the liberated libido," as the
viewpoint of a Southerner lost in California. It looked a little more
serious to those of us who were on and off campus in those
years. While Ashmore opposed the Vietnam War, he was not a marcher
because, he says, of his aversion to those males who avoided military
service not from moral conviction but from physical cowardice. I (a
marcher) was fortunate to know more of the former than the latter.
          The first person quality of Hearts and Minds trails off during the
Nixon presidency, and the historian takes over. As for Jimmy Carter,
he "came along after my time in the South, and I never knew
him."
          The history of the civil rights movement has now become a
well-paved road. What is special about Hearts and
Minds is Ashmore himself, his own path, those whose paths he
crossed, and the perspective--that of a white progressive within the
Establishment--that he represents. Added value is given to the history
he relates by Ashmore's thesis--drawn from personal experience--that
there was a humane and temperate quality in the South that made change
possible.
          What the South's reactionary leaders of the 1950s, even its
intellectual apologists like J. William Fulbright, ignored, and those
who retrospectively evaluate the causes of change overlook, is, he
says, "the fact that the Southern environment also contained a
remarkable reservoir of interracial goodwill. Had this not been so,
the Southern cities could not have opened their public and private
facilities to blacks so rapidly and with so little disorder. 

When the
federal courts unleashed the spreading blade protest movement and made
it clear that there was no practical alternative to desegregation,
ordinary white citizens proved to be ahead of their leaders; the new
breed of moderate politicians who emerged in the 1960s did not produce
the change, but were produced by it."
          In the new end revised Chapters, those dealing with the Reagan
presidency, Ashmore soundly drubs Reaganomics, especially the
president's "failure to devise a system that could salvage
underclass youngsters." Of Reagan he says, "His insensitivity
was rooted in his conviction that there was no serious racial
discrimination in America, and indeed no enduring poverty." It is
a disturbing conclusion to Ashmore's chronicle. For to him, the march
toward civil rights is continuing and "may yet be reckoned the most
profound social change mankind has accomplished without resort to
violence." I am pleased to report that a writer of Ashmore's
stature and vintage is still sounding that trumpet.
          
            SRC member Anthony Dunbar is a New Orleans writer and
lawyer. His latest book, Delta Times, reflects on
Mississippi's Delta and its people.
          
        
        
          A Passionate, First-Hand Story of One Place in the Movement.
          Reviewed by Cooper, MichaelMichael Cooper
          Vol. 12, No. 3, 1990, pp. 20-21
          
          JACKSON, MISSISSIPPI: An American Chronicle of Struggle and
Schism by John R Salter Jr. (Malabar, Florida: Robert
E. Krueger Publishing Co., Inc. 1987. 256 pp., no price).
          John Salter's book, which evokes the emotions, the frustrations,
and the fears of Jackson in the early 1960s, is particularly valuable
because so little has been written about the civil rights movement in
Mississippi's capital and largest city.
          Salter and his wife were drawn from Arizona to Mississippi in 1961
by the growing civil rights movement. A sociology professor, Salter
got a job teaching at Tougaloo College. Soon afterward he became the
sponsor of the local NAACP Youth Council.
          Under his guidance the council's eager young people became
activists. They launched a boycott of the Mississippi State Fair. With
leaflets, press releases, and word of mouth the youth group persuaded
black people to shun the fair. This victory inspired a more ambitious
project, a boycott of downtown Jackson businesses during the 1962
Christmas buying-season. A short list of demands was drawn up, bail
money was raised, and pickets were selected to launch the boycott in
early December. The first day downtown the young men and women were
met by paddy wagons and an army of policemen who promptly arrested all
six pickets. Undeterred by the overwhelming show of force, the young
people picketed for weeks and the boycott I was a success.
          The Youth Council had one impressive victory after another. In
addition to its successful boycotts of the state fair and of downtown
stores, the group had quietly desegregated public events at then
all-white Millsaps College, conducted a voter registration drive, and
campaigned for black politicians.
          The catalyst for this activism was Salter. In a long foreword to
the book, the Reverend R Edwin King, Jr., a native Mississippian and
Methodist minister, says Salter was, "The key strategist in the
massive community organizing effort." As such, Salter joined the
state's small band of civil rights activists, which included Amzie
Moore, Medgar Evers, Tom Johnson, and a handful of others. Being a
prominent civil rights activist was a double-edged honor. To the
ubiquitous Citizens Council he was an outside agitator, a man marked
for retribution.
          Despite harassing phone calls, the angry glares of white neighbors,
and constant surveillance by men in an unmarked car, Salter persevered
and the local movement attracted more and more participants. The
national NAACP, however, wasn't responding with bail money and other
assistance. While praising the organization's local officials, Medgar
Evers and Aaron Henry, Salter is quite critical of the national
NAACP's role in Jackson.
          "We knew, for example, that Aaron Henry had frequently felt that
the national office was being slow to assist the struggle in
Mississippi; and we knew that Aaron Henry himself had been criticized
by the national office for his friendliness and cooperation with such
groups as COR1S, SCLC, and SNCC." Salter also says that the
NAACP's National Executive Board was indecisive on the use of direct
action "as well as on the issue of involvement in Mississippi."
Overall, Salter felt that "the national office of the NAACP was not
much interested in our campaign in Jackson."
          But that interest changed after sit-ins at Woolworth's and a
demonstration where five hundred young people were arrested and locked
up in a barbed-wire stockade became national news. Not so
coincidentally, Salter implies, the national NAACP suddenly took
notice of the Jackson movement.
          NAACP executive director Roy Wilkins flew to Jackson and joined a
demonstration in which he and two hundred other people were
arrested. Soon afterward the national NAACP took over the Jackson
movement and moved it into a new phase, of less direct action and more
legal action. Salter's leadership was circumvented. Although he
continued to argue for more demonstrations, the move meet's momentum
seemed spent until the murder of Medgar Evers incited Jackson's black
community.
          The Evers funeral attracted five thousand people, in-

cluding Martin
Luther King Jr. Several hundred mourners made an impromptu march
downtown resulting in a police riot and dozens of bloody
arrests. Salter was blamed by both the white community and the alarmed
black community for the march and the violence. Discredited in the
eyes of the more cautious black people, he was maneuvered out of
leadership.
          Although no longer a principal leader, Salter was still the target
of white hatred. In what might have been attempted murder, he and
fellow activist Edwin King were seriously injured in a car crash. Both
men recovered, and soon afterward Salter left Mississippi to work as
an organizer in eastern North Carolina with the Southern Conference
Educational Fund.
          Some readers will object to Salter's less than flattering portrayal of
the national NAACP and of Jackson's black ministers. As he describes
it, the NAACP was too preoccupied with its own agenda and its own
glory to worry much about the people of Mississippi.
          Salter has too little empathy with local black ministers who didn't
participate in the protests. In Mississippi's civil rights battles
it's not surprising there were so few brave people; it's surprising
there were so many. Black people in particular had everything to
fear. Everything--home, family, friends, and livelihood--was at
stake. At best a local black activist might suffer economic reprisals;
at worst he or she might be gunned down. When Jackson turned violent,
Salter's wife and child went to Minnesota. And soon afterward Salter
himself left the state. Few local black people could so move.
          Salter's book does not pretend to be objective journalism. He did
not ask the NAACP officials or the black ministers for their
versions. Rather, the book is a passionate, first-hand account of the
Jackson movement by one of its central figures. Jackson, Mississippi was first published in 1979. The
Robert E. Krueger Publishing Company deserves plaudits for this new
edition.
          
            Writer Michael Cooper has been researching
Mississippi.
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By 
            Chestnut, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut. Jr.
          Vol. 12, No. 3, 1990, p. 24
          
          There is a growing army of poor, suffering black souls all over
America. They are the "Unreachables."
          They form the core of the crime and welfare problem. They make up
the statistics on welfare cheats, crime increases, illegitimate
children and the myriad pathologies that a society structured, in
part, on racial hate exfoliates.
          Totaling up these statistics and their racial substratum, many
Southerners and more than a few unreconstructed Northerners are able
to impute a covering veil of immorality to all black people. I get
sick of hearing it.
          But no race, no religion, no ethnic group is inherently bad, nor
does any race have a monopoly on fostering social disintegration.
          A given set of conditions--urban society, immutable racism,
cultural conflict and hopelessness--will develop a pattern of racial
hostility that finds expression in the lack of incentive and contempt
for the established social order. It afflicts whites, Asians,
Hispanics and all others.
          In turn, some people turn to crime, get on welfare and even derive
a secret joy in "getting back" at society by cheating.
          These are the unreachables--the black people who somehow just have
not been able to cope with society's harsh denials of their essential
dignity.
          The NAACP hasn't been able to reach these people.
          The Urban League hasn't.
          Black politics has done little or nothing.
          The churches have failed completely.
          The unreachables will flourish and multiply as long as society
ruthlessly segregates them in drab inner city public housing,
relegates them to no or sporadic employment, and the police are
permitted to beat and treat them like animals.
          I know you don't think it happens but it does. It happens every
day.
          These are the people to whom real estate brokers close their doors
and who are confined to filthy, unlivable ghettos. They are the people
who can't find jobs anywhere and when they do are forced to accept
jobs as underemployables. In essence, they are the people who just
don't give a damn.
          These are the unreachables.
          And, unless some of us, or some of our organizations, including our
churches, start reaching them soon, they will continue to grow, and
grow, and grow, and grow.
          The world, in ways, has been good to me as compared to the
unreachables. I have also worked hard. But, I must confess I identify
completely with the unreachables. I am not impressed by the lucky ones
among us.
          And, I have no interest in reading George Bush's Republican
lips.
          I have read the parched lips and contorted faces of innocent babies
addicted to "crack" in the overcrowded, run-down wards of inner-city
hospitals.
          America would be better served if it read the Bible. Reading George
Bush's lips hardly helps.
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
      
    
  