
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 12, Number 5,
	       1990
        
          What Toxic Waste Facilities Attract
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 12, No. 5, 1990, p. 10
          
          The plight of Sumter County, Ala., is a good example for those who
may be considering a toxic waste facility in their community or
state. Waste Management Inc. took over the dumpsite in Emelle in
1978. They promised that the facility would bring in much-needed
industry and jobs to our economically depressed area. However, the
facts reveal otherwise.
          In 1978 Sumter County had an unemployment rate of 5.8 percent. This
figure has risen drastically to 21.1 percent. These statistics from
the Alabama Employment Service also show that Sumter County lost 2,000
from its work force from 1978 to 1986 and lost five industries.
          Another problem with people leaving our county in search of work is
that we have many homes being put on the market. Unfortunately, no one
is anxious to move to a county that has no work to offer other than a
job at a waste dump.
          Along with property devaluation, we are experiencing a crisis in
our healthcare. One hospital facility in Livingston has closed and the
other hospital in York is in serious financial difficulty and may not
survive. We have lost most of our physicians as well. Ambulance
service has been cut considerably to rural areas.
          One of the problems of living in a dying county is that there is
not enough money to go around to all the agencies which need it. Taxes
are the only recourse for additional funds. A proposed increase of the
ad valorem tax is expected to be 11 mills which will bring the rate
from 23.1 to 34.1.
          Sumter is suffering and others can learn from its example. The only
thing toxic waste facilities attract is more toxic waste.--KAY KIKER
(Alabamians for a Clean Environment, P.O. Box 177, York, AL 36925;
205-392-7443)
        
        
          The Lillian Smith Awards for 1990
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 12, No. 5, 1990, p. 5
          
          The Lillian Smith Awards are presented yearly to recognize and
encourage outstanding writing about the American South. Smith long
distinguished herself as one of the region's foremost advocates of
human rights and one of its most sensitive students. She wrote many
works, both fiction and non-fiction. Hers is the rare type of topical
literature that remains relevant year after year because it confronts
deeply rooted social problems and promotes a recognition of their very
human roots and dynamics. The Lillian Smith awards for fiction and
non-fiction have been presented since 1968. The recipients do not have
to be Southerners, but their honored work must be about the South.
          Dori Sanders is the 1990 recipient of the
Lillian Smith Award for fiction. Sanders is the author of the award
winning novel Clover. Born in York County, South
Carolina, Sanders attended York County Public Schools and later
studied at community colleges in Prince George's and Montgomery
counties in Maryland. She divides her time between her writing,
working on her family's peach farm, an open air market, and as an
associate banquet manager in Maryland. Besides being featured in
numerous national magazines and newspapers, Clover is being translated
for publication in Japanese, Dutch, Danish, Swedish and German and
Walt Disney studio has acquired movie rights. Algonquin Books of
Chapel Hill is the publisher of this work.
          Wayne Flynt is the 1990 recipient of the Lillian
Smith Award for non-fiction. Flynt, a native of Alabama, is currently
the Hollifield Professor of History at Auburn University and a Baptist
minister. In the sixties Flynt was a civil rights activist within the
Baptist church. After the Movement he established a distinguished
career as teacher and author. In 1989 he was nominated for a Pulitzer
Prize for Poor But Proud: Alabama's Poor Whites, which
utilized scholarly research and oral history to document the
historical, economic, and socio-political implications of Southern
poverty. His chronicle of how poor Euro-Americans struggled to retain
their dignity and make sense of their world is one of the great dramas
of the story of the American people. This work is published by the
University of Alabama Press.
        
        
          The Inner Life of the Deadly Machine
          By Shortal, HelenHelen Shortal
          Vol. 12, No. 5, 1990, pp. 7-10
          
          Building
Bombs. Produced and directed by Mark Mori and Susan
Robinson.
          Building Bombs is making news. Both CNN and NBC News have broadcast footage from the one-hour
documentary that examines the human cost of nuclear-weapons production
at the Savannah River Plant in Aiken, S.C.
          Even MTV has taken notice of the film, since Building
Bombs has been promoted by rock musicians such as Michael
Stipe of R.E.M. and Dave Wakeling of the now defunct General
Public. When MTV learned that Wakeling would be on hand for the film's
premier in Washington, D.C., the network dispatched a video crew to
the Biograph Theater in Georgetown. A segment featuring interviews
with Wakeling and Atlanta-based filmmaker Mark Mori along with the
music of R.E.M. was later shown on MTV.
          The five-year effort to produce and distribute BuildingBombs began in 1984 when Mori and two friends decided to film
a peace demonstration near the mammoth weapons complex. The ad hoc
film crew paid a visit to the antinuclear activists who were living at
a peace encampment near the Savannah River Plant. "We just started
shooting protesters," says Mori. "But then we met Arthur Dexter
and Bill Lawless."
          Both Dexter and Lawless had worked at "the bomb plant," as it is
known to local residents. And both men recounted highly personal tales
of their disillusionment with the nuclear industry.
          Lawless, a former Department of Energy investigator, was sent to
the Savannah River Plant to assess the amount of radioactive waste
buried in the South Carolina soil. He submitted a report that detailed
the widespread contamination and serious hazards at the plant. And
DuPont de Nemours & Co., which managed the plant until last year,
pressured him to retract his findings. Lawless became the first
Department of Energy official to testify about the bomb plant's
hazardous conditions.
          Of the many horror stories Lawless told, the one that received the
most attention concerned the disposal of low-level radioactive
materials at the plant; objects contaminated with radioactivity were
place in cardboard boxes and buried in pits. The 192-acre burial
ground at the plant contained everything from protective gloves to
bulldozers. And the boxes were caving in, contaminating the soil and
the groundwater with radioactivity.
          Arthur Dexter was a former physicist at the plant. Ironically, he
had gone to work at the bomb plant to avoid fighting in the Korean
war; only DuPont had the power to exempt Dexter from the draft. His
new job, testing the movement of gases through various materials,
"seemed quite innocent at the time," says Dexter in the
film. "Only later did I realize I was working on weapons."
          As the years passed, Dexter became uncomfortable with the
stockpiling he observed at the bomb plant, which housed enough
plutonium and tritium to manufacture 30,000 bombs like the one dropped
on Nagasaki. "It seemed rather obscene," he says. After Dexter quit
working at the plant he became involved in the Aiken Peace Movement
and with Warhead Watch, a group that tracks nuclear weapons
transported on public highways.
          As Mori interviewed the pair of Savannah River Plant insiders, he
began to envision a different kind of protest film. Building
Bombs would focus on life inside the bomb plant rather than
rail against the hazards and abuses of the nuclear industry.
          During 1985, Mori met his future partner, Susan Robinson, at
Atlanta's IMAGE Film/Video Center for independent film and video
artists. A producer of interactive projects and corporate videos,
Robinson had a background in instructional design--and a strong
interest in environmental issues. She had attended her first
demonstration at the Savannah River Plant when she was 16.
          But neither Mori nor Robinson had produced a feature length film
before. "We were first-time filmmakers, and everyone told us to
just make a simple expose--the story of Dr. Lawless and those
cardboard boxes," says Robinson. "But we felt that personal
responsibility, political ideology, and history all came together in
this story, and we wanted to tell the whole thing. Becoming
politically aware and active is a developmental process, and we
believed that if we could tell the stories of these men and the
changes they made in their lives, they would serve as role
models."
          Robinson and Mori began compiling research materials, photographs,
film footage, and interviews about a wide range of topics pertaining
to the bomb plant. They unearthed archival footage of cardboard boxes
labeled "Radioactive Waste" being tossed into pits in the burial
ground. They filmed a pro-nuclear rally in 1984 where former Secretary
of Energy James Edwards delivered a speech about the economic benefits
of the nuclear industry. And they interviewed workers and family
members about working conditions at the plant, the region's mounting
health problems and life in the company town.
          "We tried to design the film for people who weren't necessarily
sensitive to these issues," says Mori. "People expect
Building Bombs to be a regular anti-nuclear film, but
we wanted to make it more than that. We wanted to look at the lives of
the human beings who work in the nuclear industry."
          Not that Building Bombs skimps on the Savannah River
Plant or its role in the arms race. But its litany of mismanagement
and impending doom is softened by the filmmakers' empathy for the
people whose lives have been affected by the bomb plant.
          As the film begins narrator Jane Alexander describes the growth of
the nuclear industry in South Carolina. In 1950, the Atomic Energy
Commission selected the region near rural Ellenton, S.C., as the ideal
location for manufacturing plutonium and tritium. The U.S. government
relocated more than 6,000 residents to dear a vast trace of
land. Three towns were demolished to make room for the bomb plant,
which encompasses some 300 square miles of land in three counties.
          "But with the destruction came prosperity," recounts
Alexander. The Savannah River Plant was one of the largest
construction projects in modern history. More than 200 miles of
highway wind through the five-reactor complex, which currently employs
about 15,000 workers.

          Building Bombs makes it clear that the nuclear
industry bought its way into South Carolina with a promise of
prosperity. "Over $30 billion has been brought into South Carolina
as a result of the nuclear industry," exhorts Edwards at the
pro-nuclear rally. "That's big money.... We talk about all the
problems that nuclear brings, but $5 million has been spent just on
monitoring this area."
          Nowadays, money buys silence from the people who operate the bomb
plant--and live in its shadow. A housewife interviewed in
Building Bombs says that Aiken residents won't petition
for a health study of the local population, even though "it seems
like too much of a coincidence when you have four or five people in
the same block dying of cancer." She says people are afraid of
losing their jobs or their pensions.
          The filmmakers got a firsthand look at the business of building
bombs when they received permission to shoot inside the enormous
complex. Working under constant supervision, their volunteer crews
filmed the remote controlled processes used to produce plutonium and
tritium. When the crew moved outside to shoot the burial ground, they
were given protective booties to wear. "The soil in the burial
ground was radioactive," says Mori. "All of our shots had to be
hand-held. We couldn't even put our tripod on the ground."
          Building Bombs mixes hard facts about the
irresponsible dumping of radioactive chemicals with anecdotes that are
no less thrilling. DuPont officials discovered that the turtles that
swam in these "seepage basins" had become contaminated by radiation,
so plant workers combed the surrounding streams and woodlands in an
attempt to contain the turtle-powered migration of highly radioactive
strontium-90.
          "We've uncovered some things in this film that still haven't
gotten into the mainstream media," says Robinson. A "deep throat"
source at the plant informed the filmmakers that the concrete floors
are disintegrating in the Canyon Buildings, where plutonium and
tritium are extracted from fuel rods. Thirty-five years of bombardment
by radiation is turning the floors into sponge. While Westinghouse,
which currently manages the plant, has made no response to this
allegation, Robinson believes that this silence constitutes
assent. "We've shown the film in Aiken," she says, "and none
of the facts have been refuted."
          There's a dark humor in Building Bombs that arises
from pointing out the gap between rhetoric at the Savannah River
Plant. When plant officials were warned that radioactive wastes might
spread beyond the burial ground, for example, "DuPont stated that
the radioactivity was so low that it would never outcrop,"
recounts Alexander. "The first outcrop occurred in 1978, one year
later." At the Biograph screening of Building Bombs
an explosion of laughter greeted a confession by a rake-happy
Secretary of Energy Edwards that "I'm a sort of environmentalist
myself."
          Robinson and Mori met with initial resistance when they tried to
arrange a screening in Aiken. But when they did succeed in scheduling
the film, the South Carolina premier of Building Bombs
was the lead item in the local 

news for two days. A plant worker
informed Greenpeace that Westinghouse issued a memo to advise its
15,000 employees that the film would be screened in Aiken. Mori
believes the memo was intended to spur a show of company solidarity at
the screenings.
          More than 600 people attended screenings of Building
Bombs in Aiken and nearby Augusta, Ga. Many of them were
workers from the Savannah River Plant. "People were pretty hostile
going into the screening," says Mori. "But there
were people in the film that they lived and worked with--people that
spoke their language. It affected them. When they left the screening,
a lot of people said they needed to think about what we're doing at
the Savannah River Plant."
          "The most difficult part of getting the film out was raising the
money--convincing people that the film needed to be made," says
Mori. "We started working on Building Bombs before
it was popular to criticize the nuclear industry. We were actually
filming at the Savannah River Plant when Chernobyl happened. We'd been
there getting a shot to show there was no containment dome [above the
reactor]. We were driving home that night, and we heard over the radio
that there'd been a big release of radiation."
          Not surprisingly, fundraising became easier after the April, 1986
accident at Chernobyl released 50-billion curies of radiation into the
atmosphere. Now that Building Bombs is finished,
Robinson and Mori are raising money to promote the film and court a
distributor. During the past year the pair has raised about $20,000 to
finance trips to film festivals, competitions and conventions where
programs are marketed to broadcasters and
distributors. Building Bombs was awarded a Silver Hugo
in the social/political documentary category at the 1989 Chicago Film
Festival.
          "It's always been difficult to be an independent filmmaker,"
says Mori. "The U.S. is one of the worst places for
independents. You can't get funding and you can't get your films
shown." Mori is on the steering committee of the national
Coalition of Independent Producers, which successfully lobbied
Congress to allocate $6 million per year for independent television
productions.
          Robinson and Mori are not the only filmmakers pointing their
cameras at the nuclear industry. But they believe their film is
uniquely successful in capturing the rhythm of Southern
life. "There's something very Southern about Building
Bombs," says Robinson. "It meanders; it takes its
time. Gradually, it tells viewers that the situation is an
emergency."
          Mori believes the slower pace of his hometown fostered his
five-year dream of documenting life at the Savannah River Plant. "I
couldn't have made Building Bombs if I lived in LA or
New York," says Mori. "As first-time filmmakers, we probably
would have been laughed out of town. The industry there is too
overpowering."
          
            Helen Shortal is associate editor of In Motion
magazine. This review first appeared in In These Times,
and is reprinted here with permission. (For information on rental or
purchase of Building Bombs, write to Box 5202, Station
13, Atlanta, GA 30307.)
          
        
        
          Journey of Change.
          Reviewed by Poinsett, AlexAlex Poinsett
          Vol. 12, No. 5, 1990, pp. 14-15
          
          Delta Time: A Journey Through
Mississippi, by Tony Dunbar. (New York: Pantheon Books,
1990. 245 pages.).
          An elderly Mississippi Delta plantation owner is found hanging in
his bedroom. Had he committed suicide or had he been murdered? The
dead man's grandson is certain a murderer hides among his black
sharecroppers. Unable to find him, he arbitrarily picks a family of
three and ties them to stakes. Then, while he and other white men
force the remaining blacks on his plantation to watch, he burns the
helpless family alive.
          That tragedy occurred more than 50 years ago. By 1968, when author
Tony Dunbar secretly interviewed black tenant farmers and
sharecroppers, Mississippi Delta blacks were no longer burned at
stakes. Instead, they were only beaten with ax handles and clubs,
teargassed, shotgunned, and blasted with dynamite. Or they were
anchored in rivers and planted in shallow graves, often for trying to
exercise their civil rights.
          Prudently, Dunbar, at that time a 19-year-old Atlantan, hid during
the day and ventured forth only at night to avoid reprisals from irate
plantation owners. His first book, Our Land Too, related the troubled
lives of Delta tenant farmers. His newest book chronicles the author's
findings 20 years later, as he with keen-eyed sensitivity retraces his
earlier journey--less wary, less concerned about harm coming to
himself or his interviewees. For Dunbar found that the Delta had
changed markedly during the past two decades.
          Racial atrocities no longer scar its collective
consciousness. Catfish has replaced cotton as the region's major cash

crop. Black voters, once brutally suppressed, have elected more black
candidates in Mississippi than in any other state be cause of the 1965
Voting Rights Act and federal lawsuits outlawing racial
gerrymandering. The University of Mississippi, once a battleground for
violent segregationist resistance to black student enrollment, now
presents Distinguished Black Mississippian Awards.
          In 1988, the honorees were the Delta's Robert Clark, the state's
first black state legislator of modern times; the Most Reverend Joseph
Howze of Mobile, the first black bishop to head a Catholic diocese in
the United States; the Delta's country music great Charlie Pride; and
state Attorney General Robert Gibbs.
          A posthumous award went to Fannie Lou Hamer, the former Delta
sharecropper and gallant freedom fighter who once had lamented that
she was "sick and tired of being sick and tired."
          Far from suggesting that the Mississippi Delta is now a racial
Utopia, Dunbar notes that poverty still abounds. Farm economics has
shifted blacks from the plantations to low-paying jobs at fast food
franchises or onto public welfare. Massive health problems plague the
Delta's 60percent-black residents. The public schools are almost
totally black because white students still flock to private
segregation academies.
          Black elected officials have taken over many town halls and school
systems, but have little to govern in the Delta's dying small
towns. While the 122-memberstate legislature includes 20 blacks, they
are less than half the representatives that would be proportionate to
the state's 35 percent black population.
          In 1987, Gov. Ray Mabus, a political moderate, was supported by 90
percent of black voters, Dunbar reports. The governor promptly
disappointed them by backing a white Tupelo woman, Billie Thompson, to
replace Ed Cole, the black chairman of the state Democratic Party. In
spite of Mabus, Cole was elected by a Party vote of 56 to 41.
          The governor thinks the civil rights struggle is essentially won,
Dunbar writes angrily, and that the way is now cleared to address
"real problems." However, if such thinking is the best that
Mississippi has to offer, then it--like the rest of America--has yet
to trod a long journey before finally reconciling its races and
achieving what Dun bar aptly calls "the final armistice of the Civil
War"-- 125 years after the last shots were fired.
          
            Alex Poinsett, widely published free-lance writer, with
long acquaintance of Mississippi, is a Contributing Editor of
Ebony Magazine.
          
        
        
          Movement Profiles.
          
            
              L.W.D.L. W. D.
            
          
          Vol. 12, No. 5, 1990, p. 16
          
          The Long Haul, an
Autobiography by Myles Horton, with Judith Kohl and Herbert
Kohl. (Doubleday, 1990. xvi, 245 pages.). Whitney M. Young,
Jr. and the Struggle for Civil Rights, by Nancy
J. Weiss. (Princeton University Press, 1990. xv, 286 pages.).
          Whitney Young and Myles Horton represented the breadth of and
variety within the civil rights movement. One was black, one
white. One held the confidence of corporate and political leaders, one
was avowedly radical and worked almost exclusively among the poor and
dissidents. One believed in the efficacy of political processes, the
other cared but little for policies that did not arise from the
understanding of the people. Horton with the help of the Kohls sat
down his own story before his death this year and Princeton historian
Weiss tells Young's. I knew and had some working relationship with
both men, though I was not close to either. People who knew them will
find little in these books to change or deepen their opinions of
them. All will find the books useful additions to their knowledge of
American reforms, in Horton's case from the 1930s to the present, in
Young's tragically shorter and intenser period from the mid-1950s to
his drowning in 1971. The books are, moreover, interestingly
written.
          If you want democratic society, wrote Horton, you have to act
democratically. "If you want love and brotherhood, you've got to
incorporate them as you go along, because you can't just expect them
to occur in the future without experiencing them before you get
there." Whitney Young, as I knew him, would believe and act on
that rule as consistently as Horton, though, as Professor Weiss
writes, he "spent his life making the needs and interests of black
Americans comprehensible and compelling to the whites who had the
power to do something about them."--L.W.D.
        
        
          Of Genteel Hardness.
          
            
              L.W.D.L. W. D.
            
          
          Vol. 12, No. 5, 1990, p. 16
          
          Ely, An Autobiography, by
Ely Green. Foreword by Bertram Wyatt Brown, Introduction by Lillian
Smith, Afterword by Arthur Ben Chitty. (University of Georgia Press,
1990, xxiv, 246 pages.).
          Here is a book that can be read for any number of reasons,
beginning with simple pleasure. The present edition is a third
incarnation. The first was published by Seabury Press in 1966, with
Lillian Smith's introduction. It was followed in 1970 from the
University of Massachusetts Press by Ely, Too Black,
Too White, edited and with a foreword by Elizabeth N. and Arthur
Ben Chity (the latter having been the book's discoverer and
patron).
          Unlike either the 1966 edition or this present one, that of 1970
was of Mr. Green's whole autobiography. He had lived his first two
decades in and around Sewanee, Tennessee. That time is the subject of
this edition. In 1912, he fled in fear of his life to Texas. He lived
there end elsewhere until 1968. Late in life, this semi-literate man
began writing his memoirs. He wrote with a wonderful sense of
composition, actions and feelings both tautly expressed. The
post-Tennessee part is triple the length of this. I have not read
it. Having now read Ely, An Autobiography, I am
resolved to do so presently.
          There may be no ocher place anywhere quite like Sewanee, and at the
turn of the century when Ely Green was a boy and then a young man it
was no less distinctive. Ely's father was of the white elite--and most
of the town seems to have known his identity; his mother was a black
housemaid. Hence the title of the University of Massachusetts
edition. Neither the place nor person is, therefore, typical, and so
the reader becomes primarily absorbed in this remarkable man's
recollection of his growing up, of his realization of self within a
society that gave him no identity, or none that he would accept. But
because he did live within the black society, the book is also
revelatory of the hardness of that, even in what may well have been
the most genteel spot in the South.--L.W.D.
        
        
          A Letter from Lillian Smith: "Old Seeds Bearing a Heavy Crop."
With an introduction by Rose Gladney
          By Gladney, RoseRose Gladney
          Vol. 12, No. 5, 1990, pp. 4-5
          
          As contemporary debates concerning the National Endowment for the
Arts remind us that censorship, like patriotism (to paraphrase Samuel
Johnson), too often becomes the last refuge of scoundrels, the words
Lillian Smith prepared for the 1944 annual meeting of the
Massachusetts Civil Liberties Union again raise timely end probing
questions. What fears are aroused in those who would censor art? What
in our culture continues to produce a Jesse Helms?
          In the spring of 1944 Lillian Smith found her own work the subject
of a censorship debate. Her novel Strange Fruit
had been declared a "big best-seller" even before publication date,
Feb. 29. Within a month, March 20, it was labeled obscene and banned
by the Boston police. Two weeks later, with the advice of the
Massachusetts Civil Liberties Union and the cooperation of the novel's
publishers, Reynal and Hitchcock, Harper's
Magazine columnist Bernard de Voto initiated a test case of the
ban by purchasing a copy of the book from Abraham Isenstadt, owner of
University Law Book Exchange in Cambridge. Joseph Welch, later made
famous in U.S. Army v. McCarthy, defended Strange Fruit, but on April 26 District Court Judge
Arthur P. Stone found the novel "obscene, tending to corrupt the
morals of youth." A subsequent appeal did not overturn his decision,
and the novel remains, technically at least, banned in Boston.
          Efforts to ban the book in Detroit were successfully defeated by
combined efforts of the United Auto Workers and the Detroit Public
Library. The other successful banning of Strange
Fruit occurred in mid-May when the U.S. Post Office ordered
newspapers and magazines not to advertise the novel. The ban lasted
only three days, however, because publisher Curtice Hitchcock sought
and obtained the intervention of Eleanor Roosevelt.
          Because Lillian Smith sent a copy of the following statement with a
note to Curtice Hitchcock, it was preserved with her correspondence in
the files of her subsequent publishers, Harcourt, Brace, &
Jovonavich. It is reproduced here with the permission of the Lillian
Smith estate.
          From: Lillian Smith Clayton, Ga.  (May 26, 1944)
          Statement to Civil Liberties Union of Mass.  For Annual
Meeting
          There are many people who can not bear to face a truth that
hurts. There are some who have dosed doors so firmly on their own
emotional past that they go into a panic of fear when a book revives
old memories. There are others who, because of early childhood
training, have learned to look upon all frankness--however serious,
however necessary to mature understanding of human experience--as
something unclean and contaminating.
          These are our immature, emotionally undeveloped people; frozen on a
level of infantile experience, completely cut off from the possibility
of growth and change.
          Our culture, our values, our family experiences, the Puritanic
strains in our religion--all tend to produce such people in numbers
larger than we care to admit.
          These people fear a book like Strange Fruit
with a profound dread; and will seize on any pretext, however silly,
to keep others and themselves, from having access
to it.
          But there are many others who fear the effect of Strange Fruit on the racial status
quo; and, I think, within this group we shall find Boston's major
reason for banning the book. These people believe it is to their
political and economic advantage to keep the Negro and the Jew and
labor where they are today. They fear all change. They know when
racial segregation begins to weaken, that other forms of segregation
and exploitation will crumble with it. They fear the book because it
has the effect of stirring imagination and reawakening guilt
feelings.
          To these people, segregation in all its forms: racial, economic,
religious, psychological, must be maintained at however great a cost
to civil liberties and intellectual freedom.
          It is only by realizing that the charge of obscenity is a clumsy
attempt to destroy the book's power and prestige, 

that we, who believe
in civil rights, can defend these rights in terms of this book. One
can argue until doomsday about good taste without arriving at a just
and true decision. Good taste is innate kindness and sensitiveness,
tactfully genuflecting to contemporary taboos--a subtle and delicate
blend of social good-will and hypocrisy that is too delightfully
elusive to be caught and thumb-printed. For instance, what was good
taste in men's bathing suits twenty years ago would not be worn today,
for a fortune, by one of the Watch and Ward gentlemen. Although by
their own inexorable logic they should be compelled to wear such a
garment while they go about plucking strange fruit! Yet, however
elusive it is, good taste plays a necessary role in the rituals of
everyday life and social affairs and always will.
          But a book is not a social situation. A book is a serious
examination of life. Truth cannot be adjusted to this year's
drawing-room manners, as can our behavior at a tea party. It is
completely irrelevant, therefore, to attempt to use taste as a
criterion for artistic truth--just as it would be to offer it as a
valid reason for refusing to operate on a sick man. Truth, science and
human need have never conformed to Watch and Ward manners or to postal
regulations, and never will.
          To suggest anything else is so contrary to common sense and sanity
that one is compelled to brush such excuses aside and look for the
hidden reasons. Why is a serious book with one plain word in it being
fought across the country by post-office and watch and ward
socieities and police?
          The answer to this question will lead us to the roots of our
culture--roots we must be willing to look at closely. For there is
rising rapidly, now, to the surface of our American life, forces of
hate and fear end ruthlessness that do not often show themselves so
plainly. These evils in our culture have been here for a long
time. They are old seeds that are now bearing a strange and heavy crop
of trouble. We, in fighting for the right of this book to be read, are
not fighting a little battle over one small word but a war against a
way of life that threatens to destroy all that we value in human
goodness and freedom and intelligence.
        
        
          Un-American Censorship.
          Reviewed by Dunbar, LeslieLeslie Dunbar
          Vol. 12, No. 5, 1990, pp. 11, 13
          
          Advancing American Art by
Taylor D. Littleton and Maltby Sykes. Introduction by Leon
Litwack. (University of Alabama Press, 1989. 159 pages.).
          A Romare Bearden for $6.25 anyone? How about a Jacob Lawrence for
$13.93? Or a destined to be famous Ben Shahn for $60? A Georgia
O'Keefe for $50?
          Professor Littleton and Emeritus Professor Sykes of Auburn
University recount how their campus obtained a collection of
paintings, notable ones by artists of interest, for prices such as
those. The story, a generally forgotten one, is fascinating and also
an exemplary one, in these days of zealotry over the National
Endowment for the Arts and what to do about alleged "obscene" art. The
book is so unintentionally topical that I am puzzled by its neglect in
the national press.
          The short facts were these. In 1946 the State Department, in the
enthusiasm of those post-War days for spreading American influence and
values, decided to send art exhibits abroad. At a cost of $49,000 it
selected 79 oils. Some were to go to Europe, some to Latin
America. Perhaps unwisely they were first shown at the Metropolitan
Museum of Art in October 1946. Criticism commenced at once. It was to
increase, in the press-New York Journal-American,
Look Magazine, others-radio-Fulton Lewis Jr.-and
most impellingly, Congress. As the selection was mostly "modern" (but
not inclusive of then emerging "abstract expressionism"), more
conservative artists also were disparaging. The ruckus in Congress
proved too embarrassing to an administration with larger
concerns. President Truman called the paintings "merely the
vaporings of halfbaked lazy people"; his opinion had, however, not
been publicized before the time when Secretary of State George
Marshall recalled all the paintings in June 1947 (they were then being
shown in Prague and Port-au-Prince); a short time later he had them
declared "surplus property" and transferred to
the old War Assets Administration. The 79, plus 38 watercolors
separately purchased, were auctioned to tax-supported
institutions. Auburn got 36 of them (for $1,072). The University of
Oklahoma got another 36. (The University of Georgia bought ten, and
the remainder went to Texas A&M, Rutgers, and the University of
Washington.) The total purchase price, for oils and watercolors, was
$5,544.
          Should public money--tax payer's money--be used for art? The
complaint in 1946-47 was less that it had been than that it had been
for this art, which is the same as the complaint trumpeted
and neighed by North Carolina's Jesse Helms and allies, Republicans
and Democrats, in 1990. There is a difference between then and now, an
interesting one though I am not sure what it portends. The criticism
in the 1940s was that the selected paintings somehow demeaned the
United States, put it in a poor light, and were done by politically
suspect (i.e. leftist) artists; in 1990, obscenity is the enemy. Like
a lot of civic 

life, the direction is toward below the belt.
          Yesterday's liberals were much like today's. They retreated; those
who held office in government scampering away fast. The brouhaha was
soon forgotten. Likely as not, so will be the one now led by
Mr. Helms, when the 1990 Congressional races are over and done
with. These political campaigners against art, then as now, knew,
however, what they were about, which was--as now--providing red meat for
the American electorate.
          Liberals tend not so well to know what they are about. Littleton
and Sykes report little evidence that liberals of the 1940s defended
these pictures. They ought to have, I think, because some of them as
reproduced in this book are stunningly beautiful. I don't think the
same can be said for the works which have uncorked the current uproar,
but then what is it that has not deteriorated culturally in our,
present decade? Liberals even as they bring charges of censorship are
inclined today to leave the quality debate alone, 
as they concentrate on process. It is a losing 
tactic: substance wins every argument with process. The public, which 
is the final arbiter, wants art it can respect.
          What though. of process? Is a democratic government required, by
any political theory, to support art? Probably not. But if it decides
to do so, may it fittingly choose among artists and their works?
          It is an age-old issue. Plato wrote at length about it. Art he
thought to be fundamental to a good political order, but he would have
firmly controlled its forms and shaped their style. The modern
democratic tradition is otherwise, both in public respect for
art-which is reduced to an anarchy of taste-and government's right and
even duty to direct it. Respect art or not, American
governments-federal, state, local-inevitably involve themselves in
artistic decisions. The design of public buildings, the illustrations
in children's school books, the taxation of art collections, the
awarding of scholarships-these and like matters all pave the way for
more direct challenge, such as what art-the statues, the murals, the
anthems- governments may commission and what artists' careers it may
financially aid. Who will decide what is to be favored?
          One may well not like (I don't) his or her tax dollars being spent
on some of the forms of expression we have lately seen publicized. One
may think (I do) our art community and art critics irresponsible in
their aesthetic judgments. But if we are to have federal support of
art at all, the worst conceivable judge of what is good and worthy is
Congress.
          This incapacity of Congress is true not only for art. I am not sure
that the Constitution requires that there be publicly supported
education. Certainly it does not require federal support. But the
truth we have had to learn, sometimes painfully, is that though
legislative bodies are indispensable for deciding whether to do or not
to do, they are when they intrude in areas such as education and art
bumbling at best and malign at worst, and the worst is frequent. Advancing American Art tells well what havoc
Congressmen caused in 1946-47. We may see a repeat today. Littleton
and Sykes let us see too how the uproar over these paintings was an
overture for the Red scare which would seize the country and corrupt
our law, morals, and political values during the ensuing decade.
          In the late 1980s and early 1990s Congress has become a destructive
institution. By its own complicity in the wastage of national treasure
on arms and military might, neither it nor Presidents can seldom do
anything-can move-against problems that matter to people's
welfare. All they can readily do, as long as foreign governments will
lend or give us the money, is saber-rattling or saber-unsheathing
abroad and-here at home-the flailing at "social
issues": art censorship flag burning, "family
values," and-yes--drug criminalizing. We tear ourselves apart
over such issues, and it is Congress and Presidents who impel us to do
so. It is self-willed destruction of the capacity for
self-government. Issues-if one may call them that-like these are for
this generation of Congressmen and other politicians the functional
equivalent of "rigger" politics, of "waving the bloody shirt," of
antiCommunism for their predecessors. They are the kind of
"issues" that allow Congress to turn away from
the nation's real problems, or to mask the roles they themselves play
in service to financial interests.
          Littleton and Sykes have done a great service in reminding us of an
earlier bout of this democratic disease. They and Professor Litwack
(whose Introduction really should have been an Afterword, inasmuch as
it picks up the history where the book stops) place the 1946-47
episode within the context of the harsh nativism that is always
present in American democracy and the anti-Communism that was emerging
and which in the soon-to-be years of Richard Nixon and Joseph McCarthy
and J. Edgar Hoover would form an evil era of American history.
          It did, however, have at least two good outcomes. "All of the
furore seemed hardly to have affected the careers of the exhibit's
artists unless they were enhanced by it." That was one. A second
was and is that Auburn University obtained a collection of fine
paintings, worth one's making a trip to Auburn. 
        
        
          Restarting Savannah River?
          By Connor, TimTim Connor
          Vol. 12, No. 5, 1990, pp. 6-7
          
          The Department of Energy (DOE) plans to resume operations in the
coming weeks at its three aging production reactors near the
Georgia-South Carolina border. Brushing aside questions about the need
for the nuclear weapons materials, which the facilities produce, the
Department continues to downplay the environmental risks associated
with the reactors' restart.
          The planned restart comes in the aftermath of a report in which the
Energy Department concedes, for the first time, that people living
near another major nuclear weapons plant at Hanford, Wash. were
exposed to dangerous levels of radioactivity.
          In its recent report on Hanford, DOE acknowledges that the releases
of radioactive iodine posed the greatest health threat. Scientists
know radioactive iodine concentrates in the thyroid gland, causing
thyroid cancer and other diseases. Milk from cows grazing on
contaminated grass is the major source for radioactive iodine exposure
to humans. As the Hanford study indicates, infants and children--in
whose smaller thyroids the radioactivity is most densely
concentrated--are most vulnerable.
          
            Savannah River Deserves Scrutiny
          
          The news from Hanford should be of special interest to Georgians
and South Carolinians. The revelations at Hanford came about only
after years of efforts by citizen groups and journalists to force DOL
to release hundreds of environmental records that had been classified
for over 30 years. While it's not yet clear whether Savannah River's
closets contain the same skeletons, one thing is dear. We should be
demanding a thorough, independent study of the history of radiation
releases from Savannah River before nuclear materials production
resumes at the plant.
          Until now DOE, following in the footsteps of its predecessor--the
Atomic Energy Commission--has invoked national security to thwart
outside scrutiny of the environmental consequences of its
operations. And since its inception, the agency charged with producing
nuclear weapons has also exercised extraordinary control over the
study of radiation and its effects on human health.
          There is a growing consensus among scientists that low level
radiation causes more harm than previously thought. And we know that
people living downwind and downstream of weapons production and
testing sites like the Savannah River Site (SRS) have been exposed to
more radioactive materials than generally realized.
          
            Tritium Poses Threat at Savannah River
          
          Although the available records indicate smaller releases of
radioactive iodine from Savannah River than from Hanford, a closer
look is certainly needed. Among other things, current reports indicate
that releases of iodine-129--which remains in the environment for
millions of years--is a significant contributor to off-site
radiation.
          The highest releases from SRS are of tritium, a radioactive form of
hydrogen. Tritium may be the most invasive of all radioactive
substances, capable of entering the body by both inhalation and
absorption through the skin.
          As a production center for tritium, the facility has released
hundreds of times more tritium than other nuclear plants--including
Hanford.
          Dr. Karl Z. Morgan, who for 20 years chaired the International
Commission on Radiological Protection committee charged with setting
limits for internal radiation exposure, notes that the current
standards understate tritium's toxicity by as much as five times.
          Tritium levels in drinking water downstream from the Savannah River
plant are seven to 25 times higher than that measured in other water
supplies. Federal monitoring reports show high levels of tritium in
rainfall well beyond the Savannah River plant boundary, with Columbia,
S.C. having twice the average concentration of other southeastern
cities. Surface water samples from South Carolina's Edisto River
suggest that tritium from the plant has contaminated that watershed as
well.
          
            Low-Level Radiation: New Studies, New Fears
          
          Tests that have been performed suggest the risk from radioactive
gases is much greater than generally thought. Former Savannah River
plant waste manager Bill Lawless stated that a 1982 test of
atmospheric dispersion failed to match the predictions of computer
models. The radioactive cloud, instead of breaking up near the site,
was still intact as it floated over Fayetteville, N.C.--200 miles
away.
          Studies also indicate high concentrations of other radioactive
elements dose to the SRS. Milk samples from nearby farms in Georgia
and South Carolina regularly contain radioactive strontium-20 at
levels nearly double the national and regional average. Largemouth
bass caught in the Savannah River near the plant contain
concentrations 

of radioactive cesium-137 at levels many times that
measured in bass from other river systems.
          The accumulating evidence on low-level radiation continues to
demolish previous, official assurances of safety. The more we learn,
the more obvious it becomes that past practices and rhetoric were
misguided and dangerous. Recently, Britain's Radiological Protection
Board has dramatically reduced the acceptable radiation exposure
levels for workers in the U.K.
          The lesson of Hanford ought to be dear to those living in the
shadows of other nuclear weapons plants around the country. Especially
at facilities like the SRS, where DOE plans to continue producing
nuclear materials for years to come, an earnest effort involving
citizen participation and independent oversight to examine past and
present releases should be completed prior to making any decision on
restart.
          For more information about the Savannah River Plant and what you
can do, contact Ellen Spears at (404) 584-9902 or Jan Somers at (404)
491-8064.
          
            Tim Connor is an analyst for the Energy Research
Foundation, a non-profit research and educational organization. He
lives in Augusta, Ga.
          
        
        
          The Two Faces of Southern Populism
          By Carter, Dan T.Dan T. Carter
          Vol. 12, No. 5, 1990, pp. 1-3
          
          With the strong showing of David Duke, the racism of the Jesse
Helms and Guy Hunt campaigns and the nation's general mood of
political dyspepsia, George Wallace's "populist" crusade of the 1960s
and 1970s is back in the news. The resurgence of cruder forms of
race-baiting, not to mention the more generic cry of "throw the bums
out"--we are reminded--is not without precedent in our recent past.
          Racism there is. Guy Hunt's campaign in Alabama was a relatively
soft-core version of the politics of race; David Duke and Jesse Helms
practiced the old-time religion: "Nigger! Nigger! Nigger!"
          Helms has been crawling out of these sewers since 1950 when he
joined Willis Smith's race-baiting/red-baiting campaign against North
Carolina's Frank Porter Graham. With his appeals to hatred against
homosexuals and blacks, his last campaign is a depressing reminder of
his powerful mastery of the witchcraft of scapegoating.
          In the long run, however, demagogues like David Duke may be even
more dangerous than Helms. For Duke has understood that he is
operating in an increasingly subliterate world of television in which
each new day begins afresh, without past, without future. Thus he can
nonchalantly dismiss his past history as a neo-Nazi/Klansman,
concentrating instead on having his face made over by a first-rate
plastic surgeon. As the nation's political culture descends past Oprah
Winfrey 

and Phil Donahue through Newt Gingrich's lexicon of campaign
slogans and downward toward the level of plants and minerals, appeals
to glandular reflexes ("quotas," "parasitic underclass," "tax and
speed") are infinitely more accessible then complex discussions of
budget deficits, income maldistribution or economic exploitation.
          And all three men are the beneficiary of a Republican Party's
quarter-century flirtation with soft-core racism. George Bush may try
to hang a leper's bell on Duke, but it is difficult to take him
seriously when he trucks off to North Carolina to embrace Helms, whose
campaign has been as squalid as anything David Duke could have
imagined. Barry Goldwater's opposition to the Civil Rights Act of
1964; Richard Nixon's Southern Strategy; Ronald Reagan's amiable
harangues against [black] welfare queens; George Bush's Willie Horton
commercials and his politically inspired veto of the Civil Rights Act
of 1990; and now the campaigns of Hunt, Duke and Helms; it's not a
pretty sight.
          But I am not at all certain that Duke or Helms or Hunt can be
explained as reincarnations of George Wallace; nor do I believe they
are the authentic voices of a resurgent wave of working class
racism.
          After Wallace became the high priest of racial segregation in the
early 1960s he brought to his state a level of rhetorical
vindictiveness that left wounds still unhealed. And in his
presidential campaigns through the 1960s and 1970s Wallace gave voice
to some of the darkest fears and hatreds in American society.
          What is easy to forget, however, is that George Wallace began his
career in 1946 as a down home social democrat with little enthusiasm
for the race-baiting that often marked Southern political
campaigns. And when the number of black voters in his state passed the
300,000 mark in the early 1970s, the Alabama governor reversed
directions and welcomed black voters and politicians into the Wallace
tent. Political opportunism is not an edifying spectacle; when
compared with the unwavering racism of David Duke it has its
charms.
          George Wallace's convoluted career should remind us that there are
other, more humane populist traditions which come out of the Southern
experience. Wallace himself learned his lessons from an altogether
different kind of Populist, James E. ("Big Jim") Folsom.
          Through two terms as governor and forty years of campaigning,
Folsom resumed again and again to four texts: the Declaration of
Independence, the Bill of Rights, the Gettysburg Address, and--most of
all--Jesus's 

Sermon the Mount. And from these familiar texts he evolved
his political catechism:
          That governmental laissez-faire inevitably allowed the powerful
to prey upon the weak; that adequate welfare programs were the
"fundamental obligation of a democracy to its people in order that the
unfortunate may feast on more than crumbs and clothe themselves with
more than rags;" that women were not chattel, but citizens who should
be given the same rights as men; that the black citizens of Alabama
were entitled to equal justice, equal opportunity and a "full share of
democracy;" that there were no problems which could not be cured by a
"good strong purgative of pure and unadulterated democracy."
          In the end Folsom's personal failings (too much whiskey, too many
women, too few honest friends) were as conspicuous as his six foot,
eight inch frame and his size sixteen shoes. His challenge to Wallace
collapsed in the 1962 governor's race when Folsom appeared on
statewide television, too drunk to recognize his own children. When he
ran for governor against Wallace in 1974, he got less than five
percent of the vote.
          The racists he had fought, the "Big Mule" industrialists and the
old reactionary planter class of the Black Belt seemed to have the
final word.
          And now as the economy falters and the bills for the Reagan
fantasies come due, those voices are returning to join the David
Dukes. The "liberal politics of victimization are over," we are
told. Now black Americans can once more take their historical place as
the scapegoats of a troubled society.
          Folsom had seen it all before. The Ku-Kluxers, the race-baiters,
and "some of the selfish interest groups" would always be present, he
warned in 1949, "spreading their filth, their lies, their old and
ancient hatreds ... trying to boil up hatred by the poor white people
against the Negroes ... trying to keep the poor white from progressing
by keeping the Negro tied in shackles."
          Still I take heart from the only conversation I ever had with James
Folsom. He was nearly blind and occasionally confused as we sat and
talked in a truckstop diner outside Cullman, Ala. But he retained an
almost child-like faith in the decency and ultimate judgment of the
same voters who had rejected him. The working people of this country-
"the farmer, the factory worker, the mill hand, the school
teacher"-would eventually see through this "blasphemous smoke screen"
of racial hatred, he had predicted. And they would understand that the
promise of this nation lay in the challenge of guaranteeing equal
justice, equal opportunity and equal freedom for every man, woman and
child."
          That's a far cry from the "populism" of Jesse Helms or David
Duke.
          
            Dan T. Carter is Andrew W. Mellon
Professor of History at Emory University. He is writing a biography of
George Wallace.
          
        
      
    
  