
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 12, Number 1,
	       1990
        
          Five Decades of Activism
          By Sullivan, PatriciaPatricia Sullivan
          Vol. 12, No. 1, 1990, pp. 5-9
          
          "THE SOUTHERN MOVEMENT provided a permanent flame from which the
rest of the nation could draw inspiration, light and heat. You were
always there burning, percolating, in the dark sometimes, but going
ahead, holding aloft even the smallest candle which ultimately became
the blazing light leading...to freedom," Ossie Davis proclaimed to
several hundred people gathered at the New Pilgrim Church in
Birmingham early in December. They had come to celebrate the 51st
anniversary of the founding of the Southern Conference for Human
Welfare (SCHW), and the five decades of activism joined with SCHW by
the Southern Conference Education Fund (SCEF) and the Southern
Organizing Committee (SOC).
          Rev. Fred Shuttlesworth, Anne Braden, Modjeska Simkins, Virginia
Durr, Rev. Ben Chavis, Hollis Watkins, Bob Zellner, and Pete Seeger
were among the anniversary participants--a collective testimony to the
rich legacy of the Southern movement for racial and economic
justice. In his welcoming address, Birmingham Mayor Richard Arrington
highlighted a theme of the meeting. As we look back fifty years, and
we look ahead, he said, we learn that "in the freedom struggle
there is no ending which is not a beginning." The weekend provided
a special opportunity to talk about the kinds of changes that have
been set in motion over the past half century, and celebrate the
victories, "even as we look at the walls that are still in front of
us."
          WHEN THE SOUTHERN Conference for Human Welfare was founded in 1938,
it was "one of the most exaggerated expressions of change in the
South," remembered one of its early members. The Depression and
the New Deal had shaken people from decades of political apathy and
complacency. "A lot of folks were standing up...and talking and
expecting things they had never expected before." More than twelve
hundred Southerners met in the Municipal Auditorium in Birmingham over
Thanksgiving weekend in 1938 to organize mass political support for
New Deal economic reforms. Race became the issue when Police
Commissioner Bull Connor enforced segregation upon the integrated
gathering. In a symbolic act of defiance, First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt
placed her chair in the center aisle of the racially divided
auditorium. SCHW organizers vowed that all future meetings would be
integrated. Southern moderates quickly withdrew and labeled the new
organization subversive.
          The SCHW did challenge the structure of Southern society, a society
based on disfranchisement laws and legalized white supremacy. From the
beginning, SCHW organizers believed that economic and political
democracy were essential to remedying "the nation's number one
economic problem." In the opening round of the voting rights
struggle in Congress, Virginia Durr and Joseph Gelders engineered the
introduction of anti-poll tax legislation and organized a broad
coalition of national support. Building on the expectations and
political interests stirred by the New Deal and the war against
fascism, SCHW organizers joined with the NAACP, the Southern Negro
Youth Congress (SNYC), the CIO and community groups throughout the
South in a region wide voter registration effort. After the Supreme
Court outlawed the all-white primary in 1944, the number of registered
black voters in the South increased dramatically. The Talmadges,
Bilbos, Eastlands, and Byrnes led a growing resistance, but a
sustained movement for social and political justice had taken hold in
the South.
          In 1948 Clark Foreman, a founder and Executive Director of the
SCHW, referred to the organization's first ten years as "The Decade
of Hope." The McCarthy era followed; the Southern conservative
attack on the Southern Conference movement was reinforced by the
redbait-

ing politics of the Cold War. Born in the promise and activism
of the New Deal era, the SCHW would not adapt to the conformist and
exclusionary policies legitimized by President Truman's "loyalty"
program. Its activities culminated with Henry Wallace's Progressive
Party campaign in 1948. Under the direction of SNYC's Louis Burnham
and Palmer Weber of the SCHW, the Wallace campaign in the South
expanded the campaign for political and economic democracy. Black and
white candidates ran for office on the Progressive Party ticket, and
Henry Wallace became the first presidential candidate to refuse to
address segregated audiences in the region. The Wallace campaign
demonstrated, however, that the fragile political coalition organized
by the SCHW in the South could not survive an aggressive national Cold
War consensus, and the organization quietly disbanded at the end of
1948.
          BUT THE SOUTHERN Conference Education Fund (SCEF), established as
the educational branch of the SCHW in 1946, continued. Under the
leadership of Jim 

Dombrowski, SCEF concentrated on ridding the South
of segregation as the essential first step in moving towards the
economic and political goals advanced by the SCHW. SCEF aimed to build
interracial support for desegregation, and made a special effort to
engage whites in the struggle. Its small staff endured constant
threats, attacks and investigations as it worked steadily through the
1950s, helping to support indigenous civil rights efforts throughout
the South. When Carl and Anne Braden learned that economic pressures
were about to force leading black activist Amzie Moore out of
Mississippi in the late 1950s, Dombrowski raised the money to secure
Moore's financial independence so that he could remain in Cleveland,
Mississippi. In 1960, SNCC Field Secretary Bob Moses met Moore on his
first foray into Mississippi; Moore became a crucial link between the
student movement of the 1960s and a small but seasoned generation of
Mississippi activists.
          Jack O'Dell observed that Southern Conference activists had to
"work our way around the Cold War and find 

our way back through
Montgomery and the civil rights movement." During the 1960s,
SCEF's history merged with the mass movement that broke through the
political lethargy of the 1950s and finally succeeded in ridding the
South of legalized segregation and disenfranchisement. In remembering
these hard-won victories of the civil rights movement, however, the
history has often been distorted, and the "movement" left
motionless. The Southern Conference anniversary pointed to the deep
roots of movement history and bore witness to the fact that the
struggle continues. Nostalgia was noticeably absent from this
celebration. While there were several veterans of the early SCHW years
in attendance, they seemed impatient to act on with it.
          IN A BRIEF TRIBUTE to the enormous changes of the last half
century, ninety year-old Modjeska Simkins remembered the concentrated
atmosphere of terror and violence that permeated Bull Connor's
Birmingham, a city where the Klan worked openly with the Police
Commissioner. Whenever she was in Birmingham, the South Carolina
activist recalled, she was always watching "out of the tail of my
eye, not knowing whether some of those renegades would attack me."
Bull Connor is long gone, and Birmingham has a black mayor who
presides over a progressive city government. But Mrs. Simkins observed
that many gains secured in the past fifty years have been rolled
back. "We've been knocked back down the hill by a do-nothing
president," she said, "and it looks like we're going to have
four or eight more years of 'almost do nothin'. 'We got to fight all
the way back up the hill."
          Stetson Kennedy explained that many regional problems addressed by
SCHW have become national in scope. He cited homelessness and
widespread hunger, perhaps more prevalent now than during the
1930s. Absentee ownership used to mean Wall Street; now we think of
Tokyo. "Mr. Charlie is gone with the wind, but Mr. Yakamoto is on the
way and we don't know where he stands except that he's anti-
union."
          Legalized segregation has been outlawed; now we have "desegregated
racism." "Back then, it used to be the Attorney General of Alabama
or Mississippi or perhaps the Magistrate of Florida up before the
Supreme Court arguing in favor of in justice and discrimination; but
now it's the Attorney General of the United States of America."
Much blood was shed and many lives lost on the road to free elections
and voting rights. But, Kennedy asked, how "free" are elections today?
Politics has become a state-of-the-art industry, run by the media and
highly paid consultants, who manipulate symbols in a way that often
results in "the American people voting over and over against
themselves." The notorious Southern demagogues of the past have
been replaced by a more sophisticated, polished variety saying "read
my lips."
          Community activists joined historians and students in workshops
during the second day of the meeting. Individual discussion groups on
the economy, labor, women, culture, education, and militarism worked
to define current issues within a fuller historical context, and build
a common agenda for action in the 1990s.
          IN THE "ECONOMY of the South" workshop, John Gaventa, of Highlander
Center, sketched the cycles of economic development over the past
fifty years. Gaventa explained that the ambitious War on Poverty of
the 1960s and the well-publicized industrial transformation of the
"Sun-Belt" in the 1970s have run their course; yet steady economic
growth and development has bypassed most of the region. The shift from
an industrial to a service and financial based economy has proved
elusive the gains of the sixties and seventies. Twelve million workers
lost their jobs to plant closings in the first half of the 1980s; even
more in the latter part of the decade. Companies lured South by the
promise of cheap labor, resources, and tax concessions have moved on
to exploit even better "deals" in other parts of the world. When
U.S. Steel left Gary, W. Va., a town the company built, they took the
street lights with them. During the 1980s, virtually no new jobs were
created in rural communities; 60 percent of urban jobs are poverty
level and offer no mobility. Job growth areas are affluent, white, and
offer the best education systems.
          WHILE THERE HAVE been dramatic changes in the South's economic
landscape during the last half century, they have been guided by the
state's promotion of a "business climate" which allows for the
mobility and unaccountability of capital. Barbara Taylor, Bob Hall,
and Pat Bryant described the enormous price exacted from the region's
resources, workers, and environment. Job-related injuries, illnesses
and deaths have increased in the last twenty years. The South has
become a dumping ground for hazardous wastes; the most significant
variable in determining the location of chemical dumping grounds is
race, noted Louisiana activist Pat Bryant, a factor that has not been
addressed by the environmental movement. The vaginal cancer rate for
African-American women in St. John the Baptist Parish is thirty times
the national average; the lung cancer rate for African- American men
in New Orleans is the highest in the world.
          There was much discussion and disagreement about the complex array
of problems raised by the panelists. But there seemed to be general
agreement that politics is the only way out. Now that all Southerners
finally have the 

vote, it is possible to work towards the goal of
economic democracy which guided the founding of SCHW a half century
ago. Economic development, participants agreed, needs to be considered
within the broad context of issues addressed in the other
workshops.
          In discussing the role of women in the South's progressive
movement, panelists outlined a history of interrelationship of race,
class, and gender, and suggested a broad context for the women's
movement in the 1990s. Jewell Handy Gresham told how the abolitionist
movement gave birth to the modern women's rights movement. As a
national woman's movement developed, a tension developed and has
persisted between those who would focus on white, middle class goals,
and those who view the women's rights movement as an integral part of
the larger struggle for human rights. Georgia State Representative Nan
Orrock insisted that the issue of reproductive rights must be
understood as more than the issue of abortion rights, and, indeed,
provides an opportunity for broadening the focus of the women's
movement. The crisis in health care, the issue of child care, and the
failure of the public education system should be part and parcel of
the reproductive rights movement. Orrock urged the organized women's
movement to make a more conscious effort to incorporate working-class
women and women of color into positions of leadership, and at the same
time warned progressive activists that to dismiss the women's movement
as an exclusively white middle class phenomenon.
          WHILE LOOKING towards the future, participants sought to recover a
history that would illuminate the larger contours of the struggle for
racial, economic and political justice. The workshop on racism
identified historical amnesia as a major contributing factor to the
nature and persistence of racism in America. Judge Margaret Burnham
told about the Southern Negro Youth Congress (SNYC), a pioneering
organization of African-American youth whose history paralleled the
Southern Conference for Human Welfare. From 1937 until 1948, SNYC
activists participated in organizing workers and registering voters
throughout the South, helping to build the progressive coalition of
voters that showed such promise in the immediate postwar years. SNYC
enjoyed the support of prominent African-American leaders, fraternal
organizations and churches. By the late forties, however, SNYC was
isolated and ultimately destroyed by redbaiting, and since then its
history has been largely neglected and forgotten. Yet that history
tells about the power of effective organizing before the FAX machine
and foundation grants, when chicken dinners were a major source of
fund raising. And it tells about the essential role young people have
played as organizers and leaders in the freedom struggle. The
importance of reaching out to youth, and encouraging them towards
their unique and vital potential was a central concern throughout the
two day meeting, eloquently addressed by Brenda Davenport,
Rev. Chavis, Representative Mabel Thomas, and others.
          THE FINAL PROGRAM began with a candle-lighting ceremony honoring
the heroes and heroines of the Southern movement. Ossie Davis and the
Children of Selma paid tribute to  Hosea Hudson, Joe Gelders, Mary
Mcleod Bethune, Clark Foreman, Aubrey Williams, Modjeska Simkins, Ella
Baker, Myles Horton, Palmer Weber, Lou Burnham, Virginia and Clifford
Durr, James Dombrowski, Fred and Ruby Shuttlesworth, Anne and Carl
Braden, and, joined by participants, named countless others who have
led the South, and the nation, forward. Pete Seeger called the name of
Fannie Lou Hamer. Virginia Durr remembered Hugo Black. Other voices
named Paul Robeson, E. D. Nixon, Septima Clark, and many
more. "With the help of God and struggle and leadership and song
and living and burying and marching and singing we have come a long
way toward helping this country define what its Constitution outlined
way back in 1787," celebrated Ossie Davis.
          And the struggle continues, was the refrain. The unfinished agenda
of the freedom movement has been redefined by the challenges and
possibilities of the late twentieth century. What does equality mean
in a society where adequate education, health care, and housing is
beyond the reach of growing numbers? How, asked Ossie Davis, do we
effectively challenge the divine right of greed, which reigns in
America? The answer, suggested Rev. Ben Chavis, lies in the
fundamental changes released by the unravelling of the Cold War and
the dramatic gains made by democracy movements in other parts of the
world. Shaped by the tradition and promise of democracy, the Southern
Organizing Committee for Racial and Economic Justice and countless
other groups and activists are building a strong link into an
uncertain future. But the times, noted Jack O'Dell, make us mindful of
Martin Luther King's admonition that "the arc of the universe is
long and it bends towards justice."
          
            Patricia Sullivan is the assistant director of the Center
for the Study of Civil Rights at the Carter G. Woodson Institute for
Afro-American and African Studies, Charlottesville, Va.
          
        
        
          Slapping Together a Coalition. . . To Win Below the
Mason-Dixon
          By StaffStaff
          Vol. 12, No. 1, 1990, pp. 6-7
          
          Virginia Durr: There's no sense trying to reform capitalism,
because it can't be reformed any more than slavery could be
reformed. It's a very bad system. You've got to realize that you have
lost the power of your government. You do not own your government. It
is owned by the people who have the money. And they pay the money
because they have to get on television or else they can't get
elected.
          Now, you can complain, and you can talk about waste and you can
talk about the Russians and you can talk about the Germans, but you
can't do much unless you have the power of your government. Now, it's
a democratic country, you've got the vote, you can control your
representatives if you work at it. You have to work at it day and
night. You have to form government clubs, voters clubs, you have to
watch them, you have to write letters to them, you have to see what
kind of devilment they're up to, you have to see who's slipping them
money. To sit here and complain is just a pure waste of time.
          We have a congressman [from Montgomery] who is paid by the military
contractors. And we know how much he's paid. Now he gets on the TV
every fifteen minutes; he gets elected every time because he's got the
money. Now here we sit, black and white, and we might as well be
talking about the moon as be talking about the President of the United
States. And all I can say is I'm too old to do it. I'm eighty-six
years old. Now, I did help to get the poll tax removed, and I did
really a good job. And I sure did help to get segregation removed, and
I think I did a damned good job there because I helped Mrs. Parks. On
the other hand, I do not know how to solve the economic
situation. That is left up to you. And I'm not gonna say you men
anymore; fifty years ago I would have said you men. You people have
got to do it. And it's just a waste of time to talk about the chemical
flowing down the Mississippi River. You have to control the government
that controls the corporations. Unless you do that you're just wasting
your time, and mine too. What possible solution have we been offered
here, not any.
          Rev. Andrew Turnipseed: I'll offer one.
          Mrs. Durr: Pray?
          Rev. Turnipseed: Well, no, I'll go beyond prayer.
          Mrs. Durr: Thank God.
          Rev. Turnipseed: We're all talking about politics...my name is
Turnipseed, just like it sounds, TU-R-N-I-P-S double E-D
          Mrs. Durr: He got thrown out of the church in Montgomery because he
let a black soldier in [during WWII]. So he gave up his life, his
church...
          Rev. Turnipseed: You're sweet to tell that. I'm seventy-eight years
old. I never was too quick, and I'm less quick now. I think if you are
going to get into politics, and that is the only place you can
go...the only power in the world that can deal with the corporations
would be a peoples' government. Now, how you gonna do that. Politics
as I understand it is a matter of coalitions. I know that word is
overworked; you give me a better one, I'll use it. It would be better
if we had a comprehensive program. What are those? Well, first of all
there's the black vote and, thank God, that has come to us
lately. That's the basis of a coalition. But unfortunately the blacks
are not in a majority in the South. I wish they were. The whites are
in the majority in the South. We've got to have a pool of white people
who will collaborate with the black vote and have a composite
vote. Now, where we gonna get those white people? We don't have to
have a majority of the white people.
          Now, I will digress to say that in the last four years we have
elected a senator in Maryland, and a governor in Virginia just the
other day, and a senator in North Carolina, a senator in Georgia, a
senator in Florida, a senator in 

Alabama, and got one coming up here
next year, and in Louisiana. I count five major offices. How did we do
it? I say we because I played around with it in Alabama. We had a
black vote that was 100 per cent. We had to pick up about 45 percent
of the white vote to slap together with that black vote, and you put
'em in. And how did we do it? First of all, there's the labor
movement. I know it's bow-legged and tired and run so far it needs to
rest, but time to reassert itself. We need the labor movement.
          Right here in Birmingham. The industries are gone, and you [John
Gaventa] very brilliantly showed us why they left. All the heavy
industries have gone abroad. We're left with a service economy, and
I'm not an economist, just a country preacher. But I know the steel
mills are closed. I graduated from Birmingham-Southern College in
1933, and that was in the depths of the Depression, and this town was
dirty black because of the smoke coming from the operating industries
then, the furnaces, then. They can come back. People do need
steel. And you made that point very brilliantly how at one of those
three stages they came here because we had the resources. In spite of
all of the rape against the soil and our natural resources, we still
have them....Now back to where I was on the coalitions. I said we need
the labor movement. Some of you people here have had experience with
the labor movement. . .
          Mrs. Durr: and the women's movement
          Rev. Turnipseed: All right, I'm gettin' to that. Just hold on. And
second of all...I've got to stand up. I preach better when I stand
up...we need a block of school teachers, public school teachers. The
public school system is absolutely being shot through with a
propaganda that we've simply got to eliminate. And those school
teachers, I don't care what their husbands might do to make a living,
these school teachers, most of them are women, and that's my next
point, but before I get there. You've got a school apparatus
here. Most of the folks who are against us have gone off to private
schools and they call them Christian schools--God forgive me for using
that cuss word--all right, they've gone to private schools. I live in
a little country town, a village, called Remar. A lot of folks in
Birmingham have never heard of Remar, and a lot of folks in Remar have
never heard of Birmingham. Anyway, that's where I live. And my people
in the church where I am, and I'm retired...but they're too good to go
to public schools. And we have a public school there that goes back to
the experimental days when we first had consolidated schools. And they
won't go because we live in the Black Belt and 90 percent of the
students in those schools are black. And so my people pull up and go
down the road five miles and have a private Christian school. Now
then, those people are not gonna go with us ever.
          But there are millions of white people below the Mason and Dixon
line who are white and have the same interests as your constituency
has [Louisiana State Rep. Avery Alexander]. I understand you're in the
legislature. They have the same interests. I know. I've lived here for
three hundred years, and I'm just gettin' started. We've got to do
this. And now, back to the ladies, that's the third element of this
coalition . . .
          Voice from the audience: the "women"
          Rev. Turnipseed: Well, women. Whatever they are, they're my people
and yours too. By the way everybody here had a mother. All
right. There is discrimination. And everybody knows which party loves
to discriminate against the ladies, or the women, or the females--I
won't go into that. Scared to. I think everybody here knows what I'm
talking about. If a woman does the same work as a man, and a man does
the same work as a woman, is it right to pay one one level of pay and
the other another? Is exploitation right wherever it's practiced? Of
course not.
          Well, I've already listed three levels of supply for this white
coalition. Then, too, there are a few left, never have been too
many--well, I hate to use the word intellectuals. I don't know what
that is exactly. But add those harum-scarum intellectuals, put them
with those other three elements, add them to the black base, and we
can win any election we want to below the Mason-Dixon line.
          
            Edited comments of Virginia Durr and Rev. Andrew
Turnipseed at a workshop on the Economy of the South; Southern
Conference 51st anniversary, Birmingham, Dec. 2, 1989; sponsored by
the Southern Organizing Committee.
          
        
        
          An Imperfect Assessment of Movement Flank Actions.
          Reviewed by Morgan, Mary NellMary Nell Morgan
          Vol. 12, No. 1, 1990, pp. 12-13
          
          Black
Radicals and the Civil Rights Mainstream, 1954 1970 By Herbert
H. Haines (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press. 1988. 244
pps. $24.95).
          Herbert Haines's analysis in Black Radicals and the
Civil Rights Mainstream challenges the popular notion that
so-called radical blacks did more to harm than to help the civil
rights movement during the activism of the late I950s and throughout
the 1960s. Haines examines external financial support, which he calls
"exogenous income," to test his thesis. The various sources of
"exogenous income" are individuals, churches, labor unions,
foundations, corporations, miscellaneous organizations (such as social
and fraternal groups), and the government.
          Using the concept of "radical flank effects," which he defines as
the helpful or harmful consequence for moderates of radicals' actions,
he argues that an increase in external financial support indicates
helpful effects, while the converse indicates harmful effects.
          "Radicalism" is a relative term. It is important to understand
this, Haines insists, if one is to understand social movements by
suppressed people. Any suggestion to change is likely to be considered
radical. Indeed, the mainstream civil rights organizations of the
1960s--especially the National Association for the Advancement of
Colored People (NAACP)--were once considered radical Haines argues,
and this is the crux of his thesis, that it is precisely the emergence
of radical alternatives which motivated white support of, rather than
white backlash against, the so-called black moderates once themselves
called radical.
          Using seven civil rights organizations to form a continuum, moving
from left to right, moderate to radical, beginning with the National
Urban League and ending with the most radical, the Student Non-Violent
Coordinating Committee--with the National Association of Colored
People, the Legal Defense and Educational Fund, the Southern Regional
Council, the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, and the
Congress of Racial Equality in between in that order--Haines presents
funding information for the years from 1952 to 1970. There are,
however, numerous gaps in the income information and several areas of
concern which, Haines admits, make his argument imperfect.
          Fully 46 percent of the exogenous income is either estimated or
missing: three pages of footnotes, in small print, are offered to
explain this! Despite this data deficit, Haines proceeds with his
argument. Observing that from 1957 there was a general increase in the
exogenous income of the moderate groups, a "dramatic increase in
the level of exogenous income for the movement as a whole during the
1960s," and a general decrease after 1965 for the more radical
SNCC and CORF, Haines concludes that the radicals benefitted the
treasuries of the moderates.
          I focus on the financial question because it is, by far, the
dominant theme in Haines's argument. To a lesser extent, he looks at
legislation enacted in response to actual and threatened violence by
radical groups like the Black Muslims and the Black Panthers as a way
the radicals benefitted the moderates. "The most important pieces
of legislation. affecting the rights of black Americans--the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, the Economic Opportunity Act, the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965--were all
enacted in the midst of an unprecedented racial crisis which seemed to
reflect a widespread rejection by blacks of gradualist, legalistic
means." Since these laws were responses to old NAACP and NUL
demands, such as integrated schools and protected black franchise,
they are considered positive radical flank effects; an indication that
when given the option between radical and moderate demands, government
officials chose the later.
          Another area of my concern is the question of how the continuum of
organizations was selected. It is not clear how Haines decided which
organizations to include. Very early in the introduction Haines states
that the book's focus is on "...black protest in both its civil
rights and nationalistic forms..." As already noted, Haines refers
to the Black Muslims and the Black Panthers as groups whose growing
appeal to blacks and whose direct action approaches--which included
abandoning nonviolence as a philosophy--led to greater acceptance of
the moderate alternative. Yet these organizations are not included
among those for which he analyzes income. Given the apparent
difficulty encountered in acquiring income information for most of the
organizations studied, perhaps the absence of any reliable data of
this kind for these groups led 

to their omission.
          As a final concern, I register a complaint which I no longer regard
as minor. It is particularly pertinent, because it is of an error
which crops up over and over again. I refer to the account of the
circumstances which led to Mrs. Rosa Parks's arrest. Haines states
what has become usual: Mrs. Parks refused to go to the back of the bus
as required by law and upon refusal was arrested. The more accurate
account is that Mrs. Parks was occupying a seat in the first row
designated for "colored." When all of the seats in the "white" section
were taken, it was customary in Montgomery for the bus driver to force
blacks out of their seats, beginning with the first row of seats for
"coloreds." This practice was guided by the principle that no white
person should stand while a "colored" was seated. Mrs. Parks was told
to give her seat to a white male. She refused, saying she was tired
from her day's toil. Upon refusing she turned her head and looked out
the window, ignoring the threats of arrest. She was arrested and the
Montgomery Bus Boycott followed.
          The version of the incident given by Haines--and even the
Rev. Jesse Jackson recently gave a similar account on the television
program A Different World--proliferates. Indeed,
it seems to be emerging as a modern myth. Several of my students have
told me that the only version of the Rosa Parks incident they had
heard was that given in Haines's book and "confirmed" by Jackson. In
fact, I have been presented with the argument that the inaccurate
version is better because it gives a more dynamic posture to
Mrs. Parks and the occasion which is widely accepted as the moment
which sparked the activism of the modern civil rights movement. This
is similar to saying that if one says that Columbus discovered America
in 1492 that is not falsifying history, because indeed he did discover
the Americas for Europe.
          Despite the problems noted above, this book is worth reading. I
especially recommend it to persons interested in the funding sources
of the civil rights movement.
          
            Mary Nell Morgan, is associate professor of political
science at Xavier University of Louisiana, currently on leave to serve
as visiting associate professor of American Studies at Skidmore
College in Saratoga Springs New Fork. Early in her career, in the
mid-1970s, Dr. Morgan was a research assistant at the Southern
Regional Council.
          
        
        
          Keeping The Faith On Abortion
          
            
              Ledbetter, BrownieBrownie Ledbetter
            
          
          Vol. 12, No. 1, 1990, pp. 1-4
          
          The argument about abortion must develop into a substantive
debate. We must deal with questions of morality, medical ethics,
medical technology, health care, environment, economics, separation of
church and state, individual rights, and women's rights, to name a
few.
          What decisions about life and death should we make now that we have
choices we have never had before as a result of increased medical
technology? Who should make them? Are the laws regulating such
questions adequate protection for individual rights? for doctors? for
hospitals? for family planning and abortion clinics? should we put
limits on medical research? what about the effects of overpopulation
on the environment?
          Who pays for welfare, health care, and education of the increasing
number of poor women and children in this country? in other
countries?
          If a fetus has civil rights does that include inheritance? Does
extending legal personhood to fetuses mean that women of childbearing
age must be prohibited from any job that could endanger a fetus or a
woman's right to become pregnant?
          Issues relating to human sexuality in this country have become so
complex and frustrating to many of us that we advocate single-issue
solutions. We do this, generally, out of abysmal ignorance of the
biological and social development of human life. We have allowed only
minimal education on human development in our public schools and that
little is way out of date now. It must be nonexistent in many
sectarian schools. We are 

bemoaning the fact that few high school
graduates know where Florida is. How many ever even heard of DNA?
          But changes have come about awfully fast. I can remember when
virginity was a requirement for marriage (for women only, of course),
when movies could only show stars fully clad in separate beds, and
even two-piece bathing suits covered most of women's bodies. And I'm
not even sixty yet! Now you take a person like me and jerk me up into
the '80s and '90s with pornographic TV ads and movies in which stars
have intercourse right there on the screen and you are talking major
shock treatment.
          Young folk have trouble coping with all this sexual activity as
well. They need some support if they are going to be able to "just say
no" when they believe none of their peers would and certainly very few
adults do. Besides, all that stuff on TV looks pretty tempting. Kids
do mirror our values, after all.
          A lot of folk in my vintage-and younger-just figure we have to put
our collective foot down. If we look for a nice simple reason for all
of this "moral degradation," the 1973 Supreme Court decision
protecting a woman's right to choose an abortion is a pretty good
target. Throw in the women's movement-all that freedom for women-and
you have yourself a good, clear, scapegoat. Up to date, too: it can be
characterized in a broadcast sound bite-"abortion on demand"-now used
by the media as if it were an objective description of the pro-choice
movement. Well, if every woman would just stay home and teach these
children the right moral values everything would be back to normal,
right? Wrong.
          Arguing over when life begins as a basis for solving this moral
controversy is taking the issue out of context, the context being the
welfare of the species, the planet, the creation and sustenance of all
life forms. The context being the lives and relationships of human
families...mother, father, and children already born and living...the
unborn child herself...the very child over which this irrational
conflict supposedly rages. What effect will an additional sibling have
on the family relationships? On the well-being of existing children?
On the contributions the mother is making to the welfare of the total
family? What will be the new child's acceptance by the rest of the
family if the mother's health is affected or if she dies in
childbirth? What child would trade her or his mother for an unknown
baby? What husband would trade his wife for a new child?
          What is responsible about requiring a mother to complete a
pregnancy regardless of the health risk, or the economic risk, to the
family in order to bring another life into being? Is that not
potentially destructive to existing 

family relationships? And what if
the mother is a single parent? Is there a clear moral answer to these
concerns that fits every situation?
          AND IF THE PREGNANT woman is single? Even irresponsible in her use
of abortion after a carefree sexual encounter? Would she make a good
mother to this unwanted child? Why is it more morally responsible for
her to give birth to a child she does not want or is in no position to
raise responsibly? Is it that she should be punished by having to go
through nine months of pregnancy? Is pregnancy a punishment? What
respect does that attitude show for life? What does that do for the
child?
          What ever happened to the belief that one has no right to bring a
child onto this earth unless she and he are committed to
providing for the welfare and education of the child? Is that an
immoral belief? I thought it was Judaic-Christian stewardship.
          The furor over abortion has little to do with the welfare of
babies, born or unborn. If it did we would spend more than a token
amount on the welfare of children in this country so that we could
bring them up to be the responsible citizens and leaders we need. If
the folks calling themselves "pro-life" who are
raising the issue of abortion as a child-centered concern had child
welfare in mind they would not oppose public spending for child care,
for pre-school education for every child, for school lunches for poor
children, for prenatal care for pregnant women and other measures to
decrease infant mortality, for an adequate national immunization
program. for identifying and treating child abuse, for accessible and
medically safe birth control, and above all, for increasing funding
for public education and health care.
          Unfortunately, they are joined by many other American voters who
appear to have little sense of responsibility for the welfare of
children other than their own...especially if it means paying more
taxes.
          There is an area of agreement even among the more vocal and
polarized movements. We would all like to see an enormous decrease in
the incidence of abortion. But here again there is conflict in how
that goal should be reached.
          Pro-choice groups believe that could be accomplished by increasing
the use of medically safe birth control methods and education about
the reproductive process and responsible sexual behavior. Anti-choice
groups, believing those methods to be an inducement to increasing
sexual activity, advocate abstinence enforced by law and outlawing
birth control as well as abortion to accomplish that goal.
          I believe the rhetoric about unborn babies is yet another way to
exploit children, to tug on our emotional reaction to perfectly formed
and adorable little babies (usually white) for other purposes. If we
can use babies to sell everything from soap to long distance telephone
service, why not?
          For some this tearful rhetoric about unborn babies is a way of
avoiding the tough new choices we can make about life and death rather
than being able to dismiss them as "God's will." For others it is a
way of punishing those who sin. For still others it is simply a way of
resisting change. For many it is a method for re-establishing a more
subservient position of women, a way of stopping the increasing
independence of women.
          And where are the churches on this 

moral question? Protecting their
institutions, whatever their doctrine. That appears to be the one
common denominator among our diverse religions. The linchpin of the
great American experiment, separation of church and state, protection
for individual diversity, is in danger yet again. Cries of "this is a
Christian nation" are heard once more across the land. And where are
the clergy and lay leadership alike who are not ignorant of the
historical fact that many of our most-revered founding fathers were
not Christian or that they created constitutional
protection for the diversity of religious citizens as well as
non-religious citizens?...They are silent. Even those religious
leaders who represent a faith with long-held positions of support for
the separation of church and state are silent, or outvoted by newly
organized voices as in the Southern Baptist Convention.
          That is not to say that there are not groups of religious clergy,
laywomen and men within many faiths who are trying to speak
responsibly to these issues. There are many traditional women's
organizations within a variety of religious institutions across
religious faith groups struggling as catalysts within their
institutions-all of which arc male-dominated. But rarely are they
heard by the general public because they are not the established
leadership.
          I have always believed that religious faith is a very private and
personal matter and although it is the basis of my moral value system
and I see it as the reason for my work as an activist, I do not feel
comfortable articulating my faith in secular settings, or to
religiously diverse groups unless it is the stated topic for
dialogue. However, since so much of the debate on abortion is
characterized as "religious" I may be wrong about
that.
          Probably my own reluctance is a mirror of the unbelievable
reluctance and inaction of religious institutions like my own who
claim to be "mainstream" and yet allow absolutist
groups to speak for Christianity as if there were no other Christian
perspective. There is also a certain "classism" 
among our so called "mainstream" Protestant
denominations. Perhaps guilt over our mild contempt for
"lower class" evangelical or fundamentalist
denominations has motivated the current efforts of mainstream
denominations to work towards some sort of vague coming together. It
also may have something to do with the fact that we are losing
membership.
          THE RELIGIOUS RIGHT has every right to speak for their position,
but so does the rest of Christendom-not only the right, hut the
responsibility.
          The culture in which we exist in this world and the circumstance of
our lives have such enormous bearing on our religious preferences that
I have always believed separation of the church and state to be the
only way we can coexist. It is also the only way of avoiding religious
wars. Religious wars, whether they are fought with words or weapons,
are clearly blasphemous in that any group who claims to be defending
the only religious truth is pretending to be God. That kind of
arrogance must feed the very devil that they are so busy
personifying.
          Human life cycles are longer than those of many of God's creatures,
and we have perhaps more ways to affect life and death, but we are
still within the constraints of mortality, just like all other living
things. Human life gets renewed just like all other forms of life. We
are not unique in that sense. After all, every form of life is unique
in its own characteristics. The Christian insistence that we are
superior to other forms of life we believe to have been created and
sustained by God seems to me to be the height of arrogance. Maybe that
is our "original sin." It is surely a part of our
self-centeredness.
          Most human religions advocate some level of responsibility for or
toward other living things. We humans are finally beginning to be
concerned about our environment. But until we realize that we arc only
one of the many forms of life created by God with considerably greater
options in our reproductive processes than other creatures, and learn
to use those options in more morally responsible ways, we are
incredibly poor stewards of life.
          We Christians should speak out with different perspectives, as
citizens who have honest disagreements. Instead we swallow our
commitment to our own beliefs. We try to reconcile ourselves in some
way with those of our faith who want to enforce their particular
religious beliefs in secular law and thereby separating the goats from
the sheep as if we had that kind of authority.
          After all, the pro-choice movement does not advocate laws forcing
women to have abortions. But what is being advocated by the
anti-choice movement is forcing women to complete a pregnancy
regardless of the circumstances that brought about that pregnancy, her
circumstances, or the circumstances of her family. Those among us who
believe abortion is immoral no matter what the circumstance are free,
as they should be, to practice their belief within current legal
requirements. Why should they force those of us who do not share their
belief to conform to their absolutism? We advocate personal private
choice, not abortion.
          Dialogue among religious faiths and denominations is vital and it
can solve a lot of conflicts. Heaven must know that we Protestants
have a proclivity for starting a new denomination over the silliest
disagreements. But at some point judgments must be made, not
postponed, in the name of avoiding conflict. Often that strategy only
prolongs and exacerbates the conflict. l he public welfare is at
stake. Prolonging the debate has become destructive.
          Somebody has to call for the question. I so move. 
          
            Brownie Ledbetter is a Presbyterian elder in Little Rock,
Arkansas' and a longtime civil rights activist.
          
        
        
          Collusion Between Worker and Power Structure.
          Reviewed by Kravitz, LindaLinda Kravitz
          Vol. 12, No. 1, 1990, pp. 13-15
          
          Habits of
Industry: White Culture and the Transformation of the Carolina
Piedmont. By Allen Tullos (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press. 1989. 419 pp. $34.95; $12.95 paper.).
          In the late 1920s, to attract manufacturers to the Piedmont region
of the Carolinas, Duke Power Company advertised:
          
            
              A population marked by racial purity and unusually
high character.... Willing labor, unhampered by any artificial
restrictions on outputs native born of old pioneer stock and not
imbued by un-American ideas or ideals.
            
          
          The message of
many such ads quoted by Allen Tullos was that Piedmont workers were
white and would work long hours for little pay, acquiesce in
increasing productivity demands, and resist unionization. In this
engaging and provocative book, Tullos explores the remarkable regional
culture supporting these corporate "habits of Industry," 

which he sees
as feeding upon the traditional "habits of industry" Piedmont
people. He traces their painful "shift from farm to factory, the
transition from folk to working class," through his own
encompassing analysis of the times and through the histories of
individual families representing industry's owners and industry's
workers.
          The family histories, whether of the powerful or the poor, are
imbued with values stemming from Scotch-Irish, English, or German
ancestries, and Calvinist, Methodist, or Baptist upbringings.
          Faith in authoritarian paternalism and the holiness of work shaped
individual social growth; together they produced remarkable collusion
among all economic classes in support of the power structure of the
textile industry and its demands for productivity.
          Acceleration of such demands did bring about labor unrest and
strikes, particularly in the 1920s and 1930s, but efforts at
unionization were consistently crushed by factory owners, often with
the cooperation of "the highest officials of state government and
the state's police power." Says Tullos: "Farmers recently
turned mill workers often saw the union as 'foreign' to their
experience, as un-American and atheistic, and as a threat to customary
work arrangements and familial as well as paternalistic ties of
employment."
          The familial and paternalistic ties of employment could not have
been more direct. At its most elementary, the family supplied
workers. Its vital role in doing so did not escape the regional
promoters, whose ads proclaimed: "The birth rate of the Carolinas
is the highest in the United States. Already a second generation of
textile workers has come along, and in many older textile centers a
third generation has grown up."
          Secondly, as one interviewee noted, "A man will think a long
time before he'll speak out when he's got nine little children about
his knees."
          Third, and perhaps most essential to the character of Piedmont
industry, entire families, including those of all ages and genders,
worked for individual employers. As Tullos explains, until the 1930s,
a "family wage" commonly meant that children and adults all had to
tend the factory machinery to earn a livelihood. Mill bosses
understood that much of the job of enforcing discipline and industry
among the youngest workers would be managed by the fathers and
mothers. "Besides [being] under the company's jurisdiction,"
said Grover Hardin, who entered the mills of Greenville, S.C., as a
child, "you was under your parents." Fathers ruled both roost
and workplace. "To the child, religion, stoic discipline, fatherly
authority, and the mill hierarchy seemed to be cut from the same
cloth."
          Tullos alternates voices of the Piedmont industry's captains, all
white males, with those of its labor force, primarily white women. As
he follows their family histories, the captains, including the tobacco
mogul James Buchanan "Buck" Duke (founder of Duke Power Co. and Duke
University), J. Spencer Love (founder of Burlington Mills), Daniel
Augustus Tompkins (promoter of textile schools and child labor), and
William Henry Belk (innovator in "single-pricing" and creator of Belk
stores) are chiefly heard through their writings and speeches. They
bear few surprises, little self-questioning or deviation from
promotion of industry. Witness the refrain of John Belk, heir to the
Belk fortune, who sums up his view on the habits of industry: "Man
is a working animal."
          In this whole book, the only real exception to the untroubled tales
of the upwardly mobile is the sad story of D.W. League, a weave-room
overseer who in 1928 sacrificed his job at Poe Mill in a "stand of
Christian conscience" against increased workloads for his weavers,
lost another job in a refusal to work Sundays, took another requiring
two shifts, and finally, exhausted, turned back to family farm
life. Said his daughter, "He had just got so confused, till he
wanted to get quiet. He worried himself to death." Said another,
"It bothered him a great deal, this change that had come
about. People were not given the consideration that they had been
before. You were pushed as a worker...More looms, more than you could
run."
          It is the tales of the workers which are the life of the
book. Typically, their families were sharecroppers or yeomanry
displaced by the agricultural collapse of the late nineteenth
century. Tullos gives their present-day accounts in their own words,
which are never sugarcoated, and often spirited and humorous. They are
frequently fascinating simply because of their implied acquiescence in
end expressed gratitude for the "habits of Industry" which, having
allowed them to make a meager living, also brought them much
suffering. They impress us with the vulnerability of people with
desperately immediate needs to jobs whose benefits are so low as to
guarantee that those needs are perpetuated.
          Upon the retirement of Icy Norman, for forty-seven years a yarn
winder for Burlington Mills, company officials lauded and publicized
her as its "oldest hand." She was royally taken to dinner by "big
shots" from the New York office, who told her that "if you ever
come to New York...you will have a welcome mat." She recalled that
"I really enjoyed it" and later "Every time I go back up
there [to the factory] I feel like I'm going back home."
          But in the same interview, she also related how she was forced to
retire before she could benefit from a new profit-sharing plan. "I
said, 'Just let me work one more year. . .Then I could have my debts
paid off.' The man says, 'I wish we could.' That kind of hurt me...I
could really have used that money [$12,500]. I felt like if anybody
was entitled to it, I was, because I put my whole life there. My young
life, and I growed up there. I feel like I was part in the making of
Burlington Industries, because I come there 

and stayed with them. I
went with them through thick and thin."
          Ethel Hilliard, another long-time employee of Burlington, related
how the mill hired two of her children before they were sixteen [the
legal age] because "they knowed we needed work." Her son
"oiled that machinery and climbed over them looms. I thought about
that a lot of times. I don't reckon they really wanted to work a child
like that, but they just done it to help out, I reckon. I know it was
dangerous for him to be up there."
          Ultimately, Ethel Hilliard felt, "They was good to me at the
Burlington Mill." Mother of ten children, with an unemployed
husband, she was most grateful that "They'd always take me
back. I'd stop when a baby was going to be born, and then when they
got old enough, I'd go back. Usually I'd stay out a couple of
months."
          These workers were naturally wary of unions. Wariness approached
fear in Bessie Buchanan, who in the early 1940s had witnessed a strike
at Durham's Erwin Mill. She believed she had barely escaped the union
due to "a vision that the Lord gave me." She had a dream about
Nazis, who also resembled Old Testament persecutors, who tried to
force her to join the union. In her dream, her faith as she walked a
gauntlet convinced the unionizers to free her.
          The workers' stories are not all dreary. Ethel Hilliard's
irrepressible account of her childhood, her mother's healing talent
and herbal remedies, and her marriage is alone worth the purchase of
this book. Ethel also enjoyed her work, "scalloping bedspreads," which
she felt was her "talent."
          These stories tell us that in the Piedmont any challenge to the
workplace would have been a challenge to an entire culture. The
Piedmont's "habits of Industry" were reinforced by family, church, and
workplace and, as Tullos documents, by the education system, from the
early textile schools to Duke University and the University of North
Carolina. They were benignly interpreted by the Institute for Research
in Social Science, established by Howard Odum (SRC's first president)
as a laboratory for regional sociological investigation. "With a
bit of hammering out by Odum, the habits of Industry appeared as
inevitable, manifest, progressive."
          Finally, "In time, Industry's assurance of having its way and of
having it publicly confirmed became one of the Piedmont's, and the
South's most secure habits."
          Habits of Industry would be an excellent text
for students of labor history. It is challenging reading for any who
wonder how it came about that in this country so many people would
work so hard, over so many generations, so profitably for others, and
for wages so low that their incomes would never rise above the poverty
line. And it is graceful, enjoyable reading for those who may simply
be intrigued by the rich, albeit perverse, culture of the Carolina
Piedmont.
          
            Linda Kravitz has recently resigned as research director
of the Housing Assistance Council. She is immediate past chair of the
National Council of Agricultural Life and Labor. In her undergraduate
days she worked a summer at the Council. She is co-author of the Other
Housing Crisis, published by HAC and the Center on Policy and Policy
Priorities, 1989.
          
        
        
          Angela Davis: 'Rekindle the Flame'
          By Davenport, ElaineElaine Davenport
          Vol. 12, No. 1, 1990, pp. 10-11
          
          Angela Davis, one of America's best known activists of the 1960s
and 1970s, encouraged an overflow crowd in Austin, Texas, on Martin
Luther King Day to renew a commitment to activism in the 1990s--to
"rekindle the flame."
          In 1972 Davis was acquitted of charges of murder and conspiracy
stemming from a shootout involving Black Panther prisoners at a
courthouse in San Rafael California. She emerged as a symbol of the
American left and became a popular speaker at rallies and a lobbyist
for change. "I'm asked what it was like then," said
Davis. "I tell them we worked hard, that it didn't just
happen. It's called organization and continuity from one event to the
next." She said that today's goals can be achieved only through an
activist struggle: "Our activist efforts must unfold on all fronts
...We must be aware of how the issues interconnect. You must join and
be on call to be seen and heard."
               "We must fight for free, universally available, quality
child care for all," Davis told her Austin audience. Women can't
afford to work when they earn 510,000 a year and the cost of child
care is 53,000 a year per child."Violence against women in the home and against children
has to stop." The portrayal of women in today's rap
music--"this idea that women are to be trampled upon and treated as
sexual objects"--has to change, she said, suggesting that people
write to their local radio stations.Blacks must tackle problems in their own communities, she
said, including AIDS. "We have not done whet we ought to have done
to help those with AIDS." Since blacks make up the overwhelming
majority of AIDS victims, why is it that black churches in East
Oakland can't find buddies to spend time with black people who have
AIDS? "This upsets me more than almost any other issue that we
currently face.""The reproductive rights movement is still too white."
The federal government will pay for sterilization, but is rolling back
the right to abortions. "It's this simple: it is a woman's right to
determine what happens to her body."A higher minimum wage is possible by saying "no to the
corporate system that gives us no economic hope." We may have
rights, she said, but if we're too poor to exercise those rights, we
might as well not have the rights."We must begin to fight for mandatory courses on African-
American history and Latino history on U.S. campuses," she
said. This brought a large number of people to their feet, based
perhaps on the longstanding conflict at the University of Texas over
upgrading the African and Afro-American Studies and Research Center
into a bonafide department.
          The crowd of more than 3,000 overflowed the Performing Arts Center
at the University of Texas. The PAC is often filled with
with mostly white audiences attending the symphony, ballet
or opera. But the atmosphere on this occasion resembled that of a
community gathering, as the racially mixed audience heard songs by the
Webb Elementary School Choir, a welcome by the president of the
University of Texas, who was heckled because of the university's South
African policy, and a dramatic interpretation by Miss Black
Austin. The group also participated in singing "Lift Every Voice and
Sing."
          Davis, a polished orator, spoke slowly and rhythmically, often
repeating her last few words or last phrase as members of the audience
began to shorthand clap.
          Her list of crises facing blacks and other Americans
	       was long:
"Drugs, prison and violence are a murderous cycle for our
young black people," she said. "We're talking about a genocidal
situation in this country." With homicide the leading cause of
death for black men and women ages fifteen to thirty-four, blacks
making up 44 percent of the murder victims in the country, with the
majority of those 

with AIDS black, and with large numbers of black men
permanently unemployed, "is it hard to understand why they drift to
drugs?""The U.S. government is solidly on the side of
apartheid," she said. If the United States had asked for total
economic sanctions against South Africa ten years ago, apartheid would
no longer exist.
          Davis reminded the audience that by circulating petitions, marching
and writing to elected representatives, they had achieved a national
holiday honoring Martin Luther King. "This national holiday is a
living example of the possibility of our activism. We are living in
history. Yesterday informs today." Martin Luther King was not
'the' movement. He emerged from the movement and others will emerge
from the movement, too, she said. She reminded the crowd that it was a
group of women in Montgomery, including Jo Ann Robinson, who provided
the organizational structure to successfully mount the Montgomery bus
boycott. "What the sisters did in Montgomery, Alabama, in 1955, we
can do in 1990. The issue then was desegregation, but Martin Luther
King soon realized it had economic roots. In 1990, the
interconnectedness of all the issues is much more pronounced than
before. It is no longer possible to separate all the struggles. We're
all in this together."
          One tactic she suggested was to occupy Washington, D.C. "Prepare
to stay there and force the government to negotiate with us."
There is a revolutionary spirit all around the world, she said. "If
they can rise up in Eastern Europe, then so can we."
          
            Elaine Davenport is a Southern Changes contributing
editor. She lives in Austin, Texas. Angela Davis currently teaches
courses in philosophy, aesthetics and women's studies at San Francisco
State University and the San Francisco Art Institute. Angela Davis: An
Autobiography from Random House was a 1974 best-seller. SO has also
written Women, Race and Class (Random House, 1982); her latest book is
Women, Culture and Politics (Random House,
1989).
          
        
        
          The Cold Hard Truth
          By Chestnust, J.L., Jr.J.L. Chestnut, Jr.
          Vol. 12, No. 1, 1990, pp. 16, 15
          
          Herbert O. Reid, Sr., (Herb) is attorney for the Washington, D.C.,
municipal government and personal lawyer and advisor to Marion Barry,
the embattled and dishonored mayor of the nation's capitol city. Herb
taught me criminal law at Howard University in Washington and
subsequently taught Bruce Boynton and Governor Doug Wilder, whose
class followed mine.
          At Herb's invitation I often return to Howard to lecture and judge
students in moot court competition. I cannot be certain if I first met
Barry in Herb's office or in Walter Fauntroy's church office, but I
have known and liked Barry for a decade.
          I did not know Barry when he was with the Student Nonviolent
Coordinating Committee (SNCC) during the 1960s. Jim Forman, Bernard
Lafayette, Julian Bond, John Lewis and Worth Long were in my office
almost daily. Barry was here, but I don't remember him. He remembers
me.
          Julian Bond, who moved to Washington after very serious personal
problems in Atlanta, ran into Vivian and me last summer at the New
Orleans Jazz Festival and we talked about mutual friends. Julian said,
"Marion has lost all sense of reality. I couldn't believe what he
said over his telephone and he knows it has to be tapped by the
feds."
          Julian had no need to detail what Barry said on the telephone. I
knew it had to do with drugs and women. Similar revelations have been
around for years.
          Neither Julian nor I made any other comment about Barry. We could
only pray.
          After the sky fell on Barry I made several telephone calls around
Washington. Everyone agreed drug addiction spawns a euphoric, false
sense of security and incredible arrogance. Herb commented, "No
one, not even a loving wife, can really help an addict who thinks he
needs no help."
          A black female official in Washington whom I have known for years
was needlessly defensive and abrasive. She insisted Steve Smitherman
(son of Mayor Joe) is a former mayor of Selma and wrongly accused me
of covering for "the worst kind of Southern racist" and my
hometown. She later composed herself and said, "Drugs and whiskey
are often exclusive, but our boy had both monkeys at the same
time."
          Jesse Jackson was due to address a meeting in Selma about the time
of Barry's arrest on drug charges. His secretary called to say he was
in "a trance" over the arrest. Jesse canceled all commitments and was
trying to figure what to do. I predict he will not run for office of
mayor of Washington, D.C.
          It was a depressing time. A sad, but hardly unique episode in
today's America. Some questions, however, must be answered.
          Has Barry's conduct undermined efforts to address the already
debilitating drug scene in Washington? Will Washington ghetto youths
become even more cynical? Was President George Bush's drug conference
in South America undermined to any appreciable extent by Barry's
arrest?
          The answer to all three questions is no. Given the noise 

in the media, that may be difficult to believe.
          The drug scene in Washington involves more money than many could
count on a computer. Drug traffickers operate in open defiance of the
White House, not to mention City Halls. Illegal drugs have entered
every White House beginning with the administration of Richard Milhous
Nixon. That is an open secret in Washington.
          Scores of ghetto youth already have zero faith in the system or
politicians who operate government. Ghetto youth can cite verse and
chapter of drug traffickers who operate both with impunity and
immunity. A misdemeanor bust for possession means nothing on the big
city drug scene, even if the defendant is a mayor.
          Barry's arrest had no effect on Bush's drug conference. The
conference will result in little or nothing because the president
brought only rhetoric and show.
          What a world!
          Peace.
          
            J. L. Chestnut is an Alabama trial lawyer and
writer.
          
        
      
    
  