
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 12, Number 4,
	       1990
        
          South of Art
          By Willett, HenryHenry Willett
          Vol. 12, No. 4, 1990, pp. 14-15
          
          In 1974, Walker Percy, with a bit of subtle equivocation, wrote,
"Well, the so-called Southern thing is over and done with, I
think." Of course he was wrong. The Southern thing is as strong as
it has ever been. This past year saw the publication of the 1,600-page
Encyclopedia of Southern Culture, and a major Hollywood revival of the
cinematic "Southerns," from Mississippi Burning, Heart of Dixie, and
Great Balls of Fire, to In Country, Miss Firecracker, and Driving Miss
Daisy. Steel Magnolias was the most popular stage production in
America last year. Though often flattered, we know the Steel Magnolias
audiences in New York or Chicago or Los Angeles aren't laughing for
the same reasons the Nachitoches, Louisiana, audience is laughing.
          This regional ambivalence is typical when Southerners showcase
their cultural expression for the rest of the world. Several years ago
Atlantans had high hopes that So Long On Lonely Street, an Alliance
Theater production of a new work by Atlanta playwright Sandra Deer,
would be the play that would win over the New York critics to Southern
produced drama. Lonely Street had received rave reviews during its
pre-New York run in Boston, but the New York critics did not share
their Boston colleagues' opinions. Frank Rich of the New York Times
concluded that "like that other recent Atlanta export, New Coke,
this play is not the real thing." The New York Post's Clive Barnes
called the play "preposterous hokum-Southern fried chicken without
the chicken."
          The Atlanta critics responded to the New York critics in
kind. Helen Smith of the Atlanta Journal referred to the "rigged
mindset" that scorns Southern playwrights and characterized New York
as "the most arrogant and the most provincial place in the
world."
          We Southerners, it seems, have historically reacted rather
defensively when confronted with criticism. In 1911, Georgia-born
University of Florida professor Enoch Banks was fired after suggesting
somewhat timidly that in the Civil War "the North was relatively in
the right, while the South was relatively in the wrong." Even
Mr. Banks's "relatives" weren't enough to save his position.
          When the Alabama Shakespeare Festival received criticism for its
presentation of a country-pop musical based on life in rural Georgia,
a production considered inappropriate fare and somehow beneath the
dignity of the state Shakespeare theater, it relied on that tried and
true New York legitimacy test--rave reviews in the Big Apple and a
Tony award nomination--to justify its programming decision.
          Southerners rely all too heavily on others to select, package,
market and critically-legitimize Southern cultural expression,
resulting in a commodity-marketing of Southern culture that avoids
this culture's power and complexity, instead capitalizing on the
region's stigmatizing stereotypes--poverty, parochialism, eccentricity
and retrograde religion. Nowhere is this more evident than in the
fraudulent, profit-driven marketing of the so-called "outsider"
artists from the South--Howard Finster from Georgia, Sam Doyle from
South Carolina, Mose Tolliver and Thornton Dial from Alabama, Zebedee
Armstrong from Mississippi, and a handful of others. Many of these
artists are black. Most are poor, uneducated and from rural areas; but
they're making a handful of money for a handful of gallery
owners. American studies scholar John Vlach, of George Washington
University, has called the whole phenomenon a "fraud perpetrated by
the New York art establishment, 'The Finger-Painted Word' (in
reference to Tom Wolfe's The Painted Word) as commercial exploitation
of the stereotypical view of Southerners as weird, as inbred, full of
pellagra and cholera and any other disease, biological or
psychological." Vlach's characterization of this phenomenon, I
regret, is only slightly exaggerated.
          In the current issue of Art and Antiques magazine Eleanor Gaver
offers the following account of the opening of a recent show of
Thornton Dial's work at the Ricco/Maresca Gallery in New York:
          
            ...a row of limousines waited, their engines idling. Inside, a
well-heeled crowd of collectors, dealers and artists marveled at the
paintings, though some were nonplused at the price list. "Fifty
thousand dollars for work by an untrained Negro" asked one educated
and successful neoexpressionist painter.
          
          I stood back and watched the crowd gape at a prominently displayed
black-and-white photograph misrepresenting the Dial family as poor,
down-trodden and huddled together in front of a tin shack. Nowhere was
it 

mentioned that this tin shack was not their home, but the painting
studio behind their pleasant suburban house. I turned to gallery owner
Frank Maresca and said "It's too bad the Dials aren't here for
their opening." Maresca just shook his head. "They shouldn't be
exposed to the art world," he said, "it might corrupt
them. It's better they stay where they belong."
          Perhaps Maresca really meant that the art world shouldn't be
exposed to the Dial family, for it might shatter some of those
Southern stereotypes that he markets so lucratively.
          Like many other resources of the region, Southern culture has
chiefly been an export product, something sturdy, beautiful and fine
which has often contributed richly to the shaping of American
culture. But Southern culture has also often been expropriated,
marketed in a package of stereotypes, and sold for profit. And it will
no doubt continue to be so expropriated until the region develops the
will and the mechanisms for assuming the critical proprietorship of
its own culture.
          
            Hank Willett is the former regional representative to the
Southern states for thc National Endowment for thc arts. He has
recently left that position to organize and direct thc Alabama Center
for Traditional Culture.
          
        
        
          Driving Mr. Walker
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 12, No. 4, 1990, pp. 5-7
          
          I was taken for a ride on Memorial Day Sunday. At home without my
family (off visiting relatives) I was sitting on my front porch when a
stranger approached. Dressed in a golf shirt, shorts, and running
shoes, the black man had a story--one I had heard dozens of times.
          "My family and I were driving through Atlanta and our car broke
down on I-20. I have been stranded with my wife and two little babies
all night... "
          It's a line that has been used by panhandlers and hustlers in
Atlanta so often in the last few years that even the local radio talk
shows have discussed the come-on. "The wrecker service has my car
and we haven't eaten all night..."
          "What do you want me to do?" I asked.
          "I need a ride to my car and get it from the
wrecker. . . "
          This time I said, "All right. Let me get my keys."
          We drove my car, a 1978 Chevy Malibu with a loud muffler, and he
talked non-stop. He was from Boston...in the Air Force as a career
man...had been stationed in Panama...now he wanted to come down
South...his car had broken down late yesterday afternoon...he had been
walking around looking for help all night. . tan older couple had
taken in his wife and kids...a police lieutenant had helped him with
some money until called away on an emergency...the wrecker repair shop
wanted $120 and he had paid them all he had... "What's your name,
sir?"
          "You look like a lawyer, are you, sir? Do you need to go by a
money machine to get any cash?"
          "How much do you owe for your car?" I asked.
          "Fifty-seven dollars. Do you have it? Do you need to go by a
money machine to get the cash?"
          "I think I have that much."
          We were traveling down Memorial Drive where a Baptist hospital and
the Martin Luther King Center stand as landmarks. I hadn't expected
him to ask for so much cash, whether his story was genuine or fake.
          "Sir, don't you wear a seat belt?"
          Only then, as I pulled up my strap with a thank-you, did I realize
how tense I had become.
          Mr. Walker continued to talk and talk. About his car...about his
life...he had bought the car from his lieutenant...He was "one of
the lieutenant's boys...We looked after him and he looked after
us..." He talked about his family...about how hard it is to have
someone help you when you're in a strange place...
          As we turned right, following his instructions, the monologue began
to blur as I realized that the city wrecker service was actually in
another direction. "I think we're 

gonna like it down
here. ..Atlanta is such a clean city. . .look over at that parking
lot...there's nothing there...no trash. . .nothing.. . "
          Finally, when he said to turn left, I asked him: "What was your
name, again?"
          "Walker. Robert Walker."
          We were now at the edge of Capitol Homes, one of the federal
housing projects squeezed between the interstate highway and the
Georgia government buildings. He asked me to stop.
          "Where's the lot-the wrecker service, Mr. Walker?" I
asked.
          "Oh, I have to call him first on his beeper...I just thought you
might want to give me the money here so that we don't do it out in the
open. ..This is a rough neighborhood and I wouldn't want folks to get
the wrong idea. ..Do you have a pen or pencil and I'll get your name
and number and send you your money as soon as I get to the
base. . . ?"
          With no wrecker service, tow-truck, or family in sight, I ripped a
piece of paper and wrote down my name and telephone number while
Mr. Walker did the same.
          "See, I even wrote down that I owe you $57." He now had my
money.
          "I could just walk on over from here by myself, if you don't
mind."
          "Sure."
          As I drove away, I looked back in the rear view mirror at
Mr. Walker. He was walking away with the same brisk step, the same
sense of purpose with which he had arrived on my porch. I tried to
understand what had happened. Why had I given a not-so-perfect
stranger $57 when two or three times a day I stubbornly turn down
pleas on the street for a quarter?
          Part of it was fear and part was comfort, I suspect. While
listening to Mr. Walker's monologue, I realized that there was
something large, bulky, and sharp in his short pants. He kept his hand
near it. The object could have been a knife or it could have been a
long key chain. Sitting within two feet of me in the car, Mr. Walker
left me more vulnerable on a deserted Sunday morning than do most
panhandlers on the street.
          Also, Mr. Walker didn't appear to be entirely destitute of drive or
ambition. A middle-aged black man, he was dressed just like my brother
would have been had he been coming down from Chicago. He was
articulate and talked clearly about values of family and work-all
characteristics that probably made him seem all the more deserving in
my eyes.
          But, why did I allow myself to be put into that situation? Why did
I let that chain of events happen in the first place?
          Looking back, I think it was one of those moments in my life when I
needed to risk something, a little money and perhaps my own faith in
human beings, in order to see if I was really living in a community
where people do help strangers in need.
          This wasn't an organized decision to witness my concern for the
poor, as is volunteering at a homeless shelter. While important, that
commitment could not touch the 

core of my need on Sunday. Then and
there I could no longer go on turning down strangers blindly without
knowing if I was truly able as an individual to do something
meaningful about the suffering and distress that I see walking down
the streets everyday near my office and home.
          For ten years I have negotiated with my conscience and with the
homeless, hustlers, peddlers, and the distressed as I walk the
streets. Telling most of them, "No, I'm sorry I can't help you
today...but good luck," I have built an elaborate set of rules of
personal conduct: Always give money to women and children who are
homeless; If people say they're hungry, take them to a nearby
restaurant if convenient; Don't give money to people who are drinking
or drunk; Don't give money twice to people who make a business out of
begging. On Memorial Day weekend, I was tired of living by these rules
that have no virtue other than convenience and compromise. I wanted to
know if my own sense of Southern neighborliness, my own belief in a
South of concern for all had become so narrowed over time that I can
now count as my neighbors only those individuals I know in
person. Simply, I needed to know if I could truly be a good Samaritan
living in the heart of the South.
          Apparently not. Mr. Walker took my money and I have not heard from
him since. Don't expect I will. Clearly, I was more of a sucker than a
Samaritan. Suspecting as much, I called the phone number Mr. Walker
gave me for the "naval air side base." It was probably a random
number--a phone recording for someone who tried to sound like
W.C. Fields when asking that you leave a message.
          Looking back, I know that I was willing to run a risk from the time
Mr. Walker came to my porch to the time I handed over the money
because I thought both he and I had promise. He was energetic and
able-bodied. He was someone who, if helped, could prevent tragedy in
his life, make something out of his life. My little act of charity
could possibly make a big difference in his life, I hoped.
          Of course, I didn't get nor deserve such self-satisfaction. Had
Mr. Walker's family been sitting in a car as we turned the curve at
Capitol Homes, I now see that I would have been the victim of a false
sense of community, a bogus self satisfaction about what I alone can
do in the face of societal homelessness and poverty.
          Until the society in which I am an active, productive member acts
in its own collective self interest, I am virtually paralyzed as a
neighbor to stop the violence of poverty that empties the spirit,
soul, and pocketbook of individuals and communities. My own individual
need for neighborliness--my own need to be open and generous to those
who are different and strange--cannot be quieted for now. I must live
with convenience and compromise because I do not live in a city or
region where neighborliness cares for all.
          If Mr. Walker had returned my money, that would have been the real
hoax.
        
        
          A Walk on the Supply Side
          
            
              Katz, Michael B.Michael B. Katz
            
          
          Vol. 12, No. 4, 1990, p. 6
          
          "One of the most enduring and indivious social categories is
'stranger.' We engage the world as a series of concentric circles
based on degrees of relation: family, friends, neighbors, community,
strangers. The composition of the circles shifts over time, but
strangers remain always on the outside. Not surprisingly, they are the
primary objects of a continuing debate about, to use Michael
Ignatieff's evocative phrase, the 'needs of strangers.' As in England,
colonial American poor laws were clear about the limits of social
obligation. Parents and children remained responsible for each other;
communities were to ease the suffering of their members. But the
public owed nothing to strangers, who were to be shunted back to their
community of origin.
          "Within cities, poor people have almost always remained
strangers. We pass their houses on a train or in a car; read about
them as individual cases; study them as abstract statistics; and
encounter them asking for help in public places. Most of the writing
about poor people, even by sympathetic observers, tells us that they
are different, truly strangers in our midst. Poor people think, feel,
and act in ways unlike middle-class Americans. Their poverty is to
some degree a matter of personal responsibility, and its alleviation
requires personal transformation, such as the acquisition of skills,
commitment to the work ethic, or the practice of chastity. This
"supply-side" view of poverty, often despite powerful evidence, has
coursed through American social thought for centuries."
          --from the introduction to The Undeserving Poor, by
Michael B. Katz (Pantheon Books, 1989).
        
        
          Feud
          Reviewed by Hall, Suzanne M.Suzanne M. Hall
          Vol. 12, No. 4, 1990, pp. 18-19
          
          A local, essentially family-based dispute arose after Ranel McCoy
accused Floyd Hatfield, who was "Devil" Anse Hatfield's cousin, of
stealing a hog. The two families, however, did not resort at once to
the bloody vengeance for which they are famed. Like other good
citizens of the Tug Valley community in nineteenth century Appalachia,

they took their grievances to county court. When the jury reached a
decision, both Hatfields and McCoys obeyed. The violence popularly
associated with the Hatfield-McCoy feud legend did later occur, but
the reasons for the violence stem from deeper economic and social
changes in the region than the myth suggests.
          People often prefer myths to historical explanations. Myths do many
things. They obscure contradictions and disturbing aspects of the
past, and depict events as people wish they had happened. After the
passage of time and the telling and re-telling of the myths, recall of
the "real" events of the past becomes almost
impossible. Can the historian determine what is historical fact or
truth and what is myth? Moreover, are not myths as well as histories
to be understood as strategies people devise to comprehend and survive
the past?
          Altina L. Waller does a fine job of extracting the history and
meaning from the notorious late nineteenth century Hatfield-McCoy feud
myth. The story compellingly reveals the complexities of Appalachian
life at a time of great change from what Waller calls a pre-modern
traditional culture to a modern class society tied to national and
world economies. Her analysis is not a mere simplified description of
poor, backward mountain folk railing against the forces of modern,
industrial exploiters. Rather, it is a careful explanation that shows
the varied facets of change in the Tug Valley of adjoining Kentucky
and West Virginia.
          The Hatfield-McCoy conflict was not one interminable, violent
exchange between two families but a feud with two major, and
contrasting, phases. The first phase, 1878-1882, began before
industrial capitalism exerted its power in the region and involved a
conflict between local citizens. The second phase, 1887-1891, was
within the context of and characterized by the encroachment of the
timber and railroad industries. Waller's second level of analysis
focuses on the traditional community and its relation to the state,
nation, and world. Besides the gracefully written narrative, Waller
provides a photographic essay which adds another dimension,
dramatically showing the growing contrasts between the rural
traditional culture of the Tug Valley dwellers and the rising middle
class town people.
          Waller challenges the view that mountaineers were inherently prone
to violence. She shows that the feudists did not have an ancient
heritage of violent behavior. Instead, she argues that economic and
social exploitation by both industrialists and townspeople initiated
cultural disruptions that forced the feudists to violent action as a
last resort during the second phase of the feud. Previously, in the
first phase, both sides had used the court system to adjudicate their
disputes. They had also respected the court decisions and abided by
them. The mountaineers, such as "Devil" Anse Hatfield, turned to
violence only when the legal system, as they understood it, changed to
support the interests of the industrialists and their town
boosters.
          The South has a strong violent tradition, one which includes
numerous manifestations from dueling to Iynching to wife-beating to
capital punishment. These varied forms of violence undoubtedly require
different analyses and explanations. It seems probable that a violent
South must be so from some cultural underpinnings that historians can
discover. From where, then, does the Southern--and not only
Southern mountain people's--proclivity for violent behavior stem?
Does it arise solely from the upheavals of cultural transformation or
does it come from a deeper source?
          Waller exposes the social conflicts within the Tug Valley. For
instance, she finds that Anderson Hatfield, former Confederate and
leader of the Tug Valley home guard, began to threaten traditional
ways when he entered the timber business. People considered that
enterprise "risky, speculative, and conducive to dishonesty,"
and a challenge to the value system and way of life. "Devil" Anse
forged an economic niche for himself and his family while he alienated
many of his neighbors. He used the legal system to acquire timber
land, thus making enemies of such men as Perry Cline from whom he won
thousands of acres in a law suit. Later, in the second phase of the
feud, the cantankerous Ranel McCoy no longer led the attack on the
Hatfields. The vengeful foe was none other than Cline and his new
powerful allies.
          Cline's personal vendetta against Hatfield could only be
successfully waged during the second phase of the feud when he could
ally with Pikeville merchants, who sought outside investors and
catered to the timber and coal interests, and the governor of Kentucky
who planned to attract capitalists to the eastern mountain country. In
fact, Waller argues, "Cline and the governor literally recreated
the feud in order to suppress it." By doing so, Kentucky would be
seen as a strong law and order state that could suppress the violent
tendencies of its inhabitants and thereby attract capitalists.
          Hatfield, ironically, becomes a symbol as preserver of the
independent mountain culture, even though he had been a pioneer of
industry himself. Cline and the Pikeville townspeople represented the
Republican, pro-industrial order with their middle class values
buttressed with evangelical religion. Ranel McCoy hung onto the old
feud with its themes of honor and revenge. Waller tells a complex
story in a captivating style which satisfies the needs of scholars and
the general reading public. Her account of the feud is vastly more
thought-provoking and entertaining than the Hatfield-McCoy myth. K
          
            Suzanne Hall is a
member of the History faculty at Kennesaw State College in Marietta,
Georgia.
          
        
        
          A View from Death Row.
          Reviewed by Finlator, W.W.W.W. Finlator
          Vol. 12, No. 4, 1990, pp. 16-17
          
          Last Rights by Joseph
B. Ingle (Abingdon Press, 1990).
          Seldom do I have the honor to review a book written by a personal
friend and respected colleague, and I welcome the opportunity to
identify myself with the prison ministry of Joseph Ingle and his
eloquent presentation of it in Last Rights.
          Dr. Frank Porter Graham, former president of the University of
North Carolina, U.S. Senator, and U.N. Ambassador, used to tell us
that when a person, born and bred in the South, steeped in and loyal
to the best in its traditions, yet possessing the capacity for
transcendence, emerges with an open mind and a heart of compassion,
you have the true, the authentic liberal. In Joe Ingle, behold the
man! The brief account of his spiritual pilgrimage in the first two
chapters is worth the price of the book. Southern Presbyterian
background; graduate of St. Andrews College in Laurinburg,
N.C. (religion and philosophy); the wretched and anguished stint at
Union Theological Seminary in Richmond, which has long been a solid
institution to prepare solid ministers to serve the solid South and
during the years of the Civil Rights Movement and the Vietnam War, no
fit place for the likes of Joe Ingle; Union Theological Seminary in
New York where at last he could breathe a freer air and indulge his
social conscience; the assignment to the Bronx House of Detention
where he came to the realization that his "call" was not to the parish
but to the prison ministry; and, finally, his growing conviction that
it was in Dixie Land that he must take his stand and hence his return
"home," to take part in the founding of the Southern Coalition of
Jails and Prisons. Quite a pilgrimage.
          The jacket of the book describes the author's involvement with
twelve men and one woman who have been executed since 1976 as "13
fatal encounters." The phrase is on the mark. There is a sad
inevitability in each story, for the reader is painfully aware that in
spite of all the heartaches and hopes and heroism the curtain of doom
will fall at last and that in no case will there be an "and they lived
happily ever after." Knowing too well the tragic endings, I don't want
to see King Lear or Othello again, and though Joe's friends on Death
Row show genuine character development through his loving ministry,
their tragic ends don't bring cleansing to my soul, as such dramas are
reputed to do.
          But there are unforgettable services Last Rights offers. The state
refers to capital punishment as execution. Joe Ingle always terms it
"killing," and he calls governors, judges, and D.A.s murderers--in our
name. However legal the case, no matter the quantity of due process
and exhaustion of appeals, the governor who will not grant clemency,
the judge who will not set aside, the D A. who will not relent, is a
killer.
          This hard ball stance by a tender hearted man can only be
understood in light of the life affirming nature of Joe
Ingle. Throughout the hectic, frenetic pace of the narratives there is
time to notice the laughter of little children, to hear the song of
identified birds at morn or eve, to admire the lush produce of the
fertile soil of eastern North Carolina, to listen to, smell and feel a
Mississippi night, to remember to carry two roses to Velma Barfield
during her last hours on Death Row. Just the man to affirm with a
passion the lives of those who have been condemned to die.
          Without exception he demonstrates in each fatal en-

counter the
humaneness of his approach and wins the love and confidence of every
prisoner by embracing their full humanity. Our government, whether in
war with the Vietnamese, or combating drug lords, or dealing with
unfriendly dictators, or executing the men and women on Death Row must
first strip these people of their humanity. He and his colleagues,
standing almost alone, force the world out there to see these victims,
as he would call them, as human beings, as God's children who,
regardless of the heinousness and atrocity of their crimes, which he
neither denies nor dwells upon, have come from backgrounds of
emotional disorders and faced daily deprivations with which they were
unable to cope. Yet, despite their sad and sordid histories, they can
and do change and mature and love and forgive. Joe Ingle is a man of
simple Christian faith and the grace of God is in his book. As a
subtitle I would suggest "The Humanization of Death Row."
          I am uncomfortable, however, when he uses the Christian faith to
pressure judges and governors, reminding them of Jesus and the woman
taken in adultery or of their Presbyterian backgrounds, etc. In the
first place it's ineffective. These "Christian" magistrates are far
more aware of votes and constituents and their political futures than
they are of the Bible. In the second place such a practice can be
counter productive.
          If I were Catholic, I would deeply resent the threats Cardinal
O'Connor would visit upon me if I failed to vote "Christian" on the
abortion issue. And should the Fundamentalists some day come to
outnumber the rest of us may Heaven and the Constitution preserve us
from a "Christian America." I dare not presume to counsel Joseph Ingle
in his prophetic and courageous ministry, but I hope he will put a
major emphasis upon justice and equity and due process and, yes,
outrage.
          And indeed the author could counter my reservations by pointing to
those frequent passages in his book that tell me that 90 percent of
all people on Death Row are too poor to hire lawyers to defend them,
that court-appointed lawyers are not given to hot pursuit and often
tend to incompetence and neglect, that blacks who kill whites are
eight times more likely to be executed than whites who kill blacks,
that the number of executions is disproportionately high in the South,
and that the majority of those on Death Row are poor, unschooled, and
have serious emotional disorders--figures to suggest that the death
penalty is used as a method of social control.
          Some day the pendulum will swing. Some day America will reclaim its
conscience and refuse to stay in company with South Africa and Iran as
the nations with the largest number of executions. Some day we shall
live under a government that refuses to kill its citizens. And a major
factor in this return to sanity and humanity could be these 13 souls
who were put to death by the state and who Joe Ingle has here kept
alive.
          
            W.W. Finlator, preacher, prophet, man of justice,  lives
as he long has in Raleigh, North Carolina.
          
        
        
          You Gotta Serve Somebody
          By Davis, MurphyMurphy Davis
          Vol. 12, No. 4, 1990, pp. 1-5
          
          I want to begin by saying a word about my life in the Open Door
Community since this so deeply affects anything else I would say.
          We are a residential Christian Community of 32 folks. We are
African-American, white, Hispanic, young and old, women and men,
formerly homeless, formerly prisoners and those of us who have always
been housed, Ph.D.'s and illiterates, from backgrounds of the middle
class, obscene wealth, and utter poverty.
          As a family we live together, eat together, worship, work, and sing
together, share our money and other resources, and try to understand,
learn from, and love each other.
          Out of our family life and shared faith we live a life of
servanthood and advocacy among and on behalf of the homeless poor of
Atlanta: many more than 10,000 men, women, children and families who
have nowhere to go; and servanthood and advocacy among and on behalf
of prisoners in our state: the many and increasing thousands of women,
men and children who live in cages. We particularly work among the 111
people who are on death row in Georgia.
          As a way of beginning to discuss the challenge of service, let me
introduce you to three friends.
          First there's Charlie. When I left home yesterday morning Charlie
was lying in the sunshine in our front yard waiting for the soup
kitchen to open. He is, like hundreds of thousands of men and women
and children across this land, homeless.
          Charlie has been a working man since he was 17 years old. The last
job he held was one he had for five years. He 

had worked his way up to
four dollars an hour. But at age 45, Charlie was slowing down a little
and the employer realized there were any number of 22-year-olds to be
had for the minimum wage.
          So Charlie was fired. He had no savings and no benefits. The weeks
and months of job hunting were fruitless: "Sorry," they all
said, "but you know we're really looking for somebody a little
younger." The strain on Charlie's marriage grew to the breaking
point. By the time he found himself with no job and no family and no
home, he began to wonder what kind of a sorry excuse for a man he was
anyway.
          He gets an occasional job out of a labor pool. He crawls out of his
cat hole at 4:30 a.m. and goes to sit in a dingy room full of hopeless
humanity and prays for eight hours of work. Usually there's nothing
for Charlie. But if he does go to work, he goes out hungry, and the
soup kitchens will be long closed by the time he gets back. The best
he can expect, though his employer for the day might pay the labor
pool seven dollars an hour for his work, is the minimum wage minus a
few bucks for transportation, hard-hat rental, and all-maybe he'll
have $19 or $21 at the end of a day.
          The only place that will cash his labor pool check is a liquor
store across the street-with a purchase, that is. So by nightfall the
best he's looking at is a bottle, a pack of cigarettes, and sixteen
bucks. Try to live on it.
          Charlie gets locked up a lot. From time to time he does twenty to
forty days in the City Prison farm for the terrible crime of public
urination. We jail those who relieve themselves in public even though
Atlanta has not one single public toilet. In other words, there is not
a legal alternative. The money we spend in one year of punishing this

heinous crime we could build and maintain public toilets all over the
city. But for doing what every human body must do Charlie goes to
jail.
          Charlie also did ten months on a one-year sentence for criminal
trespass. That was from the time he was caught sleeping in an
abandoned warehouse. He has another court charge pending because he
went into Underground Atlanta and walked down the street. The police
told him he didn't belong because he stank. So he was arrested.
          When the pain gets to be too much for him, Charlie drinks. As he
lay in the sunshine in our front yard yesterday a car drove by. A
young man stuck his head out the window and screamed, "Get a job, you
bums!" Charlie raised his head for a minute and dropped it on his arm
again.
          Next I'd like for you to meet Jerome. Jerome was young,
African-American, poor and retarded. He was executed by the state of
Georgia in June 1986. He was convicted of being involved with another
man who killed a woman in Columbus, Ga.
          When Jerome got his death warrant, the Georgia Association for
Retarded Citizens got involved in his case. GARC examined him
extensively, confirmed that he was clinically retarded, and made a
passionate appeal on his behalf.
          But our society had long ago given up on Jerome. I read one school
record from the time he was about eleven. A counselor wrote this
advice to Jerome's teachers and guides: "Jerome is slow and
probably unfit for anything other than simple factory work. He's not
worth your time."
          The admonition was apparently heeded. Nobody wasted any time on
Jerome. His mama loved him, but her life was hard. She was a maid for
the county sheriff end though she worked more than full time, she was
paid so little that her family had to depend on government surplus
powdered eggs and milk to keep from going hungry.
          His life was one of degradation and neglect but Jerome, in his own
simple way, tried to do right. When the state set his execution date
they sent their own psychiatrist to examine him. Jerome tried his best
on the intelligence test and he was very proud. The shrink said that
he wasn't quite retarded enough to be spared from the electric
chair.
          The doctor was paid and Jerome died with 2,300 volts of electricity
through his body once, twice, three times.
          Before he died Jerome said to me one of the wisest things I've ever
heard. We had been talking about prison life and Jerome looked at me
and said: "You know-peoples was not made to dog around. Peoples was
made to be respected."
          Third, I'd like for you to meet Nancy. If you had met Nancy a few
years back you would not have expected her to end up with a ruined
life.
          She was a school teacher and her second marriage was to a prominent
lawyer in a small Georgia town. He had once worked for the state
attorney general's office and had friends in high places.
          For all his prominence Nancy's husband was a violent man. Soon
after they were married he began to have outbursts that would leave
Nancy bruised or with an occasional broken tooth or bone. Didn't
Nancy's coworkers and friends and family wonder that she was
"falling down the stairs" so often?
          But we learn from Nancy that the problem of male violence against
women and children cuts across every class line and every racial
line. Our leaders like to talk about Willie Horton and stranger
violence against women on the streets, and it's a problem. But we most
often avoid the most obvious truth. And that truth is that the very
most dangerous place for a woman to be in the United States of America
is in a relationship with a man.
          The most dangerous place for a child to be in the United States of
America is in a family.
          Hear it! Most women and children who are victims of

violence are victimized at home. That's how deep our sickness is.
          For Nancy the sickness was eventually fatal. One night her husband 
came across the room toward her with a 2x4 in his hand. She turned, 
picked up his gun and shot him dead.
          She was convicted of first degree murder and sentenced to life 
in prison.
          She really and truly tried to make the best of her life in prison. 
She taught other prisoners to read. She wrote letters for the 
illiterate. She helped to set up a special program for mothers 
and solicited transportation for their children to be able to visit.
          The prison doctor told her that the lump that developed in her 
breast was benign. When it grew he insisted that it was "nothing to 
worry about" and accused her of malingering.
          When she finally got another biopsy, itwas too late. This "dangerous 
criminal" was sent home in a wheelchair to spend the two remaining 
months of her life with her teenage son and her elderly parents.
          Now that you have met my three friends I can discuss the challenge of service. The title of this article should actually have been, "You Gonna Have to Serve Somebody." Bob Dylan sings that song:
          
            You might like to wear cotton
            Might like to wear silk
            Might like to drink whiskey
            Might like to drink milk
            Might like to eat caviar
            Might like to eat bread
            May be sleepin' on the floor
            or sleepin' on a kingsize bed
            But you gonna have to serve somebody...
            It may be the Devil or it may be the Lord
            But you gonna have to serve somebody.
          
          The point is: Everybody is serving somebody or 
something.
          Not having made a decision does not mean we are 
not serving. I really believe that anyone, especially 
of the middle or upper class, who is not serving her 
oppressed neighbor is serving the status quo.
          In other words, as long as our neighbors are being 
oppressed among us--and they are--and we are not 
serving them, then we are serving those who benefit 
because of our neighbor's oppression.
          We would not have homeless people if it did not benefit 
someone. We would not be spending millions, billions 
of dollars a year at every federal, state, county and 
municipal level to build prisons and jails if it didn't 
benefit somebody. Don't tell me we've got all these 
billions and we can't build housing for people. Where 
do you think crime comes from? Despair! But prison 
construction is big business. Beware when you raise a 
question.
          The oppression of some benefits others. Our government 
speaks, for example, of "acceptable levels of unemployment." 
Meaning, of course, that a certain level of unemployment 
is actually good for the economy.
          Tell that to the unemployed!
          You gonna have to serve somebody. 
The question is who?
          In traditional terms, when we talk about serving our 
neighbors, we really have in mind charity.
          That's a great word: caritas. Love; passionate caring; 
compassion; advocating love; stand-up love.
          But charity is often taken to be serving somebody a bowl of 
soup and thinking that's it.
          The bowl of soup is critical. A hungry person has to cat 
and the sooner the better.
          But let a love for justice walk hand in hand so that at 
the very same time we serve the food we ask, "Why is my 
neighbor hungry?" What's going on in our system that creates 
so much hunger in a land where we throw away more food than 
any people in human history ever dreamed of!
          Charity and justice together provide a night's shelter 
while asking why? Why? Why are all these thousands of people 
homeless? Women and men and boys and girls and families?
          We have huge quantities of construction materials--and 
buildings every where--church buildings, college buildings, 
government buildings, so many of them standing empty most 
of the time.
          Why? Why are so many of our neighbors homeless?
          At many points in history women have taken important roles 
in the struggle for justice for the oppressed. One group of 
our foremothers who are a resource for us today is the 
ASWPL--the Association of Southern Women for the Prevention 
of Lynching.
          After the Civil War, African -American people were freed from 
chattel slavery. But Southern whites were determined to 
maintain a tight social control. In three decades after the 
war it is estimated that more than 10,000 African-Americans 
were lynched.
          Gradually the myth of the black rapist became the excuse 
for lynchings well into the twentieth century. And it was 
done in the name of Southern white women.
          Ida B. Wells, Mary Church Terrell, Mary Tolbert: bold, 
courageous, outspoken African women, stood up, protested, 
pleaded with their white sisters to take up the cause. "Because 
it is done in your name," they argued, "you are the very 
ones who can stop it."

          It took about 35 years to get some real action. But in 1930, 
Jessie Daniel Ames joined with white church women from around 
the South to form the ASWPL.
          Their motto as they picked up the crusade against lynching 
was "Not in our Names."
          They were tireless in their petition drives, meetings, letter 
writing, and demonstrations and in taking on their own men. 
Their effectiveness in bringing to an end the public acceptance 
of lynching is a reminder to us of the power of women working 
together to end oppression.
          The crusade against lynching had its problems, but it was 
genuinely an interracial womens' movement: the sort we need so 
desperately today.
          Do you know? Do you have any idea how much the poor and 
your oppressed neighbor need you? Do you have any idea how much 
your life, your service, your compassion and love is needed by 
the many who suffer because of injustice?
          Oppression in the form of racism, sexism, war and poverty 
is causing death and destruction around the world and right 
under our noses. The flagrant destruction of the earth and 
its precious resources and the destruction of human hope and 
human dignity are a part of the same death-dealing spirit that 
says: Serve yourself. Take what's yours and then get yourself 
a gun and an insurance policy to protect it. Use up whatever 
you want right now and let somebody else worry about it tomorrow.
          Our earth and the earth's people (most of whom are in this very 
moment poor and hungry ) need us to give our lives to service of 
our neighbors toward the goals of justice and social transformation.
          It is so easy to be blinded by our class, our privilege, and yes, 
even blinded by our educations and educational institutions.
          But in these days our ignorance of our neighbors' plight--whether 
willful or unwitting ignorance--our silence and our inaction mean, 
literally and powerfully, service to a public policy that is 
killing our neighbors at home and around the world.
          You gonna have to serve somebody.
          
            Murphy Davis is the Open Door Community's Southern Prison
Ministry Director. This article is adapted from a symposium talk in
May 1990 at Converse College. (Open Door Community, 910 Ponce de Leon
Avenue, Atlanta, GA 30306-4212; (404)-874-9652.)
          
        
        
          Mississippi and the WPA
          Reviewed by Campbell, WillWill Campbell
          Vol. 12, No. 4, 1990, pp. 20-23
          
          If I were asked to name one agency of government which has done the
most good in my lifetime I would not hesitate. The Works Progress
Administration of the Great Depression. The WPA.
          For proof, I offer the newly republished Mississippi: The 
WPA Guide to the Magnolia State,
with a new introduction by Robert S. McElvaine. This volume, first
published 52 years ago, is about a lot of things. But to me, for the
University Press of Mississippi to consider it important enough to
publish a golden anniversary edition is a tribute to the agency that
made it possible in the first place. So I wish to join the applause
for the WPA. It seems appropriate, so that the majority of Americans
who were not even born when the book was first published might know
from whence it came.
          When millions of people were idle in the mid-1930s they were given
jobs. Thus few "street people." Not high paying jobs but something to
do for pay. My father, a yeoman farmer, among them. Because of his
work for the WPA he was able to save the family farm when crops failed
from drought, when what corn as did grow sold for five cents a pound,
shelled corn was worth a can of Prince Albert for the men, a Baby Ruth
for the children with nothing left over for the women, and the bank
came calling. I remember it well. This summer, at 92, my father died,
leaving the small Mississippi acreage to his children and
grandchildren.
          I also remember that the WPA built two ten-hole outhouses for the
East Fork Consolidated School which we attended. I was never allowed
to see the one for girls but the one for boys is vivid in my mind. I
was in the fifth grade. The day it was completed my friend,
J.D. "Wart" Pray, and I meandered down to look it over. The urinal, a
V-shaped cement trough, stretched the length of the back outside
wall. J.D. suggested that we scratch our initials on the glistening
surface of the still soft cement so that all the world would know we
had been there, sure that this sturdy structure would be there at
least as long as the world stood.
          The proud proprietor of this facility, the school principal,
appeared in the fifth-grade room shortly after we had resumed our
places. He moved directly to J.D.'s desk, bellowing with each
stride. "And who is H.B.?" I had feared at the time that leaving our
mark on the WPA outhouse might be considered a major infraction. So
instead of W.D.C. I had inscribed the initials H.B., meaning
nothing. J.D. answered that he didn't know who H.B. was, that he had
been "down the hill"-our euphemism for the outhouse-by himself. I sat
frozen in terror, certain that Mr. Stuart would soon exact from
J.D. the name of his accomplice. He knew that J.D.P. stood for
Jefferson Davis Pray, and that he had defaced this near holy
place. There had never been such an elaborate facility at East Fork
before. The inevitable five hefty licks of the rubber tube Mr. Stuart
carried did not persuade J.D., two years older than I, to betray the
trust of his little friend. The irate principal jerked J.D. from his
seat and fiercely directed him to the office. I knew that more severe
punishment awaited him there. I considered confessing that I, WDC, was
the erring HB. But I quickly convinced myself that J.D.'s swift glance
was saying that since he was going to get a beating anyhow, why both
of us. We heard the hard licks 

and J.D.'s loud yells. But the loyalty
held firm. He never told. And J.D. "Wart" Pray is still one of my
dearest buddies, despite serious ideological differences during the
civil rights days in Mississippi. Such is the stuff of friendships
forged by the WPA.
          But the WPA did more than save small family farms and build
outhouses. They built parks, theaters, museums, roads, bridges,
gymnasiums, and many other projects of long-range public benefit.
          There were also arts programs known collectively as Federal
One. Under this umbrella were the Federal Writers' Project, the
Federal Theater Project, the Federal Art Project, and the Federal
Music Project.
          In addition to my father's road building job and the East Fork
outhouse I was further introduced to the work of the WPA through
Federal One, the parent of this volume. There was a program for people
in the various communities to read and study literary works as well as
to produce them. We were a close knit neighborhood, most of us related
by blood or marriage. The idea was for someone in the community to
organize and lead discussion groups among their neighbors. There was a
small stipend involved. Aunt Ruth organized such a group in our
neighborhood. On the appointed summer evening we-men, women, children,
and babies-gathered at Aunt Ruth's house. We had been told that a
supervisor of the project would be present and that it was important
that everyone enter into the discussion so as to impress her. The
adults sat in chairs in the parlor, yearling boys and girls sitting on
the floor, babies on pallets or in mothers' arms. Aunt Ruth announced
that we would be discussing a passage from the Bible, the book with
which we were most familiar and the only book to be found in may of
the households. She read from the eighth chapter of The Acts of the
Apostles. It was the story of Philip encountering an Ethiopian eunuch,
a man who was treasurer for Candace, rich queen of Ethiopia. Philip
found the eunuch sitting in his chariot, climbed up on the chariot
with him, converted him to the new Christian faith and baptized him in
a nearby stream. After reading the story Aunt Ruth did a brief
exegesis and opened the floor for questions and discussion. Uncle
Bill, Aunt Ruth's husband, having been coached on the importance of
lively discussion, was first to speak. Raising his hand to be formally
recognized, and given permission to 

speak, not generally a part of
marital mores in Amite County, Mississippi in this rural depression
era, he asked his question.
          "Yes, yes," he began. "I have a question. What is a eunuch?"
          Aunt Ruth, embarrassed by her husband's question, looked at the
visiting supervisor, a woman none of us knew. The woman nodded that it
was the discussion leader's responsibility to deal with any
inquiry.
          When vexed Aunt Ruth pronounced her husband's name as "Beale." "Now
Beale!" she pleaded.
          Uncle Coot, as we knew him, had been urged to participate, to ask
questions. So he persisted. "What's a eunuch?"
          A few of the older boys and girls snickered. The adults sat in
squirming silence, waiting for Aunt Ruth to answer. "Beale. Now
Beale. You know what a eunuch is."
          Uncle Coot, getting impatient and sensing that he had asked an
inappropriate question, asserted himself further. "No, Ruth, I
understood everything you explained except what a eunuch is. Now if
you know yourself, just tell me what it means."
          Aunt Ruth, seeing that he wasn't going to let go, made answer. Soft
but awkward. "A eunuch is like an ox."
          Uncle Coot was on his feet, roaring with incredulous laughter. "Now
Ruth, you know damn well no ox didn't get up in a chariot with a man!
Now what the hell is a eunuch?"
          That pretty much ended our literary evening but I lived it again as
I examined the new edition of Mississippi: The WPA
Guide to the Magnolia State.
          With a helpful new introduction by Professor Robert S. McElvaine of
Millsaps College the book takes the young back in time half a
century. At the same time it reminds my generation of how many things
have changed in, to us, so short a time. And how many things have
remained the same.
          It is a one volume history of one of our most complex states, going
as far back as history can go. It is an archaeological and
geographical study, an outline of four centuries, a treatise on
religion, folkways, education, architecture, music, arts and
letters. It is also a detailed guide of twenty-four interesting tours,
from the Delta to the Gulf Coast. And it is a fascinating reading
experience.
          Young readers will be appalled to learn that in a serious book of
the 1930s it was written of black citizens:
          As for the so-called Negro question-that, too, is just another
problem he has left for the white man to cope with. Seated in the
white man's wagon, and subtly letting the white man worry with the
reins, the Negro assures himself a share of all good things.
          But it was written, and yes, believed, and the WPA did us a service
by having it recorded so that we never forget.
          Maybe it is a weakness of the book that we know the names of none
of the researchers and writers. A few of the photographers, like
Eudora Welty, are named but not the wordsmiths. They were people who
could write but were not well enough known to make a living at it. So
the WPA paid them small amounts to weave their patterns of beautiful
words about what they knew best--Mississippi and 

her people. Did some
of them, like Miss Welty, go on to become celebrated authors? We
aren't told. And maybe it is just as well. Still and yet, maybe there
should have been a byline for the men and women who put these words to
paper and received in return a small check from the WPA. Words such as
these:
          
            
              The earth is not ours, and if we should doubt, 
we need only to
look to the clean, unsodded plot flanking the church-house. Here
sunlight by day and moonlight by night glide down cold marble
headstones and are absorbed in dark, oval-shaped mounds; and here we
gather once a year to hold Memorial Services for our fathers, who came
over the mountains and down the wilderness with just such a zealous
preacher leading them. We came out of the land and we will return to
the land, and, the preacher's voice drones on, we will be contented
there.
            
          
          It would be an ambitious project for someone to search the
records. From Harry Hopkins, administrator for the WPA, to county
courthouses, bank and family records and elsewhere to let us know what
happened to the hundreds of Mississippians who strung pretty words
together because that was what they did best and because there once
existed a federal administration that believed in feeding the hungry
and clothing the naked. As for me, I will be content knowing that the
words were written and are once more available to us. 
          
            Will Campbell's most recent book is Covenant, with
photographs by AI Clayton. Mississippi: The WPA Guide to the
Magnolia State, with a new introduction by Robert
S. McElvaine, is available from the University Press of
Mississippi.
          
        
        
          Black and White and Rosy.
          Reviewed by Bussey, Charles J.Charles J. Bussey
          Vol. 12, No. 4, 1990, pp. 17-18
          
          Black, White, and Southern:
Race Relations and Southern Culture, 1940 to the Present by
David R Goldfield (Baton Rogue: Louisiana State University Press,
1990. xviii, pp. 321.)
          The American South reminds me of ancient Sparta. Both were
entrapped by their past, by their fear of change, and by their using
every means at their disposal to keep outside ideas and people
away. The charge "outside agitator" was prevalent in Sparta, as it was
in the American South. David Goldfield's book, Black, White and
Southern, reinforces this analogy.
          "Appearances are important in the South," writes Goldfield,
"and white Southerners have a great capacity for ignoring
unpleasant things.... But at some point it is no longer possible to
pretend." Goldfield has written a book using religious
metaphors. "It is," as he says in his preface, ". . .a book
about redemption, a Southern story that begins by defining the sin of
white supremacy and how it poisoned a region and its people; it
continues by relating how that sin came to be expiated, and how the
sinner and the redeemer managed to be transformed without destroying
their unique land, the South.... "
          Goldfield's analysis of "racial etiquette" is provocative, and I
think correct in the conclusion that it "was, above all, a system of
control." Southern racial etiquette bolstered the notion of white
supremacy and strengthened the concept of black inferiority. By
treating blacks as less than human, white Southerners turned the
American Dream upside down. Blacks got their small rewards when they
lived down to low expectations, were punished when they attempted to
secure an education or to develop landowning ambitions. Loud protests
to the contrary, white Southerners like my Mississippi family never
knew or understood their black neighbors.
          In fact, they only rarely saw them. William Alexander Percy
understood that, and wrote in 1941 "that whites and blacks live
side by side, exchange affection liberally, and believe they have an
innate and miraculous understanding of one another. But the sober fact
is we understand one another not at all." The Mississippi Delta
aristocrat was right, but was as trapped as the rest of the white
South and could take no action.
          Goldfield is especially articulate and convincing in 

analyzing
change in the South. He argues persuasively that change had to come
from outside the region. There was too much accommodation within, even
from white Southern liberals, for change to have occurred unaided
inside the region. "White Southern liberals," he said, "were
not only marginal to the process of change, but in some cases actually
inhibited it; and the intrusion of the outside world did not set back
the cause of racial equality but, to the contrary, enhanced its
chances for success."
          One thing particularly disturbing to me, a white Southerner, was
the "respectable resistance" movement led by white intellectuals and
members of the aristocracy. A key figure in resisting the 1954 Brown
decision to integrate the school was James Kilpatrick. Kilpatrick,
today a respected conservative and syndicated columnist, wrote
editorial after editorial in the 1950s and early 1960s in support of
the dual school system, offering arcane arguments to support an
anachronistic way of life.
          Although this is not a history of the civil rights movement,
Goldfield provides an adequate account of that era. But though he
emphasizes the role of school desegregation in bringing change to the
South, he fails to mention the role of Head Start. From the beginning,
key administrators of that most successful of the "Great Society"
programs viewed Head Start as a tool for integration. Julius Richmond,
the first Director of Project Head Start, said that Head Start began
"with a very conscious determination...to...develop integrated
programs." Although not always successful, Richmond said, Head
Start at least "highlighted the issue, and we kept working toward
this and communities kept learning that we were serious about
this."
          Goldfield is not very convincing in his argument that Southern
mores have shifted regarding race. He believes that "the debate
over black poverty has shifted from race to class issues.... " And
that "for the crusade against economic injustice, Southern blacks
and whites are likely to be partners."
          There is considerable evidence that race remains vitally important
as a Southern dynamic and as an inhibiting factor in the fight against
poverty. Likewise, there is a significant debate going on right now
concerning the effect integration has had on improving the quality of
life for blacks in both the North and the South. The July 1990 issue
of Sojourners magazine, for example, is devoted to that very question;
one of the authors argues, for example, that integration was co-opted
by whites. Goldfield is, I think, more optimistic than current
circumstances warrant. His desire, along with mine, is that black and
white together can descend from "the mountaintops of hope" to "the
green valleys of complete equality and justice." That, however,
remains a dream, not a foreseeable reality.
          Nonetheless, Goldfield's book is an important contribution for
people who seek to understand being black, white and southern. His
bibliographical essay is thorough and provides a key starting point
for any reader.
          
            Originally from Mississippi, Charles Bussey now  is on
the History faculty of Western Kentucky University. He is  researching
the life and work of Julius Richmond, the  architect and first
director of Head Start.
          
        
        
          Cooked Food
          By Bondi, RobertaRoberta Bondi
          Vol. 12, No. 4, 1990, pp. 8-12
          
          When Benjamin was five, he looked down at his plate one morning at
breakfast. Then he looked up at me and asked, "Mama, when you were a
little girl, did they have cooked food?" "Are you kidding?" I
answered, sympathetically, knocked breathless by the question. Who did
he think his mama was? How many aeons of life does he think mine has
spanned?
          When my own Mama, in Louisville, Kentucky, moved from her big house
on Willow Avenue into her tiny two-bedroom condo on Village Drive, my
two aunts came to help. My mother's sisters, Kas and Suzie, had awaken
early to leave their farms outside Sturgis in Union County. They
arrived after their four-hour trip shortly after I'd gotten up. It was
late in the move, and most of the work of dismantling my mother's
household and reassembling it in a very small space was already
done.
          Immediately, they started in on wrapping the jelly glasses in
newspaper. I tried to stay quiet and absorb caffeine as quickly as I
could. I knew I was in for it when they started to talk about how hard
life used to be, end how my great aunt Blacky who was eighty at the
time still works, and how people just don't work like they used to. Of
course, they were right on all points.
          Life on a farm is no picnic right now, but it is nothing like my
memories of visiting my grandmother when I was a city child. Until I
was eleven I grew up in Bayside, New York, within striking distance of
my other grandparents who lived in Manhattan. Our home in Queens was a
small, three-bedroom apartment on the second floor of a type of
complex called "garden apartments." To go from playing in the yard
with a flock of assorted children in New York to a farm in western
Kentucky for three weeks each summer was to enter a world that was at
the same time intensely boring and amazingly terrifying.
          My grandparents' house was old, built around the time of the Civil
War. It was one fairly dilapidated story, white frame, with four huge,
high-ceilinged, long-windowed rooms, and two little rooms. The fixed
rooms were the living room on the front, and the kitchen on the
back. The other two shifted in use. Sometimes the dining room would be
on the front of the house next to the living room, while my
grandparents' room connected the kitchen and the living
room. Sometimes it was the dining room that lay between the front and
back. My uncle Quentin and my Aunt Suzie were not married yet. The two
small rooms were theirs.

          The central focus of the house, however, was the kitchen, and this
is where I remember most of the household work being done. It had
three windows. Two of them on the side almost overlooked a neighbor's
house, which was partially hidden by a rickety and overgrown trellis
covered with sweetpeas. Through the window on the back, over the sink,
you could see my grandmother's grapes, also overgrown, a barbed wire
fence against which blackberry bushes grew, the smokehouse (if you
stood on tip-toes and strained to look to the right), and the chicken
yard containing the terrible out-house beyond it. Straight out the
window were open fields, and at a great distance beyond the fields lay
the low ridge of Dyer Hills that enclosed the landscape.
          My grandmother indeed did work hard in that kitchen. There was an
enormous black coal stove she cooked on, with its kettles and skillets
and dented-up enamelled pan. When she opened that stove, the red light
of the fire looked like hell itself and scared me twice as
badly. Under the back window was a sink with a hand pump for cold well
water at its edge. I still remember the metallic taste of that water
that was too cold to wash in. A great square table with a table cloth
that always seemed mostly worn out stood in the middle. Off to one
side of the kitchen was a cold room for storing canned and preserved
foods, and in the floor of that room, a cold cellar you got to by
lifting a trap-door in the floor and descending into the earth.
          This wasn't the farm my mother had grown up on. My grandparents had
lost that one in the Depression. That former farm, however, was close
enough to the farm of my childhood to make me wonder. How did my
grandmother rear six children and feed all the farm workers? Nothing
anybody ate ever seemed to come easily or cleanly out of that
kitchen.
          Every meal was a hot meal, including biscuits or rolls or corn
bread. I remember taking turns with my little brother Freddie churning
sour butter that I couldn't eat in a tall tapered wooden churn from
unpasteurized milk. My grandmother made wonderful fruit pies, but the
apple pies were made of tiny wormy apples she had us pick up off the
ground behind the house in the long wet grass where the dog played and
the chickens ran. The peach pies had an unspeakable origin: the
half-rotten freckled peaches had fallen from their trees into the
dusty, bare dirt right inside the gate to the chicken yard. Her fried
chicken was heaven, but I think I was nearly forty before the memory
of the smell of boiling water poured over chicken feathers and the
feel of those feathers coming off in my hands began to
fade. Vegetables grown in the garden, eggs from the hen house, canning
and preserving, the smoking of hams and the making of sausage all
boggle my mind and memory.
          Though they most certainly took place, I don't remember large
family gatherings of cousins, aunts and uncles, and great aunts and
uncles before the big kitchen was redone as another bedroom and one of
the small rooms was turned into a modern kitchen. The new kitchen was
very long and narrow, and even when it was brand new I remember it as
dingy and rickety, an old woman's kitchen--though my grandmother
wasn't old when it was added--without the solidity and significance of
the old kitchen. Nevertheless, it had hot and cold water with a real
sink, a refrigerator, a gas stove, a washing machine, and a chrome and
formica dinette set with the table still covered by a worn-out table
cloth. I remember very well the family dinners that came out of the
new kitchen when we visited in the summers as I grew older.
          These dinners were complex affairs. Orchestrated by my aunts and my
mother, they took place on Sunday after church. The assembled family
included not only Panny and Papa Charles, my grandparents, my aunts
and uncles, and my first cousins. They usually also included at least

a great aunt or two and occasionally some second cousins as well.
          These gatherings occurred in three movements. The first movement,
of moderately quick tempo, was in three parts. Providing one part, the
men-folk sat on the wide front porch staring toward the road and
talking about the crops and other uninteresting subjects. The next was
played by the children, who were almost all male. In the back yard,
the side yard and the front yard the little ones ran around and
whined, while the older ones teased each other, scuffled, and
tussled. The third and central part came out of my grandmother's
kitchen, and the players were my mother, my aunts and my grandmother
with an occasional female first cousin to set the table, pour the iced
tea, and so forth.
          The second movement was much slower and was in two parts. All the
men and the younger children performed first, coming in off the porch
to eat by themselves without the women. Men at one end, children at
the other, they would assemble in the darkened dining room at the long
white dining room table, while the overhead fan would stir the hot
summer air.
          Sometimes the meal would be pot-roast, new potatoes, and beans
boiled forever with a piece of salt pork. Sometimes it would be ham or
the infamous fried chicken and fried corn. Never were we without
tomatoes from the garden, slaw, and little onions, and usually a white
cake with caramel icing. falling apart in the middle with the icing
running into the crack, and a fruit pie or two. Even the children
drank gallons of the sweetened iced-tea, which was served in big
round, stemmed glasses with little dents in the sides. But most of
all, there were wonderful rolls or biscuits which would be provided by
hovering aunts who kept them coming steadily, always hot, always crisp
on the outside and soft on the inside. Only after the men and children
had eaten, and the table was cleared did the women gather together
their own meal and go to the dining room for the "second sitting."
          For the women, the major portion of the much more rapid third
movement was again the kitchen and clean-up. Unlike the time before
dinner, when conversation was fairly well restricted to discussion of
food and gossip about the present, during clean-up time my
good-natured, joking aunts, great-aunts and grandmother would tell
stories of their own aunts, great-aunts, grandmothers, cousins, and
great-grandmothers. All the while, the men smoked smelly cigars on the
porch, continued to talk about crops, deals, and the weather, and the
children played and napped around the house and yard.
          How to understand these dinners from this distance, One key is in
the breads. I'm not sure how old I was when I began to realize the
special importance hot homemade breads held for me as a female family
member, and how it was that I came to know that everything a woman is
or is not is wrapped up in her rolls and biscuits. I know I learned
late about chicken. I remember as a fourteen-year-old being mortified
at my own gaping lack of womanly abilities when I heard my aunt Suzie
exile a neighbor from the entire race of women by saying of her,
"she's a good woman, but she can't pluck a chicken!" But there never
seems to have been a time when I didn't know that, whatever else my
grandmother, my mother, my aunts, and my great-aunts were able to do,
their power, their honor, and their mysterious authority lay in their
ability to make those perfect biscuits like the women in the family
before them, and bring them to the table throughout the meal, forever
golden, full of buttermilk, and always hot.
          I may not know how old I was when I began to understand about the
significance of biscuits for a real woman, but I do know that it is
only recently that I have come to begin to understand the real power
structure of my family which was revealed in those Sunday dinners.
          Although I lived in New York City as a child, and although I was
the daughter of Kentucky on my mother's side, the law of my father's
Yankee family prevailed in our household. A dazzlingly intelligent and
entertaining so-

phisticated Manhattanite, my father ruled our home with the same grace 
and power as any other absolute monarch. Obedience without argument or questioning was demanded and received from wife and children equally, 
and speeches detailing the moral, psychological, and physical weakness 
of women provided the justification for the law.
          Naturally, therefore, on my grandmother's farm, all I could see 
were the men on the porch rocking while the women worked, sitting to 
cat while the women stood up to wait on them. I was afraid of my big 
uncles. I knew they believed women should work while men played. Even 
on Sunday in their good clothes their hands were huge and rough and 
cracked, and the smell and feel of large animals as well as of intricate 
and spiked farm equipment enveloped them.
          When I would come onto the porch Uncle Bob Wesley and Uncle Bo 
especially would tease me. "You talk like an Eye-talian! " "Say 'Pie 
in the sky when I die!'" And most humiliating of all, "Well, well, 
little lady, you ain't nothing but a horse's titty!" I thought they 
despised me and wanted to make me cry. Uncle A. D., my aunt Kas's 
husband, was kinder and sweeter, and Uncle Bob, married to my Aunt 
Susie, was the quietest of all. I don't remember much from then of 
Quentin, my then college-aged uncle who is now a lawyer. I did not 
know how grindingly hard my farming uncles worked. I could not see 
much of their relationships with my aunts, though I know now as an 
adult that the marriages in my family were remarkably happy, and were 
based on a kind of equality and respect that was invisible to me.
          The truth is, as I have been able to work it out over the intervening 
years, the position of the men in the family is somewhat ambiguous. 
I know now, as I did not then, that my family is an intricately 
structured matriarchy. Living as I had with only a mother, an 
authoritarian father, and younger brothers in New York, the patterns 
of the larger family had escaped me, and so I could not see the 
smaller ones within the larger family, either.
          Yet even then, if I had been asked to diagram the Wynns and the 
Wesleys, I would have known that my greatgrandmother Grammar, a Withers 
before she was married to Bob Wynn, was the center and source of power 
in the family. Only incidentally, it seemed to me as a child, was Papa 
married to my great-grandmother. When I thought about it, I knew that 
all Grammar's children lived on farms close by, that when her daughters 
married, her sons-in-law came to live with her daughters close to their 
mother, and that her son John Bundy didn't marry at all but continued 
to live with his mother. I knew that among my grandmother Roberta's 
children, the same was true. They all settled around their mother. Only 
the oldest, my own mother, had broken that pattern.
          I knew even as a child that within the hierarchy of the family, 
one's status depended upon whether one was male or female first, and 
only after, whether one was born into the family or married into it. 
In the Wesley family, the aunts ranked first, followed by their husbands, 
then came the aunts-in-law, trailed by their husbands, the natural-born 
uncles. Among the cousins, the children of daughters were closer to the 
sources of power than the children of sons, and the daughters of 
daughters both were most favored and had the most expected of them.
          Once when I was about ten, when it was the turn of the front room 
to be the dining room, I watched my mother ironing. I saw a little 
white pique skirt on the ironing, board. "Whose little tiny skirt is 
that?" I asked. Immediately, I received a shock. For the moment I 
asked the question I knew the answer. "Why, it's yours, silly! Whose 
did you think it was?" "I knew that," I said, pitifully. I had thought 
I was almost grown up.
          When I see those childhood dinners, now, I find the players in them 
have changed size and shape as radically as I changed myself when I 
saw the real nature of that white skirt on my grandmother's ironing 
board. From this distance the men in the family appear dull, living 
in a clumsy world of language made entirely of plodding ideas badly 
expressed. Although I was afraid of them I saw even as a child that to 
them, being a man depended on showing no softness, accepting no ambiguity, rejecting men who enjoyed the company of women. They ate first with 
the children because they were like the children. They were too simple for 
the company of women, and their memories were too short. They did not 
carry in their bodies and their minds the skills, jokes, and history of 
the family.
          Now I remember the plates of fried chicken with some of the best 
pieces saved back for the women. Though my mother was my father's weak 
woman at home, I recognize now how articulate, self-confident and strong 
even my mother as well as my aunts were in that place. Their skills at 
sewing, quilting, gardening, laughing, and story-telling were enormous. 
Now I know how little and confused I felt

about what I needed to be myself in the face of their competence. I
had been raised to be obedient, but my aunts were not obedient, and
neither was my mother in this place. They were in charge. My aunts and
my great-aunts summoned me to take my place of authority as the eldest
granddaughter in matriarchy that went back as far as I could see, but
how could I even let myself know it? If I took a place of competence,
I would betray my father. If I did not take it, I turned my back on my
own strength. As it happened, I wanted my father too much. I chose the
second option long ago, and only many years later did I begin
seriously to undo that choice.
          It is true that on me fall the expectations and responsibilities of
the oldest daughter from all those generations of women whose memories
I inherit. I suppose this is why sometimes I feel myself to be a
failure in the family in some important respects. Though the biscuits
I bake are as good as they come, and I can bake rolls from my
great-grandmother's roll recipe any woman in the family would be proud
of, I don't live in Union County. I am not a matriarch. I feel myself
to be a branch still green but fallen off the family tree-the feeling
Eve had, perhaps, as she made a life for herself and her family
outside of Eden. Though I hang on to the memories of my great-aunt's
and grandmother's generation, I don't keep track of my cousins as I
should. I'm a city woman. I can't can. I don't quilt. I certainly
don't know how to work like my aunts and my mother.
          Even in that far off time, however, when I was twelve I began to
cast in my lot with Kentucky women. I had a second cousin my own age
named Sam. Sam was my great aunt Blacky's son. He was mean and didn't
like my Yankee mouth and cringing shyness. One day, out in the yard
behind his house on the hill he grabbed my two pinkie fingers and he
starting bending, outward. "I'm gonna bend your fingers till you yell
'uncle,'" he taunted. I didn't say a word. "Say uncle!" he said. While
I felt a fire in my joints, I gritted my teeth and said nothing. "Say
uncle, say uncle!" he yelled, and he kept on bending. By the time he
was finished my fingers were bent so out of shape they never
recovered. They hurt all through high school, and they are still
misshapen.
          After my aunts and mama and I finished our morning packing to get
her out of the big house and into the little condo, we had a lunch
unthinkable from my childhood-fancy chicken salad, a green salad with
an intricate dressing, and croissants. While we scraped the plates
into the garbage disposal and put them into the new dish-washer, I
mentioned my memories of Aunt Suzie's biscuits. "Oh, no," she
laughed. "I never make biscuits any more. They're not so good for you,
you know. They have too much cholesterol, and we're all too fat,
anyway."
          Astounded, I mull over the meaning of what Aunt Suzie
said. Earlier, and inexplicably, she has told me how proud of me my
aunts are because of the work I do. For years within my own family, I
have felt embarrassed by my university work. I have avoided talking
about it, as though it were a not very good substitute for the
practice of the real skills of the women of the family. What does it
mean that she doesn't make biscuits because they're not good for you?
Has she just taken away from me the power of my womanhood or has she
set me free? Feeling a bit betrayed by the aunts I thought I had
myself betrayed, I wonder over the mystery of time passing, and of
cooked food. 
          
            Roberta Bondi is professor of church history at the
Candler School of Theology at Emory University. She is the author of
To Love as God Loved: Conversations with the Early
Church (Philadelphia: Fortress Press, 1987). Illustrations
with this article are from John Egerton's Southern
Food (New York: Knopf; 1987), photographed Al
Clayton.
          
        
      
    
  
