
          The South Gets Its Own Network
          By Glenn, GwendolynGwendolyn Glenn
          Vol. 13, No. 2, 1991, p. 11
          
          A new radio network has been established in Atlanta, Ga., to produce and syndicate documentary programs on the South. These programs will air nationally, mainly on public radio stations.
          The network is called the Regional Radio Network (RRN).
          "Other networks produce stories on issues in the South from time to time," said RRN director Gwendolyn Glenn, "but no one is focusing exclusively on the region on a national level. Putting this network together is an exciting challenge because there are many interesting stories throughout the South waiting to be told."
          The network's premier program, "Southways," began airing nationally via satellite on May 3,1991. It is a weekly half-hour program consisting of documentary style reports, produced by reporters who travel in or cover the South on a regular basis. Many of these reporters have national experience.
          "Southways" covers a broad range of topics: politics, education, the environment, cultural events and individual profiles, to name a few.
          "This will be a great opportunity to take listeners on a journey through the South, through sound," said Glenn.
          Glenn is also the producer and host of "Southways." Since 1981 she has worked as an independent producer and reporter for National Public Radio in Washington, D.C. For the past four years, she produced reports for NPR's award-winning news program "All Things Considered."
          "'Southways' will attempt to meet the needs of all its listeners," said Glenn, "from the Southerner who wants to hear more on the air about the region, to those in other parts of the country who are not familiar with the region and want to learn more about the South, to the Southern transplant eager to hear news from home."
          The Regional Radio Network is a project of the Southern Regional Council, and is funded by a grant from the Mary Reynolds Babcock Foundation. 
        
