
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 20, Number 3,
	       1998
        
          The "New" Disfranchisement
          By Hagens, WinnettWinnett Hagens and Spears, EllenEllen Spears
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 3-4
          
          Because the core premise of a democratic society is that legitimate rule is based on the consent of the governed, the linchpin of our democratic order is fair representation. And fair representation begins with access to the ballot. In an intentionally democratic system like ours, rules about who is allowed to vote inevitably affect who gets what. 
          In American history, outright disfranchisement has been one of the
most common tactics employed by propertied interests seeking to
protect their advantages. Nowhere has disfranchisement worked better to preserve and entrench rule by a narrow segment of privilege and wealth in American society than its use in the South following Reconstruction. In the last quarter of the nineteenth century, white elites began building what V.O. Key in his 1949 book Southern Politics called "the most impressive systems of obstacles between the voter and the ballot box known to the democratic world." Since readers of Southern Changes are familiar with the inventory of ballot obstructions (literacy tests, poll taxes, all white primaries, etc.) instituted under segregation, the subject needs no elaboration here. 
          By today's standards, those methods of outright
disfranchisement-the "old" or traditional disfranchisement-are crude
and blunt mechanisms of control. The "old" disfranchisement simply
stole and denied the right to vote. The "new" disfranchisement gives
people the vote, and in doing so it breathes life into the illusion of
a society based on consent. This "new" disfranchisement steals from
the voters not their ballots but their choice of candidates and
representatives. It also steals the power of the vote through
dilution. Taylor Branch, in his book Pillar of Fire, captured the essence of the "new" disfranchisement when he quoted civil rights worker Bob Moses in 1964: "The best way to keep someone a slave is to give him the vote and call him free." 
          Camouflage-concealing the potent and polarizing influence of race
and money in politics-is the distinctive feature of the "new"
disfranchisement, which we examine in this issue of Southern Changes. The "new" disfranchisement is not enforced by police with billy clubs and tear gas. Voter intimidation persists, as witnessed in the multi-faceted assault on the use of absentee ballots and black political power in Greene County, Alabama. (See "Voting Rights on Trial Again in Alabama," by veteran activist Anne Braden, Summer 1998,  Southern Changes.) Yet, even where such intimidation is absent, having a vote feels utterly pointless for voters if they have little or no hope of using it to protect their interests. The willful retreat from justice in voting rights is a classic case in point. 
          "The simple fact is that virtually all districts in which whites
are a majority elect white candidates.... For blacks to win," wrote
Lisa Handley and Bernard Grofman in the 1994 book Quiet Revolution in the South, "it is therefore
still necessary in the South to draw districts in which blacks are a
majority or a supermajority of the population." Even though it is
beyond dispute that African Americans and Latinos have almost no
chance of electing community-based candidates of their choice without
district geographies holding a preponderance of their voters, federal
courts have repeatedly rejected districts where race is a major factor
as unconstitutional. The courts' rulings in the 1993 Shaw case and its progeny are "racially unfair and nearly unmanageable," explains Laughlin McDonald in his article, "Redistricting at the Millenium," quoting Supreme Court dissenters who point out that the recent rulings disadvantage the very group they were designed to help.
          When the smoke screen of litigation lifts, we are left with a
legacy no carefully crafted electoral remedy can circumvent, the enduring fact of white racial bloc voting. "Until racial bloc voting diminishes, black-majority congressional districts are one appropriate and necessary means of ensuring that black candidates are afforded an equal opportunity to compete for-not win-office," argues Harvard public policy professor Keith Reeves in "When a Black Face Turns Away White Votes." Reeves shares his innovative research on media messages and white racial bloc voting in an excerpt from his 1997 book,"Voting Hopes or Fears?: White Voters, Black Candidates and Racial Politics in America." 
          Sometimes circumstances-whether court rulings or geographical dispersion-preclude the use of districting as a leveling mechanism. In "Monopoly Politics: Southern Style," Center for Voting and Democracy Director Rob Richie explores an alternate route to fair representation for minorities, suggesting proportional representation as one way out of low turnout, uncontested elections and the limits of the winner-take-all system. Proportional systems are in effect in more than 200 localities in the U.S., including a number of communities in Alabama and Texas. They work to enfranchise any political minority-whether a racial or ethnic group, or a political party. 
          Of course, unless and until such systems enjoy more widespread use,
incumbent politicians control the redistricting process. Allan
Lichtman shares his predictions of expanded Republican power in the South after the November elections and the attendant consequences for the 2000 Census and the redistricting to follow.
          In a special section, we explore what competes with race as a powerful disfranchising mechanism-Money in Politics-and the growing movement to curb its influence. Huge and growing sums of money are now required to capture public office. Any candidate reaching the ballot in today's world has already been pre-selected by an invisible "wealth primary," a "new-old" method of exclusion from decision-making. Advocates Randy Kehler, Sharon Basco, Gwen Patton, Stephanie Anthony and Pete McDowell outline what's at stake in this democratic fight for Clean Money and Clean Elections.
          Criminal disfranchisement laws, the denial of the right to vote of people convicted of crimes have a disproportionate impact on African American males. Earl Shinhoster questions the unequal effect of these laws, with 1.4 million (one in seven) black men denied the right to vote due to present or prior felony convictions. 
          Jim Blacksher brings us back to the starting point: our society's legitimacy rests on the consent of the governed. Wholesale disfranchisement, delivered through unjust voting rights decisions, criminal disfranchisement laws, and the power of money, plainly contradicts the principle of consent. In departing from this principle, he says, the Shaw majority "would make interracial  legislative dialogue constitutionally illegitimate and black  political influence once again impotent." 
          Sadly, calls for genuine interracial dialogue have been all but buried in what passes for governance these days. The success of that interracial political dialogue requires fair representation of political interests-in a system that disfranchises no one.
          
            Winnett Hagens is director of Fair Representation Programs and Ellen Spears is communications director at the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          The Midterm Elections in the South: Another Democratic Slide?
          By Lichtman, Allan J.Allan J. Lichtman
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 4-5
          
          The notion that Bill Clinton saved the Democratic party by moving it from the left to the center of the political spectrum is another convenient theory exploded by inconvenient facts.  During the Clinton years  Democrats have suffered the worst drubbing at the polls since  World War I.
          Democrats have lost control of both houses of Congress and of numerous state house and senate chambers. Since 1990, the number of Democratic governors has declined from twenty-nine to sixteen. Of the ten largest states, only Florida and North Carolina still have Democratic governors.
          Nowhere has the decline of the Democratic party been more evident than in the once solidly Democratic South. Today, Democrats control a minority of U.S. House and Senate seats and governors' mansions in the South.
          There is little chance that Democrats will reverse the Republican tide in the South in the midterm elections of 1998. Rather, these elections will likely bring additional Democratic losses in the South and elsewhere, with profound implications for the 2000 Census, the post-Census redistricting,  and policies that affect U.S. minority groups.
          Given that Democrats in the South are as far or farther behind Republicans in U.S. Senate seats and governorships as in U.S. House seats, Democratic losses in the South cannot be attributed to the creation of majority-minority House districts following the Census of 1990. The Democrats' Southern problem is neither caused by nor subject to remedy by redistricting. Rather, it reflects a huge decline in votes cast for Democratic candidates.
          In most Southern states there are no longer enough Democratic votes to create majorities for Democratic statewide candidates or Democratic congressional delegations. In Georgia, for example, the Democratic share of votes cast in congressional races fell from 61.3 percent in 1990 to 45.5 percent in 1994. In North Carolina, the Democratic share fell from 54.7 percent to 43.8 percent.
          Thus far Democratic losses in the South have largely been confined
to white voters. In most Southern states, Republicans can routinely
count on 60 percent or more of the white vote. But, there are signs
that Democrats may be losing their near-unanimous support from
Southern black voters. In the 1997 elections for governor of
Virginia, victorious Republican candidate James Gilmore garnered a
record 20 percent vote from African Americans. In Florida, with white
and black Democrats squabbling, Republican gubernatorial candidate Jeb
Bush seems poised to make significant inroads into the black vote. In other Southern states, similar though less serious rifts between black and white Democrats have emerged as well. Even a small loss in black support would have devastating consequences for Democrats in the South.
          Although there should be no major shifts of party power in the South this year, chances are that the Democrats will slide further downhill. If the Clinton scandals explode further prior to November, that slide could be even steeper than is now expected. In governor's races, Democrats could lose two of the most important states the party still holds: Florida and Georgia, both of which have retiring Democratic governors. In Florida, Republican Jeb Bush is expected to defeat Democratic Lieutenant Governor Buddy MacKay. In Georgia, wealthy Republican businessman Guy Millner is perched to prevail over Democratic State Representative Roy Barnes. Another tight race is shaping up in Alabama, where Democratic Lieutenant Governor Don Siegelman faces  incumbent Republican Governor Fob James, who won easily after a brutal primary struggle.
          House and Senate races in the South also present greater opportunities for Republicans than Democrats, especially in a midterm election with the White House in Democratic hands. Not since 1934 has the party of the President made gains in Congress during a midterm election. In the Senate, Republicans have a decent chance to pick up an open seat in Kentucky and the seat held by Ernest F. (Fritz) Hollings in South Carolina. The most vulnerable Republican is Lauch Faircloth in North Carolina. 
          In the House, about fifteen seats are in play, with Republicans having about two or three more opportunities than Democrats. In Alabama's Fifth Congressional District, Republicans may defeat Robert E. (Bud) Cramer, the last white Democratic Representative in that state. Already there are no white Democratic House members in Georgia and only one in Kentucky, Louisiana, South Carolina, Mississippi, and Alabama. If there is a broad ripple effect on Democrats from the scandals, even some of the South's black Democratic members of Congress could be in danger this November.
          The likelihood of expanded Republican power in the South and nation virtually guarantees that the 2000 Census will be conducted without the sampling needed to reduce the undercount of minorities. Even if the Supreme Court authorizes sampling, Republicans will likely have enough power in Congress to block use of the procedure in the 2000 Census. It means that  far more so than in 1980 or 1990, redistricting will be controlled by Republicans whose power depends greatly on white votes. And it means less support for affirmative action and civil rights programs.
          There is no quick fix for the declining electoral prospects of Democrats. The party may have to undergo a large-scale reconstruction like the Republicans pulled off in the 1970s. New issues are on the horizon of the twenty-first century. Among others, these include: the nation's potentially ruinous entitlement obligations; the increasing concentration of income and wealth among a small segment of the population; inequality in educational opportunity; genuine reform of the political system; the corrosive effects of the global economy; and, ongoing racial divisions.
          If the Democratic party is to thrive in the new millennium, it
cannot simply accommodate itself to Republicans. The party needs to
seize control of the battle for new ideas, reinvigorate its grassroots
base, and develop new mechanisms for communicating its ideas to the
public.
          
            Allan J. Lichtman chairs the Department of History at American University in Washington, D.C. He has participated as an expert witness in more than fifty federal voting rights and redistricting lawsuits and is the author of  The Keys to the White House, 1996: A Surefire Guide to Protecting the Next President, Madison Books (1996).
          
        
        
          When A Black Face Turns Away White Votes...
          By Reeves, KeithKeith Reeves
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 6-7
          
          In the wake of the Supreme Court's flawed but significant rulings on race-based districting, two central questions remain: What happens when a black face turns away white votes and can blacks be elected from settings where whites comprise a majority of the population? With the Court's developing jurisprudence of racial gerrymandering, racial pluralism in Congress has been dealt a signifcant blow.
          In the entire checkered history of this country, only nine blacks have ever won election to the U.S. Congress from election districts where whites were overwhelmingly in the majority. Following the 1990 reapportionment, black congresspersons were elected from Florida for the first time ever, and from Alabama, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia for the first time in more than a century. 
          One of those riding the crest of political change in 1992 was Louisiana's Cleo Fields, the twenty-nine year-old state senator from Baton Rouge. With prodding from the Department of Justice, the state legislature interpreted the 1982 proviso to the Voting Rights Act to mean that "where a majority-black district could be created, one must be created." Thus, to gain approval of its reapportionment plan, it carved out the district from which Fields was elected. Of seven congressional districts, Louisiana now had two that were predominantly black-the Second and the Fourth. William Jefferson's geographically compact Second District in the New Orleans region was relatively easy to configure(see  map). By stark contrast, Field's widely dispersed district, the "'Z' with drips" district stretched from the northwestern city of Shreveport to his home base of Baton Rouge.
          But the Justice Department's policy of creating majority-black districts met with fierce criticism. Disputants charged that the districts convey the impression that voters were segregated on the basis of race, in violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. Furthermore, intentional racially configured voting districts, they alleged, "raise the specter of racial quotas, deepening racial and ethnic cleavages, and minority political ghettos." "These districts are reserved for black candidates; no white candidates need apply," one detractor argued. Besides wrote another, "[r]ace relations suffer when 'electoral remedies' favor one racial group."
          Such sentiments resonated with the U.S. Supreme Court when it ruled
in 1993 (in Shaw v. Reno) that the shape of two majority-black congressional districts in North Carolina were suspiciously race-driven and subordinated traditional districting practices such as geographical compactness and contiguity, in particular. The five-member conservative plurality, speaking through Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, reasoned: "So bizarre on its face" were the districts that it "rationally cannot be understood as anything other than an effort to segregate citizens into separate voting districts on the basis of race." 
          Indeed, O'Connor maintained that North Carolina's majority-black First and Twelfth districts resembled "the most egregious racial gerrymanders of the past" and, accordingly, violated the constitutional rights of all voters to participate in a "color-blind" electoral process. That said, North Carolina would have to demonstrate that its reapportionment plan was not drawn for an expressly racial purpose or, if so, that the plan was "narrowly tailored to further a compelling governmental interest." Contorted majority-black electoral districts in Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas, all drawn after the 1990 census, were now open to legal challenge by disaffected whites. 
          Meanwhile, the Court plurality applied its reasoning in Shaw v. Reno two years later, when it invalidated Georgia's majority-black Eleventh District, represented by Cynthia McKinney, the state's first black congresswoman. The Court concluded that the state legislature's emphasis on race when it drew the boundary lines was "predominant" and thus unconstitutional. 
          Like it or not, a great many of us are left to contemplate the
profound and vast implications of the Court's evisceration of
race-based legislative districting. Justice John Paul Stevens grasped
the dire, if not muddled, ramifications of the Court's rulings. In
poignant, pointed language, he epitomized the concerns of many:  "The
decisions issued...serve merely to reinforce my conviction that the
Court has...struck out into a jurisprudential wilderness
that...threatens to create harms more significant than any suffered by
the individual plaintiffs challenging these districts....I cannot
profess to know how the Court's developing jurisprudence of racial gerrymandering will alter the political and racial landscape in this Nation-although it certainly will alter that landscape."
          As Steven Holmes of The New York Times put it, "[T]he country will soon have to face a practical question that all those legislative contortions were intended to avoid: Will whites vote for black candidates?"
          For the last several years, white and black Americans across the country have been engaged in polemic and contentious discussions about the perils of affirmative action. And, in some critics' minds, majority-black districting amounts to "affirmative action in the voting booth." This is a simplistic and trivial characterization of both the nature and extent of the problem. Race remains this country's deepest and most enduring division. Racial discrimination was the problem in the 1965 campaign for voting rights, and even after the passage of the Voting Rights Act that year, it remains so today.
          The presumption was that stringent enforcement of this law would
remedy the problem of black voters' disfranchisement. And to a great extent, the legislation has. But thirty years after the passage of the act, an intractable problem remains that neither Congress, state legislatures nor the courts can ignore the prevalence of racial bloc voting on the part of whites.
          To date, virtually all of the electoral data on the prevalence of racial bloc voting has been in the aggregate registration and turnout figures. This information does not enable us to understand why citizens vote as they do.
          To ascertain whether whites' political choices are motivated by racial animus, for example, I conducted a biracial campaign study experiment. Approximately 110 white respondents in the study were asked to read one of two news stories that described a hotly contested and racially polarized election campaign between two mayoral candidates. One group of respondents was given a news story about two white candidates while the other group was given the same story, only in this case the race of the two candidates was changed, one candidate was black, the other white. 
          A research investigation of this kind is significant for the following reasons. First, the study provides direct information about the motivations and sentiments underlying white voting behavior toward a black office-seeker. For instance, respondents were queried about their: (1) racial attitudes; (2) evaluation of the candidates; and (3) vote choices "if the election were held today." Second, the fact that many voting-rights disputes cover small jurisdictions or past events means that individual-level survey instruments for these cases are usually not available and cannot be constructed. This experimental campaign study enables us to peer inside the privacy of the ballot box. Third and most important, if it can be shown that whites' limited receptivity toward a black office-seeker is due to racial animus independent of political orientation, qualifications, and experience, age, reputation, or some other personal attribute is an affirmative remedy not warranted?
          Thus, several striking conclusions emerge from this biracial election campaign study. First, the study showed conclusively that those whites who read the news story of the contest between the black and white candidate were reluctant to vote for that black candidate despite the fact that he possessed identical credentials, political experience, and personal characteristics as his white counterpart depicted in the other news story. Furthermore, the study found that in a racially polarized political campaign, whites' aversion to voting for a black candidate is associated with their attitudes, opinions, and stereotypes of black Americans as a categorical group. A black candidate seeking the support of white voters is evaluated accordingly. Such racial bias unfairly burdens black candidates who ought to have an equal opportunity to compete for elected office on the basis of their qualifications, experience, issue stances and personal character.
          Racial bloc voting on the part of whites perniciously stacks the electoral deck against any black candidate, particularly in circumstances in which that candidate competes against a white opponent. One must ponder what it says about our society that thirty years after the tumultuous campaigns of the 1960s, a black American who runs for office is not afforded an equal opportunity to compete for white votes.
          Americans of all political and ideological stripes must acknowledge racial bloc voting for what it is a formidable barrier to aspiring black political candidates. Until racial bloc voting diminishes, black-majority congressional districts are one appropriate and necessary means of ensuring that black candidates are afforded an equal opportunity to compete for, not win, office. This is not a special privilege. Rather, it is a remedy to level the political playing field. And although five redistricted black members of Congress were returned to office in 1996, it is beyond dispute that race loomed large in those elections.
          The merits of majority-minority districting ought to be evaluated from the vantage point of bringing real meaning to notions of equal opportunity and racial pluralism. As the Supreme Court continues its wade into the "jurisprudential wilderness of racial gerrymandering," it is imperative that the justices affirm these fundamental concepts. To do so, they must come to grips with the fact, however dispiriting, that racial bias still plays a role in the voting booth.	
          
            Keith Reeves is an associate professor of public policy in the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University. He was an expert witness in Hays v. Louisiana, III, a federal court challenge to the creation of Louisiana's Fourth majority-black congressional district.
          
        
        
          Redistricting at the Millennium
          By McDonald, LaughlinLaughlin McDonald
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 8-10
          
          As we await the 2000 census that will trigger another round of
redistricting at the congressional, state, and local levels, the
U.S. Supreme Court has laid down a minefield of problems. In a series of 5-4 decisions, beginning with Shaw v. Reno in 1993 (which has caused the destruction of majority black and Hispanic congressional districts in Georgia, North Carolina, Texas, Florida, Virginia, Louisiana, and New York), the Court has made redistricting not only racially unfair but nearly unmanageable. It has also created an elaborate set of special rules that can only be described as affirmative action for white voters, allowing them to challenge majority-minority election districts. The Justices who dissented in the Shaw line of cases have correctly noted that the Court's new standards are "unworkable" (Breyer and Souter), lack "a definable constitutional core" (Stevens), "render redistricting perilous work for state legislatures" (Ginsburg), and "place at a disadvantage the very group,  African Americans, whom the Civil War Amendments sought to help" (Breyer).
          One principle which does emerge with disquieting clarity from the
recent redistricting decisions is that majority black and Hispanic
districts are held to a more stringent standard than majority-white
districts. The Court struck down the majority-minority congressional
districts in the Shaw line of cases on the grounds that the districts were bizarrely shaped and the states had "subordinated" their traditional redistricting principles to race. The Court, however, had never called into question the constitutionality of a majority white district on account of its bizarre shape, or because the jurisdiction subordinated its traditional redistricting principles to race. 
          There is, of course, a long and continuing tradition of drawing majority white districts, including those that are highly irregular in shape and disregard "traditional" districting principles, to protect white incumbents. The old Eighth District in Louisiana drawn to ensure the re-election of white Congressman Gillis Long, and District Six in Texas created in the 1960s and known as "Tiger" Teague's district after the white congressman of the same name, are two of many examples. Bizarrely shaped majority white districts had always been regarded as immune from challenge under the Court's often stated principle that a regular looking district shape was not a federal constitutional requirement. 
          Non-traditional, oddly shaped majority white districts were also
drawn in the 1990s. The Congressional Quarterly has described District Four in Tennessee (96% white) as "a long, sprawling district, extending nearly 300 miles . . . from east to west it touches four States-Mississippi, Alabama, Kentucky, and Virginia." The Eleventh District in Virginia (81% white) has "a shape that vaguely recalls the human digestive tract." District Nine in Washington (85% white) has a "'Main Street' [which] is a sixty-mile stretch of Interstate 5." District Thirteen in Ohio (94% white) "centers around two distinct sets of communities . . . [t]he Ohio Turnpike is all that connects the two." No court has ever held or suggested that any of these oddly shaped majority-white districts were constitutionally suspect.
          In the recent Texas redistricting case, Bush v. Vera (1996), the plaintiffs challenged twenty-four of the state's thirty congressional districts, eighteen of which were majority white. The district court invalidated just three districts-the only two that were majority black and one that was majority Hispanic. The court admitted that the other districts were irregular or bizarre in shape, but held that they were constitutional because they were "disfigured less to favor or disadvantage one race or ethnic group than to promote the re-election of incumbents." The oddly shaped majority white districts, designed to keep white incumbents in office, were tolerable as "political" gerrymanders, while the oddly shaped majority-black districts, designed to provide black voters the equal opportunity to elect candidates of their choice, were intolerable as "racial" gerrymanders.
          On appeal, the Supreme Court affirmed. According to Justice
Kennedy, "[d]istricts not drawn for impermissible reasons or according
to impermissible criteria may take any shape, even a bizarre one."
Justice O'Connor said in Shaw v. Reno that
"reapportionment is one area in which appearances do matter." In light
of the Texas case one can conclude that appearances do indeed matter,
but only where the districts in question are majority-black or
Hispanic. When it comes to bizarre district shape, if it's white it's all right.
          Prior to Shaw, the Court frequently said that one of the essential purposes of redistricting was to "reconcile the competing claims of political, religious, ethnic, racial, occupational, and socioeconomic groups." For that and other reasons, voting districts have regularly been drawn to accommodate the interests of Irish Catholics in San Francisco, Italian-Americans in South Philadelphia, Polish-Americans in Chicago, and Anglo-Saxons in North Georgia. 
          In light of Shaw, however, blacks and
Hispanics are now the only racial or ethnic groups that are targeted
for special disadvantages in the redistricting process. All others may
organize themselves politically and press for a fair or maximum share
of recognition in redistricting. The comparable efforts of blacks and
Hispanics alone are subject to the exacting and debilitating standards
of strict scrutiny. Such a result cannot be reconciled with the
purposes of the Fourteenth Amendment. As Justice Stevens wrote in his
dissenting opinion in Shaw, "[i]f it is permissible to draw boundaries to provide adequate representation for rural voters, for union members, for Hasidic Jews, for Polish-Americans, or for Republicans, it necessarily follows that it is permissible to do the same thing for members of the very minority group whose history in the United States gave birth to the Equal Protection Clause."
          Equally offensive to any principled notion of equal treatment under the Fourteenth Amendment are the special rules the Court has developed allowing white voters to challenge majority-black districts. Aside from creating a new cause of action based on district shape, the Court has dispensed with any requirement that white voters prove a discriminatory intent on the part of the legislature, and has relaxed the traditional notion of standing, i.e, that a plaintiff has suffered a direct and personal injury, to bring a case to federal court. 
          In Shaw the white plaintiffs did not claim
that the state's congressional plan diluted white voting strength. And in Johnson v. Miller, the 1995 redistricting case from Georgia, the trial court found that the white plaintiffs "suffered no individual harm;" the state's plan had "no adverse consequences" for white voters. The lack of a concrete and personal injury, which has always been required as a condition for bringing a case to federal court, should have denied the white plaintiffs "standing." The Court held, however, that the plaintiffs had standing because they alleged that their right to participate in a "color-blind" electoral process had been violated. The injury was in being "stereotyped" or "stigmatized" by a racial classification, i.e., being put in a majority-black district. 
          The problem with the plaintiffs' argument was that the Court had
previously held that a similar abstract, hypothetical, or stigmatic injury was insufficient to confer standing upon black voters to challenge discriminatory governmental action. In Allen v. Wright (1984) the Court rejected a challenge by blacks to alleged discrimination by the Internal Revenue Service on the grounds that "stigmatic injury, or denigration" suffered by members of a racial group when the government discriminates on the basis of race was insufficient harm to confer standing.
          The Court also dispensed with any requirement that the white
plaintiffs prove the state intended to discriminate against them in drawing a majority-black or Hispanic district. The Court reasoned that a racial classification was apparent or "express" where a majority black district had a "bizarre" shape, and that accordingly "[n]o inquiry into legislative purpose is necessary." In cases involving blacks, however, the Court has applied a much more stringent test. In City of Mobile v. Bolden (1980) the Court set aside a constitutional challenge by black voters to at-large elections in Mobile, Alabama on the grounds that they failed to prove by direct evidence that the system was established or was being maintained with a racially discriminatory purpose. Even proof that the voting strength of blacks had in fact been diluted was, according to the Court, "most assuredly insufficient to prove an unconstitutionally discriminatory purpose." 
          Before the millennium census precipitates another round of
redistricting, the Supreme Court should reconsider its unfortunate and
misguided Shaw cases. They have created subjective and unworkable standards. Legislators no longer know the extent to which race can or should be taken into account in drawing district lines, the result of which has been to draw the federal courts increasingly, and unnecessarily, into the redistricting process. The Court has created rules that give political preferences to whites and shackle racial minorities with special disadvantages in redistricting. That this should be done in the name of the Fourteenth Amendment is one of the intolerable ironies of the Court's modern redistricting jurisprudence. 	
          States may legitimately consider race in redistricting for a variety of reasons-to overcome the affects of prior and continuing discrimination, to comply with the Fourteenth Amendment and the Voting Rights Act, or simply to recognize communities that have a particular racial or ethnic makeup to account for their common, shared interests. Only when the consideration of race causes real harm, such as the denial or abridgment of the right to vote or participate equally in the electoral process, should there be a warrant, and an obligation, for federal judicial intrusion.
          
            Laughlin McDonald is director of the Voting Rights Project, the Southern Regional Office of the American Civil Liberties Union.
          
        
        
          Who Pays for Election Campaigns?
          By Kehler, RandyRandy Kehler
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 10-12
          
          Anyone who stops to think about  how we Americans finance election campaigns  knows that this process makes a mockery of our democratic ideals and betrays the principles of political equality and "one person, one vote."  It's a matter of common sense that in politics as in everything else, those who "pay the piper" will always "call the tune."  And it will remain that way until we make that process fair, representative, and accountable. 
          So, who does pay for the process of campaigning for public office? According to a recent survey supported by the Joyce Foundation, most of the money that funds federal elections comes from those who make contributions of at least $200. That group of donors accounts for less than  one-quarter of one percent of the population. This tiny elite is incredibly  unrepresentative of average Americans: 95 percent are white and fewer than one percent identify themselves  as persons of color (even though people of color comprise nearly a quarter of the U.S. population). Eighty percent of these big donors are men, and nearly half are over the age of sixty.  Eighty-one percent have annual incomes over $100,000 (as compared to under five percent for the general population), and 20 percent of them have incomes over $500,000 (as compared to 0.29 percent for the general population).
          This "contributor class" is not just unrepresentative in their backgrounds; they are equally unrepresentative in their outlooks.  The same study found that more than half support cutting taxes even if that means reducing public services.  By a two-to-one margin, the contributor class opposes cutting defense spending and supports free trade "even if jobs are lost." And a plurality reject national health insurance and disagree with spending more to reduce poverty.  Each one of these positions is at odds with those of the general public.  With most incumbent politicians preoccupied with raising money for their re-election campaigns and willing to do the bidding of their financial backers, is it any wonder that we have a government that is more concerned about profits for weapons manufacturers and capital gains for the wealthy than about public services, jobs, and health care for everyone else?
          What discourages most of us even more than the rank inequality and
unfairness of the political process and its dire consequences in the
policy-making arena, is the apparent hopelessness of seriously
overhauling that process.  Those who bother to pay attention to the
campaign finance debate in Washington, D.C., know that even the most minimal reforms routinely go down to defeat, year after year.  Unfortunately, we're locked into a kind of "Catch-22."  With no bold, comprehensive reform proposals on the table, the public isn't inspired to weigh in.  Yet the absence of a mobilized public demanding real reform limits the "politically viable" reform options to the kinds of piecemeal changes that, even if passed, wouldn't make much of a dent anyway.  
          But hold on. There's something happening beyond the Washington Beltway. Far reaching reform proposal are on the table in a growing number of places around the country.  This November the voters of Arizona, Massachusetts, and most likely New York City, will all have a chance to approve "Clean Money" campaign finance systems for state or city elections that could make the current corrupt and corrupting system a thing of the past.  Under a Clean Money system, qualified candidates who are willing to reject private money and abide by spending limits receive equal, yet ample, amounts of public funding to cover all their campaign costs.  And should they face a privately financed opponent who  spends beyond the Clean Money amount or is helped by "independent expenditures," they receive additional funds.  
          Such a system was passed by voters in Maine in November of 1996 and by the state legislature of Vermont in June of 1997 (laws which will go into effect in the year 2000 and after the 1998 general elections, respectively). And there are at least a dozen other states where Clean Money bills are headed for the ballot in 1999 or 2000, or where (in states without ballot initiative provisions) they are due to be introduced and fought for in state legislatures during the next session.  Altogether there are more than thirty states where coalitions of groups-senior citizens, environmentalists, trade unions, good government groups- have started organizing around the Clean Money concept.  Coordinating and providing resources  to this growing state-based effort is a new national organization called Public Campaign whose longer-term goal is to translate this grassroots momentum into a focused national campaign capable of forcing Congress to enact a Clean Money system for federal elections.     
          Perhaps the most interesting is that more and more people are starting to define the elections problem  not as a "campaign finance" issue,  a designation that,  for  better or worse, tends to put people to sleep, but, as one church group in Kalamazoo, Michigan, recently put it, as a "justice  issue."  William McNary, a much-respected African-American leader in Chicago, echoed that perspective when he says, "Clean Money campaign reform is about three things: freedom, morality, and power."  
          Even more pointedly, veteran Montgomery, Alabama, civil rights activist Gwen Patton has said that what we are talking about is a voting rights issue. "Getting private money out of public elections," Patton declared, "is the unfinished business of the Voting Rights Movement." (See interview with Patton on page 16.)	
          The Supreme Court has made clear that the right to vote is not only the right to pull the lever but also the right to cast a meaningful vote.   Indeed, this was codified  by the 1982 amendments to the Voting Rights Act, which prohibit any system or arrangement that causes certain voters to have "less opportunity than other members of the electorate to participate in the political process and to elect representatives of their choice." The anti-democratic way in which we finance the campaigns of candidates for public office is a prime example of such a "system or arrangement."
          Accordingly, Clean Money citizens coalitions in states across the country-including many in the South (see box on page 22)-jointly designated the week of September 21-27, 1998, as a "national action week," with the theme  "Clean Money Is a Voting Rights Issue."  During that week, Public Campaign released research report entitled, "The Color of Money."  Taking advantage of innovative computer technology and data from the Census Bureau and the Federal Election Commission, the report examines zip code areas by race, income, and campaign contributions.  Here's an example of the findings:  the aggregate amount of 1995-1996 federal campaign contributions from one wealthy zip code area in Atlanta was 30 percent greater than the amount that came from all eighteen of Atlanta's zip code areas comprised of at least 50 percent people of color. 
          Ultimately, what is needed is not just the effective abolition of privately-financed elections, but real progress on a number of other political reform fronts as well.  These include finding equitable alternatives to the current single-member, winner-take-all election districts; bringing down states' ballot access restrictions for non-major party candidates; and removing the remaining barriers to voter registration (which, at a minimum, means making sure the "Motor Voter" law is fully and universally implemented).   
          Because all these and other changes go hand in hand, those of us who pursue them must work hand in hand. Just as the Civil Rights Movement was composed of people working separately yet together on different aspects of the problem, from the segregation of public facilities to the denial of voting rights for African Americans, it is time to bring together under one over-arching banner today's related issues of political reform. Call it the "Civil Rights Movement Continued," or the "Political Rights Movement," or the "Fair Representation Movement," or the "New Democracy Movement"--it doesn't matter. 
          The important thing to is expand our vision and enlarge our work,
with the aim of bringing about a fundamental, nationwide
re-examination and re-formation of what we mean by, and how we
practice, democracy.
          
            Randy Kehler, who lives in Massachusetts is a founding member of  the Working Group on Electoral Democracy, and a consultant to Public Campaign. For more information about Clean Money Campaign Reform, call Public Campaign at 202-293-0222, or check out their web site <www.publicampaign.org>.
          
        
        
          Incomes/Outcomes:
Campaign Finance as a Civil Rights Issue
          By Basco, SharonSharon Basco
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 13-15
          
          Throughout United States history, the right to vote has been defined, expanded, contracted, and refined. Textbooks call voting "the most elemental form of democratic participation." So why, then, at the close of a century that has seen hard-fought, persistent campaigns to win and ensure the right to vote, do so few people choose to participate? One hundred years ago, 80 percent of registered voters went to the polls; today,only one-third vote in Congressional elections, and fewer than half in Presidential races.
          Why the apathy? Here are the two most  common answers: (1)My vote doesn't matter; (2) The candidates are pretty much all the same.
          Let's examine those two simple notions. On the "vote doesn't matter" ledger, we can consult one of America's most famous non-voters, Roger Tamraz. He's the multimillionaire businessman who startled U.S. Senators last fall by sharing with them his experience that money buys access in politics, and big money buys big access.
          Tamraz's September, 1997, testimony came as a rare, amusing break from the mind-numbing proceedings before the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee. "If you do a favor for a politician, he won't forget you," Tamraz explained as his motive in writing $300,000 in checks to Democrats last year. "This is politics as usual." Non-partisan with his monetary attentions, Tamraz had earned "Republican Eagle" status in the '80s for his contributions to Ronald Reagan's campaigns.
          Tamraz testified that his generosity paid off handsomely when he was able to bend President Clinton's ear about his scheme for a $2-billion Caspian Sea oil monopoly. "So do you think you got your money's worth?" Senator Joseph Lieberman [D-Conn] asked. "I think next time I'll give $600,000," Tamraz answered.
          Senators expressed shock when Tamraz told them he'd never registered to vote. "I think [money] is a bit more than a vote," Tamraz told the Senators. "The New York Times" reported that moment succinctly: "In the great scheme of democracy, Mr. Tamraz testified, he considered his checkbook far more potent than his unused ballot franchise."
          American voters seem to believe that their elected representatives are unprincipled enough to rate contributors' money higher than ordinary citizens' votes: a poll showed that just 14 percent of the people give members of Congress a high rating for honesty and ethical standards.
          "Under the present campaign finance system we have lost that very important link between the office holder and the voter," according to Sara Clark, president of the League of Women Voters in Georgia, adding that the public well knows that. "The primary factor for being a successful candidate is money. In a recent survey done by the national League of Women Voters, the number one reason for low voter turnout is not apathy, but a feeling by voters that their vote simply is not connected to the decisions made by the elected official."
          To a large extent, the viability of candidates for office is measured by the size of his or her war-chest. Voters can see that the best-funded candidate wins office, the well-funded incumbent stays there, and much of an officeholder's time and energy is devoted to fund-raising. Politicians publicly bemoan this money-sick system: on the subject of campaign finance reform, the past decade has seen the U.S. Congress produce 6,742 pages of hearings, 3,361 speeches, 1,063 pages of committee reports, 113 Senate votes and one bipartisan commission.
          Do American voters believe all this scrutiny and discussion add up
to a genuine commitment for reform by the 105th Congress? "In one survey . . .  nearly half the people polled said they were more likely to see Elvis Presley alive than reform legislation passed by Congress," reported pollster Celinda Lake in the Capitol Hill newspaper, Roll Call this past March.
          And that takes us from (1) my vote doesn't count, to  (2) the candidates are pretty much all the same. Why do major party candidates seem interchangeable, representing safe and predictable political positions? In part, it's because they've been pre-selected through the "wealth primary," a system that was identified and named by an American University constitutional law professor,  Jamin Raskin, and John Bonifaz, executive director of The National Voting Rights Institute. Simply put, the "wealth primary" is the process by which wealthy people and corporations control who participates in-and who almost always wins-elections.
          "Thank God we're a capitalist society and there's nothing wrong
with running after money," Roger Tamraz told the Senate Governmental
Affairs Committee. But what deity should non-multimillionaires
petition to seek equality in a money-driven system?
          
          The "wealth primary" deprives the non-wealthy from meaningful participation in elections. It's an exclusionary process, leading up to every party primary and general election, in which those with money or access to money (by means of their campaign contributions) choose the candidates who almost invariably go on to govern. Prospective candidates who don't raise enough money - and who thus lose the wealth primary-almost always fail to win office.
          This theory is at the heart of litigation in several states aimed
at eradicating the primary barrier in our political process and restoring one person, one vote democracy. In Georgia, a lawsuit brought by a coalition of grassroots organizations led by the NAACP and represented by the National Voting Rights Institute contends that wealth plays such great a role in deciding who gets elected that it violates the Equal Protection and First Amendment rights of lower-income voters and candidates. Known as Georgia State Conference of NAACP Branches v. Massey, the lawsuit seeks a federal judge's order mandating the creation of publicly financed campaigns for state office.
          Explaining the organization's role in this case, the NAACP's Georgia president, Walter Butler said: "Thirty years ago, we won the fight to bring down the poll tax. The campaign finance system in Georgia today is the newest voting rights barrier, preventing ordinary citizens from equal participation in the election process."
          Like the unlawful white primaries of the past, today's wealth primary prevents participation of the 99.75 percent of people who don't contribute more than $200 to campaigns. The system violates the constitutional guarantee of equal protection for all in the political process and undermines the constitutional right to an equal and meaningful vote.
          One plaintiff in the Massey lawsuit is John White, a seventeen-year veteran of the Georgia House, who in the 1996 state senate elections, was outspent  by his opponent seventeen times over (White's campaign budget: $16,000; his opponent's: $270,000). White lost, and he believes lack of money was the reason.
          "It used to be, you couldn't vote if you couldn't pay the poll
tax," John White said. "Now you can't be a senator if you can't raise
$200,000." White's contentions were bolstered by the results of a
study which found that is money a determining factor in winning
Georgia state senate elections. Analyzing all contestants for senate
seats in the Georgia state senate from 1992 through 1996, the report,
sponsored by a coalition of Georgia grassroots organizations,
concludes that money was one of the strongest indicators of success,
with the higher-spending candidate winning 83 percent of the time. The
study found that incumbents who outspent their rivals in the last
three election cycles prevailed 95 percent of the time.
          "Unless the campaign finance laws are changed to make the field equitable, unless there are caps for spending, it will continue to be the wealthy who will have a voice and access to the people, and consequently, the power,"  said James Gibson, who canvassed rural Calhoun County in John White's campaign. "In the '96 election I saw the tremendous disadvantage that John White had, not having the money to reach the people the way his opponent did, with television advertisements. I knew White could better represent the peoples' interests, but he couldn't get to them the way his wealthy opponent could. He could not reach the people."
          Nelson Rivers, director of the Southern regional office of the
NAACP, describes the NAACP's investment in changing the campaign finance system: "It's a natural extension of our historic battle against injustice and exclusion at the ballot box. Money has become a barrier to equal access and participation in the process, and if it is not addressed it will continue to mean diminished democratic opportunity for African Americans and other people of color. And despite what appears to be just the opposite thinking, America still has not declared that  political participation is only  for those who have money. It doesn't say that in the Constitution."
          Addressing the relevance of lawsuits like Massey to the African-American community, Rivers said: "We're impacted negatively in a disproportionate way. Since African Americans have decidedly less income, less disposable money than other people in the country, we're at a disadvantage when money is the deciding factor in whether you can participate.
          "Sometimes the whole issue of money is nothing but a subterfuge to get to other things," Rivers continued. "The messages that are there on the airwaves and in campaign propaganda, those messages cost money, and a lot of those messages are negative and foster negative stereotypes. A lot of  code words are used. Some of the same strategies that were used by whoever would say the n-word the loudest now is more sophisticated and cleaned up, but the outcome is still the same. So we have to fight that battle to make sure that your income does not predict or control your outcome as a candidate."
          James Gibson sees Georgia's lawsuit as the beginning of a larger
struggle. "All of us have the opportunity to affect change, to make a
difference. It doesn't matter whether it's on the local, state or
national level. As American citizens we have the opportunity,
responsibility, and the right to go out there and do whatever we can
to make things better for this generation and the next
generation. What happened twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years ago will
not be able to occur again. It's about making America the best for
everybody."
          
          From the NAACP's perspective, says Rivers: "This case is about the future. It means that young people will have the chance to participate in the process of deciding who will make decisions that affect their lives. Because the people who control the politics control the policies that affect young folk-everything from whether there will be a college education available to them, whether there will be a chance to get a job, to go into business. Income ought not to determine the outcome politically. And right now that's what happens in America. There's a lot of pious platitudes about 'anyone can participate.' But over and over again we see that money is the big factor. And what that leaves us with is the Will Rogers comment about 'the best Congress money can buy.' Well in Georgia we've got the best legislature that money can buy, and that's not the best legislature for serving the people. This is a long-term project. But our struggle for justice is long-term."
          Like his fellow Georgia plaintiffs, James Gibson is determined that
the Massey case will help change the system. He's the persevering type: Gibson stays active in politics, even though he's been confined to a wheelchair since a farm accident in 1962. He has always lived in the rural community of Edison (population: 1,150), but there's nothing provincial about his world view: "This case is important to young people all over the country, because if they don't get involved, then the funding by Congress, by state legislatures, by city and county governments, that money won't be there to provide for their education, for health care, or for roads, food stamps-the whole nine yards. It's all connected to who makes those decisions in Congress and in state legislatures. We have to address these issues, because they will affect every single aspect of our lives from the time we're born to the time we die, really and truly."
          
            Sharon Basco is communications director at the National Voting Rights Institute, and can be reached at: 
294 Washington Street, Suite 713, Boston, MA 02108; Phone (617)368-9100;Fax(617)368-9101;Email: nvri@world.std.com.
          
        
        
          Getting Money Out of Politics
          Interviewed by Spears,         EllenEllen Spears and Hagens, WinnettWinnett Hagens
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 16-20
          
          Veteran activsts in Alabama, North Carolina, and
Louisiana who have been involved in local and state campaigns speak
out about efforts to remove the corrupting influence of money in
politics.
          
            Gwen Patton
            In 1990 we were looking at money and politics and  how it was a barrier for grassroots candidates to get onto the playing field because you had to have all this money-money for placards, television ads, mass mailings. As we looked more and more at that problem, I began to see that the unfinished business of the voting rights campaign was to get money out of politics.
            We had a conference with long-time community organizers (union activists and rainbow activists) in Waveland,  Mississippi, in 1990 or 1991 to bring this question of money and politics on the table. Of course they balked and said, 'Oh no, not another issue! We have all we can handle trying to deal with pollution in the community.' And they never could see that this money in politics was the thread that went through all of the organizations in terms of why we were not getting the kinds of policies that would be responsive to community needs and community sentiments.
            The more and more we talked about it, the more we  realized that voting rights were crucial. And everybody saw the importance of the voting rights movement, the importance of blacks in the political arena, the importance of blacks, Chicanos, and women being elected to various offices. You have to also remember that this is pre-redistricting as well. And why was that?
            The reason was that they couldn't get into the political arena. They might make it through a primary, only to get slapped in the general election by the opposing candidate. But many times the primary was the determinant, especially in non-partisan elections like the city council.
            So, we began looking at this question in earnest and grassroots organizations picked it up, particularly Project South which has done an outstanding study of money in politics in Georgia. The environmental people saw that they could never ever get any kind of fair environmental policies because the polluters, for instance, the chemical industry and the oil industry down in Louisiana, were underwriting the candidates, both black and white. So this  raised a question that went beyond color. Money in politics pollutes not only the political system, but the environment and everything else.
            We saw it as a victory when around 1993, grassroots organizations took this issue to heart. Then it became a struggle with the unions because they felt that they were having an effect with their PACs. Many in the union hierarchy still feel that their PACs make a difference, but when you compare the union PAC money to business PACs, corporate PACs, real estate PACs, and insurance PACs, it's just a drop in the bucket. It's really money being burned up, especially on the local level. We made some breakthroughs with unions, but we still have a long way to go with them.
            Our democratic process should be considered a line item, just as
important as the military budget. We should have public financing of
campaigns. We drafted a model bill that in essence talks about
canvassing in terms of getting signatures that would be the threshold
to say that you are a viable candidate and then from there you would
get small contributions-like five or ten dollars-as part of the
threshold. We would also have an account where the American citizen
would put five or ten dollars into a pot, just like on your regular
income tax. We think it ought to be mandatory and done on the federal
level, with a variation on the state level. With public financing you
would have to meet certain criteria, meet certain thresholds, and then
you would be eligible for matching funds--very much how we have the
presidential elections now. The state of Maine introduced and passed a variation of what I'm talking about.
            Back in '91 and '92 I wrote all of the Alabama legislators and the secretary of state asking them  to sign on to campaign finance reform. They had no intention of having any serious campaign finance reform.
            I can't recall the exact year, maybe it was '92, when Milton McGregor, who owns the dog tracks here in Alabama, gave nearly every state legislator and every senator campaign contributions. And the first item on the agenda when they convened was to put a dog track up there in Birmingham. We already had one in Macon County and one in Greene County-two Black Belt counties. And we already had the horse race track, but they passed the additional dog track overwhelmingly.
            It's not a black-white issue, it is a democracy issue. This country and all of its political components need to decide if they really revere democracy as something very sacred and worthwhile-to lift up democracy and make it as untainted as possible. Our politicians are practical and grubby. Some politicians initially come out strong on campaign finance reform and when they get in they do a complete turncoat. The point I'm making is it's so damn seductive.
            You see after a while [these politicians] have such a relationship with industrial and corporate types that they're bedfellows. It's no longer where the candidate has to drub up interest in a campaign. The corporate entity has already picked the candidate.
            I see it as a destruction of democracy. What we really have is an oligarchy where you have rich people running themselves or rich people buying who they want to be in political office to set public policy and pass laws that are skewed to their own private interests.
            I used to get mad when people would say 'What difference does it make if I vote?' I used to write letters about voter apathy, in essence blaming the victim. But now I understand the apathy.
            We need to get people primed to understand their full citizenship responsibilities. Otherwise, they [politicians] take it any kind of way-with the money, manipulating the vote- counting programs on voting machines. So, now I do have a little appreciation of folks who say it really doesn't matter, and it's unfortunate that it has come to that.
            We just have to keep plugging about democratically-financed [campaigns]. We have to keep plugging about the sanctity of democracy. They are destroying our democracy. How dare they lift up this country as a model of democracy to Taiwan, the former Soviet Union and around the world when we don't have democracy here. We have a plutocracy. I don't know if we can change them like we did in the civil rights movement. We have to be very creative in our approach to get the people to recognize that we don't live in a democracy. 
            If it was put to the voters, blacks in particular, fair and
square-all private corporations, unions, and so-called special interest groups should not give money to candidates, that elections should be done in a way that's fair and square so that even if you decide to run as a candidate you will have the opportunity to do so-I think voters would buy that. It would have to be framed that even you, if you would decide to become a candidate, will have a real chance to win. Right now, grassroots black folk know they can't be a candidate. See, the voting rights movement was not simply for us to be passive participants just through the voting, but we also had the hope that we would be active participants in the political process by becoming candidates and winning.
            We don't live in a democracy. That's what we have to keep hammering out there. If we can get mainstream people to start becoming rabble-rousers, to understand that we don't have a democracy, we can turn it around. Just like the Civil Rights Movement. It resonated with the mainstream. We cannot continue with Jim Crow laws and with Bull Conner beating up on folks and hanging folks and all of that business.  The question of true democracy has to become self-evident to the people.
            Slowly, but surely, there is momentum behind campaign finance reform. When we tie it in as simply and as succinctly as possible, money in politics is the reason for all of this mess, then I think people will start beating the drum. But it will be a long haul.
          
          
            Gwen Patton ran for the U.S. Senate in 1992 as an independent and is now the archivist for Institutional Records and Special Collections of Montgomery's Pioneer Voting Rights Activists located at Trenholm State Technical College in Montgomery, Alabama.
          
          
            Interviewed by 
              Hagens, WinnettWinnett
		Hagens and Lee, Barry E.Barry E. Lee
            Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 18-19
            North Carolina now has over 10 million hogs and 7.5 million
people. Hogs priduce five times the waste of humans and it's all
pumped into huge open lagoons. They spray the hog waste onto fields
from where it wshes into rivers. The legal preconditions for the
lagoons were set up by a former state senator, Wendell Murphy, who
became chair of the state senate agiculture committee and who led the
passage of about ten major state laws which gave tax breaks and
regulation exemptions to the hog industry. He now the foremost
corporate hog farmer in the nation.
            folks that live around htese "lagoons" started to complain.These
lagoons are, for the most part, located in majority-black areas of
eastern North Carolina. One example is Tillery, a black community
founded during the Depression as part of a resettlement
project. Black farmers were given twenty acres anda mule in North
Carolina. They propered, retired and then found the hog industry
moving into their neighborhood. Gary Grant, directo of Concerned
Citizens of Tillery, said it was like saying you retired with your
house and you're consigned to smell [hog feces] the rest of your
life. You can't sell your house. You can't move out.
            A movement was organized against these corporate hog farmers for
regulation that was put together by the adjacent communities, by the
environmental community because the waste lagoons would
overflow. There was a huge rain in June 1996 and the sides of the
lagoons broke down resulting in a huge sewage spill the equivalent of
the Exxoon Valdez oil spill tow times over. This led to major fish
kills, especially on the Neuse River. This has been an enormous issue
and there was major legislation proposed, a moratorium.
            A group of corporate hog farmers and other intered parties got
together to fight the environmentalists. They were called the Farmers
for Fairness. A moratorium bill passed the Republican
House. According to the Farmers for Fairness, who testified under
oath at a board of elections hearing, there was a meeting of the
group with Speaker of the House Harold Brubaker, his staff, and some
leadership in which Brubaker essentially said the cost of stopping
this bill was at least $200,000. The corporate hog farmers
contributed, but well short of that amount. The bill was passed,
according to Farmers for Fairness, in retaliation against them for
failure to produce enough campaign contributions.
            This bill led to a three-day hearing to a packed house in which
this whole thing was reviewed. But the Farmers for Fairness realized
they were endangering themselves because if they had told all, they
were setting themselves up for attempted bribery. What you had
instead was a three-day meeting in which a columnist said there was
an "amnesia-fest." Nobody could remember what happened even though
they had gone on record and sworn what happened before.
            The Farmers for Fairness also went after some republican
legislators who had fought them. They used issue ads to do
this. Essentially, issue ads are media ads which attack a
politician's position on a particular issue. One target was Cindy
Watson who was from the biggest hog producing county, Duplin
County. They spent $10,000 a week in issue ads against Watson and
eventually defeated her.
            There are two things happening in terms of being able to turn this
around. A lot more organizing still has to be done. Campaign finance
reform is everybody's second issue and has been for a long time. The
fifty groups in the Alliance understand that their main issues are
totally tied to campaign finance. The environmentalists understand
it. The folks dealing with poverty issues are beginning to understand
it. Consumer groups understand it.
            The legislature is almost totally a creature of the business
community. The only way to win this thing is to out organize them and
that is a long-term process. Great strides have been made in
demonstrating the problem of money in politics, but what has to
happen is some people have to start losing elections on this issue
and some people have to win elections on this issue.
            We've had one person, Ellie Kinnaird, a former small town mayor,
win an election on this issue. She is now a state senator from the
Sixteenth District which includes Chapel Hill and Carrboro. Her
campaign was based on the ideal of not taking big corporate and PAC
contributions so she limited contributions to $100. She took no more
than $250 from PACs and only from those she agreed with on important
issues. She raided the least money and got the most votes. People are
really looking for someone who will get out there on this issue. She
could raise issues that everybody else was afraid to raise--going
after the Department of Transportation, going after bank tax
loopholes--all the sacred cows. They weren't sacred to her because
she wasn't getting any money from them.
            Back during the civil rights era the situation was that the vote
was the key. Now the situation is that money is the key. The result
is that economic elites run state government and national
government.
            You can put the most uncorruptable people in office, but they
still would have to come up with the money to be re-elected. There
are no partial solutions to this problem. A clean money bill is no
magic bullet. At least there has to be a way people can run and not
be dependent on big money. This is a long hard fight. The campaign
finance reform movement is totally in the tradition of the abolition
movement, the right to vote movement, the women;s suffrage movement,
the labor movement, and the environmental movement. These were all
democratizing movements that gave more power to regular people. It's
not just a situation in which we build on the gains of the past. The
gains of the past keep getting whittled away as the nature of money
and power changes. I don't think people realize that.
          
          
            Pete MacDowell is executive director of Democracy south
in Chapel Hill, North Carolina
          
          
            Stephanie Anthony
            Interviewed by Hagens, WinnettWinnett
Hagens and Lee, Barry E.Barry E. Lee
            Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp.19-20
            Back in 1992, I ran for public office. I was tired of not having
the basic services that people expect and deserve--regular garbage
and trash pickup. I live in public housing in historic South Baton
Rouge, just a few miles from the state capitol. On one side of the
district you saw manicured yards, all the trash and leaves picked
up. And then you came to District Ten and there was trash blowing all
in the street, old wood and toilet seats and stuff piled up where the
trash had never been picked up. When it rained it flooded so badly
down there that you couldn't get the kids to the school. The
Councilman was driving a Lexus with his cell phone, and I'm saying,
'Why can he take care of some of this basic stuff?'
            I entered the race [for district ten city council seat]. I put
together my little platform, got together my little volunteers.
            There was the incumbent, the Lexus driver. There was his
assistant, There was a Muslim Sabree, a black Muslim teacher. There
was a pharmaceutical salesperson. And there was one other person I
can't remember. They were all men, all better financed.
            My fundraisers included daily cupcake sales. We called it the
"cupcake campaign." We didn't take any large donations--the
establishment wasn't planning to give us any.
            We went through the chamber of commerce interviews and afterwards
they said in the primary they would not back anyone. This was just
fine with us. We campaigned on the issues. We did the debates and we
were beating everybody on the issues. The chamber of commerce changed
its mind and pumped $25,000 to the incumbent.
            I walked door-to-door, to every door in the district whether they
were registered to vote or not. You soon find out that $25,000 can
make that null and void. In the big scope of things that's not a lot
of money, but it is in a little race where he spent $25,000 and his
assistant spent $10,000. I spent $1000 and came in third. They ran
studio ads and that made a difference. We had to be real creative. We
put out yard signs in one area of the district and the following week
we'd go pull them up and put them in another part of the district
because we only had so many yard signs.
            When you have money, reaching the people can become a matter of a
whole lot of flash and very little substance. The top money people
will always win the primary, unless there is a scandal or
something. It's a sad state of affairs. It's no longer a situation
where you go out and press the flesh, just shake hands
and listen to people's problems and concerns.
            I would favor two approaches [to campaign finance reform]--limits
on campaign spending and public financing of campaigns. Of course the
ideal would be public campaign financing. I think it's ridiculous to
spend more on a race than the person is going to make in the
office. Something's just not right with that picture. It doesn't make
sense to me. If we had a money limit of $5,000 for everybody I could
have raised a thousand and won, but not a thousand to twenty-five or
a thousand to ten.
            In our situation here, we're in a battle about
casino gambling. Part of district ten is on the river. Before long
[after then end of the 1992 campaign] our councilman was lobbying for
one of the three riverboat companies vying to get into Baton
Rouge. We didn't elect him to do that. Those people who voted for
him, that wasn't one of their issues. Their main concerns were
flooding, traffic lights, and garbage pickup. The next thing we knew
he was the main spokesman for one of the casinos. Now we have casinos.
            I think that the grumble is that people fell all their elected
officals are on the take. I don't think that is true, but I do
believe that money is greatly influencing a lot of elected
officials. It can't help but do that because they know that before
the end of their term they've got to raise big bucks to wage the
campaign in order to stay elected. It's very, very hard for new blood
to come in because the money stakes are so high. It's getting to the
point that people are feeling like they might as well not go to the
polls because they really don't have any choices.
            And it affects all parts of their lives from their utility bills
to the water they drink, the air they breath. Something's got to be
done, or nobody will need to go to the polls. And if we don't bring
the cost and direction of these elections into some reasonableness,
good people that do have the best interest of the general public at
heart won't put themselves up to be elected and they won't be
elected. All of the offices will just got to the highest bidder.
            You can't get any elected official to say they are influenced by
money. It's going to take pressure from they constituents, that
enough is enough. People want solutions and they want common sense
solutions, and a common sense solution is let's bring down the cost
of elections. Elections have become a giant business. We've got to
bring it into balance. And I believe the way to do that is to bring
the cost down to something reasonable and to encourage public
financing.
            I think that there is hope. It's not lazy hope. It's hope that has
to be backed up with work and a little sweat. I envision a time when
a service station attendant or a service station owner, or a corner
store owner can offer himself or herself as a public servant and
wouldn't have to mortgage a business or home to do it. I envision a
time when he or she doesn't have to sell values down the tube to the
highest bidder in order to be elected, that elections will make
sense, when people with differing ideals will come to the table, when
there will be open debate, when the general population will be able
to listen to that debate, make a personal evaluation, go to the
polls, cast the vote, and when this process will not be polluted by
funds from interests that have a different agenda than people who
live and work in those communities. Where voters are concerned, they
need to say, "How is this person paying for bring this message to me?"

          
          
            Stephanie Anthony, an organizer and mother of four
children, is the founder and executive director of the Louisiana
Democracy Project in Baton Rouge. She ran for city council in 1992.
          
        
        
          State Contacts  for Clean Money, Clean Elections Campaigns
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 p. 21
          
          
            Alabama
            Greater Birmingham Ministries
Scott Douglas
2304 12th Avenue North
Birmingham, AL 35234
Phone 205-326-6821; Fax 205-252-8458
Email gbmdouglas@aol.com
            Alabama Arise
Stan Johnson
P.O. Box 846
Huntsville, AL 35804
Phone 205-880-6254; Fax 205-880-2781
Email stanjj@mindspring.com
          
          
            Florida
            Florida Sierra Club
Susie Caplowe
P.O. Box 1201
Tallahassee, FL 32302
Phone 850-385-6160; Fax 850-385-6536
Email susie.caplowe@sierraclub.org
            Florida Consumer Action Network
Dan Hendrickson
3208 Langley Circle
Tallahassee, FL 32312
Phone (850)385-6160; Fax (850)385-6536
Email dansue@earthink.net
            Florida Common Cause
Sally Spencer
1811 Ivan Drive
Tallahassee, FL 32303
Phone 904-222-3883; Fax 904-222-3906
Email ccfl@freenet.tlh.fl.us
          
          
            Georgia
            Project South
Abbey Illenberger, Jerome Scott
9 Gammon Ave. SE
Atlanta, GA 30315
Phone 404-622-7778; Fax 404-622-7992
Email projectsouth@igc.apc.org
            Georgia Rural-Urban Summit
Randall Merritt
340 King Avenue
Athens, GA 30606
Phone 706-546-1733; Fax 706-546-4073
Email 104357.2171@compuserve.com
          
          
            Kentucky
            Kentuckians for the Commonwealth
Lisa Osanka
2210 Dundee Road #203
Louisville, KY 40205
Phone 502-473-0464; Fax 606-878-7514
Email losana@kih.net
          
          
            Louisiana
            Louisiana Democracy Project
Stephanie Anthony
200 Lafayette Street., Suite 613
Baton Rouge, LA 70801
Phone 504-338-9393; Fax 504-338-9188
Email ENDLEEd@aol.com
            EPAC
Darryl Malek-Wiley
618 Adams Street
New Orleans, LA 70118-3929
Phone 504-865-8708; Fax 504-865-8708
Email dmw@bellsouth.net
          
          
            North Carolina
            Democracy South
Stan Goff, Pete MacDowell
605 A NC Highway 54 West
Chapel Hill, NC 27516
Phone 919-967-9942; Fax 919-967-7595
Email petemacdowell@all4demcracy.org
            Democracy South
Robert Hall
5706 Old Stoney Way
Durham, NC 27705
Phone 919-489-1931; Fax 919-489-6597
Email sprc@mindspring.com
            Democracy South
Lisa Hamill
P.O. Box 392
Carrboro, NC 27510
Phone 919-967-9942
Email lhamill@juno.com
            North Carolina Alliance for Democracy
Warren Murphy, Len Stanley
605A Highway 54 West
Chapel Hill, NC 27516
Phone 919-967-9942; Fax 919-967-9765
Email lenstanley@4democracy.org
          
          
            South Carolina
            South Carolina Progressive Network
Brett Bursey
P.O. Box 8325
Columbia, SC 29202
Phone 803-808-3384; Fax 803-808-3781
Email scpoint@mindspring.com
          
          
            Tennessee
            Tennessee Citizen Action
Brian McGuire
2012 21st Avenue, South
Nashville, TN 37212
Phone 615-297-2494; Fax 615-297-8372
Email tnca@mindspring.com
          
          
            West Virginia
            Ohio Valley Environmental Coalition
Janet Fout
1101 Sixth Avenue,  Suite 222
Huntington, WV 25701
Phone 304-522-0246; Fax 304-523-6051
Email jfout@eve.net
            Southern Appalachian Labor School
Gary Zuckett
P.O. Box 258
Page, WV 25152
Phone 304-659-3193; Fax 304-659-3178
Email gzucketto@wnpb.wvnet.edu
          
        
        
          Monopoly Politics, Southern-Style
          By Richie, RobRob Richie
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 23-24
          
          Just who decides legislative elections in the United States? The voters cast ballots, but most Americans, most of the time, experience "no choice" legislative elections. They live in political monopolies that essentially are one-party fiefdoms created in redistricting to produce exactly such lopsided results. With voter turnout shrinking to one of the world's lowest levels-a 1997 study ranked the United States 103rd in voter turnout among 131 democracies in national elections since World War II-and with alienation from the political process increasing rapidly, particularly among the young, it is high time to consider changing the rules that create and sustain these political monopolies.
          Although the South's politics have undergone dramatic changes in recent decades, the region still provides the nation's most damning evidence of non-competitive elections and their impact on voter turnout. In 1996, every state in the region ranked among the bottom twenty in voter turnout in U.S. House elections. Of the Southern states, only Arkansas finished among the top twenty in competitive congressional House races (as measured by average victory margins). Six of the seven Southern states with partisan state legislative elections finished among the bottom ten states in the uncontested races, with more than half of races having only one major party candidate.
          Turnout and competitiveness are even lower in mid-term elections. In 1994, eight Southern states were among the nine lowest in the nation in voter turnout. No Southern state that year had more than 55 percent of its state legislative seats contested by both major parties, with four states having more than three in five state legislative races won without contest. Turnout in 1998 promises to be even worse; nearly half of the region's U.S. House races will be uncontested. 
          The current U.S. election system often produces a legislature with the distortions of a funhouse mirror, poorly reflecting the full spectrum of voters' opinions and interests. Only 1 percent of the U.S. Senate is black or Latino despite those groups making up more than 25 percent of the nation's population. In the Deep South, running from South Carolina to Louisiana, Republican candidates won nearly 70 percent of House seats with only 55 percent of votes. Women hold only one of these 36 seats.
          Non-competitive elections and distorted representation arise from the winner-take-all election system. Single-member district elections in majority black areas have been the route to fair representation for black voters throughout the South. Rather than returning to at-large systems-winner-take-all elections held in multi-seat districts usually exaggerate distorted representation and dilute black electoral opportunity-non-winner-take-all election systems should be given a serious look.
          The principle behind these "proportional representation" (PR) systems is that any grouping of like-minded voters should win legislative seats in proportion to its share of the popular vote. Whereas the current winner-take-all principle awards 100 percent of the representation to a 50.1 percent majority, a PR system allows voters in a minority to win a share of representation. PR may be familiar to those who have closely followed presidential elections, as all Democratic presidential primaries and caucuses and many Republican primaries allocate convention seats by proportional representation.
          To convert to a form of PR, five one-seat districts might be combined into a single five-seat district. A candidate could win with the strong support of 20 percent of voters in this district. A slate of candidates with the support of a narrow majority of voters would elect three of five seats.
          Proportional systems are used in most mature democracies. Of the thirty-six major,  full-fledged democracies around the world, only the United States and Canada do not use a PR system to elect at least one of their national legislatures.
          There are both partisan and non-partisan forms of PR; more than 200
localities in the United States in fact use one of three non-partisan systems: limited voting, cumulative voting and choice voting (e.g., single transferable vote). Some PR systems allow very small political forces to win seats, while others set higher thresholds that limit proportionality. Some PR systems eliminate all guaranteed representation of different geographic areas; others allow voters to balance geographic representation with representation of their other communities of interest. 
          Lowering the percentage of votes necessary to win representation may cause concern about representation of extremists. The experience of PR around the world, however, suggests ways to find reasonable compromises between extremely low thresholds of representation (only one percent in Italy and Israel before those nations raised their thresholds this decade) and the winner-take-all threshold of 50 percent. More fundamentally, for every American voter who wants to elect an extremist, there are probably five to ten voters currently denied an opportunity to elect a more centrist representative because they live in a non-competitive district. 
          South Africa's first all-race elections in 1994 are revealing. Despite that nation's bitter racial history and a low threshold in which 1/400th of voters could elect their own representative, the two leading parties won more than 80 percent of the votes with multi-racial candidate slates and messages of inclusion. Radical parties appealing only to blacks or to whites won fewer than 5 percent of votes and just a handful of seats. 
          Closer to home, Illinois' experience with cumulative voting for
state legislative elections from 1870 to 1980 is reassuring: as the Chicago Tribune editorialized in 1995 in calling for cumulative voting's restoration, "[Cumulative voting] produced some of the best and brightest in Illinois politics." 
          Given a likely record-low voter turnout in 1998 and a Congress that increasingly puts short-term political considerations ahead of long-term policy interests, it is encouraging to see signs of serious interest in proportional representation. Congresswoman Cynthia McKinney has introduced legislation to give states the option to use PR systems for House elections. The Southern Regional Council, Southern Center for Studies in Public Policy, the Center for Voting and Democracy (CVD) are working together to promote education about PR systems. Law review articles are examining PR systems as a potential remedy in voting rights cases.
          For more information on these developments and a special report Electing the People's House: 1998, see the Center for Voting and Democracy web site (http://www.fairvote.org) or contact CVD at: (202) 828-3062.
          
            Rob Richie is executive director of The Center for Voting and Democracy, based in Washington, D.C.
          
        
        
          Sampling the 2000 Census
          By Torian, Sarah E.Sarah E. Torian
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 24-25
          
          In the upcoming months the Supreme Court will be making an
important decision that will affect what has been termed the "most
important civil rights issue for the remainder of the 105th
Congress." The issue is the Decennial Census and whether or not
scientific sampling methods will be used to improve the accuracy of
this population count in the year 2000.
          The Decennial Census, a vital part of a fair and functioning
democracy, is becoming  less effective. For the first time since the
1940 census, the 1990 Census was less accurate than its
predecessor. The 1990 net undercount or percentage of people who are
missed by the Census count, was 50 percent greater than its 1980
counterpart. According to the Census Bureau, the 1990 Census missed
8.4 million people and double-counted 4.4 million, resulting in an
undercount of 4 million. Of that 4 million, over 1.5 million (39
percent) were in the eleven Southern states.
          Even more disturbing is the "differential undercount," the
difference between the undercount of whites and the undercount of
ethnic minority groups. The "differential undercount" for the 1990
Census was the highest ever recorded since the Census Bureau began
conducting post-Census evaluations in 1940. Most of those overlooked
in the Census are children, people of color, and the rural and urban
poor. Children under the age of 18, a group that represents 26
percent of the total national population, accounted for an incredible
52 percent of the undercount.
          Considering the influence of the Census, these statistics are
quite disturbing. The Census figures are used to allocate seats in
the House of Representatives, to distribute tens of billions of dollars annually in federal, state and
local program funds, to apportion electoral college votes, and to
carry out congressional, state, and local redistricting, among other
things. Since poor, minority, and central city populations and
children, those most frequently undercounted, are also communities
that are often most in need of social services and economic
development programs and are frequently poorly represented as a
constituency, it becomes increasingly important to ensure as fair and
accurate a count as possible. Otherwise, these groups are denied
important services and are denied their right to fair and equal
representation.
          Factors such as poverty, illiteracy, lack of education, fear or
mistrust of government, language barriers, geography, and changing
family structure all contribute to these lower rates of coverage.
          In an  effort to address the limitations of present enumerations
methods, the Census Bureau, with the help of National
Academy of Sciences, General Accounting Office and Commerce
Department's Office of Inspector General panels, produced "The Plan
for Census 2000." This plan combines a more aggressive direct
enumeration effort, including several mailings to every household and
multiple response options, with modern scientific sampling techniques
to complete the count of the final non-responding households.
          This plan is currently under attack by a Republican-led House
that wants scientific sampling methods banned from use in collecting
Census data and filed a lawsuit, arguing that the use of sampling
methods would violate federal law. The Clinton administration, which
supports the use of scientific sampling, is challenging a three-judge
federal panel's August 25 decision in that case that invalidated the
Census Bureau's plan without ruling on the constitutionality of
sampling.
          The Supreme Court will hear arguments November 30 and will likely
decide by March whether scientific sampling can be used in the 2000
Census. A decision by March is vital. Since the lower court's ruling,
administration officials have been preparing for the upcoming Census
on a "dual track." one using scientific sampling and the other using
only direct headcount methods. lawyers for both the House and the
administration said, "If the current uncertainty continues beyond
March 1999 [the] ability to conduct the most accurate census possible
will be seriously threatened."
          For more information on scientific sampling in the 2000 Census,
visit http://www.census2000.org and
http://198.5.6.212/lcef/census2000
          
            Sarah E. Torian is program assistant in communications
at the Southern Regional Council
          
        
        
          Criminal Disfranchisement Laws
          By Shinhoster, EarlEarl Shinhoster
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 26-27
          
          Criminal disfranchishment laws-the denial of the vote to citizens convicted of crimes-have lasted over a century and have continued to deny and dilute black voting strength long after the death of other disfranchisement laws such as literacy tests, poll taxes, understanding clauses, property tests, and other racist laws and practices banned by the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (Figure 1). 
          In January 1997, The Sentencing Project released a report authored by Marc Mauer entitled "Intended and Unintended Consequences: State Racial Disparities in Imprisonment." This report pointed out that one of the consequences of a felony conviction in most states is the loss of voting rights. In all except four states, inmates lose their right to vote during the time they are incarcerated. In addition, thirty-one states disfranchise offenders during the time they are on probation and/or parole, and of these, thirteen states disfranchise most felons for life (Figure 2).
          Mauer writes, "As a result of increasing numbers of offenders being supervised in the criminal justice system, we estimate that approximately 4.2 million Americans are now either currently or permanently disfranchised from voting and, of these, 1.4 millon are black males (Figure 3). Indeed, these numbers may in fact be higher."
          This represents 14 percent, or one in seven, of the 10.4 million black males of voting age. The alarm to be sounded here is that the incarceration trends are not receding, but advancing upward steadily. The U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics bulletin, "Prisoners in 1996" (June 1997) pointed out that an increasing percentage of the nation's prisoners are black or Hispanic (males and females).
          Between 1985 and 1995, the number of prisoners with sentences of more than 1 year rose by over 600,000. The number of white males increased by 103 percent, the number of black males by 143 percent, the number of white females by 194 percent, and the number of black females by 204 percent. At year end 1995, there were more black males in state or federal prisons (510,900) than white males (493,700).
          On December 31, 1995, an estimated 3.2 percent of all black males were in prison, compared with less than half of 1 percent of all white males. While the incarceration rates of both white and black males have risen since 1985, the rate for black males has grown more rapidly. In 1985 black males were about 6.3 times more likely than white males to be in prison; by 1995 they were seven times more likely than white males to be in prison.
          In Georgia where a person convicted of a felony loses the right to
vote until his or her sentence has been completed and are no longer
serving on probation or parole, and owe no fines, has a
disproportionate number of black males incarcerated for felony
convictions.  In a state with traditionally low voter turn-out and
where one in four registered voters are black, it is evident that
every possible vote counts.  Between August 1, 1997 and July 31, 1998,
6,765 persons lost the right to vote because of felony convictions.
Of this number 3,087 were black males and 1,010 were black females for a total of 4,097 disfranchised.
          Many arguments are advanced as to why such glaring disparities exist in incarceration rates between blacks and whites. Public policy which produced a "war on drugs;" disparities in legal representation; differential treatment of the accused; and discrimination and harassment by law enforcement authorities are perceived to be large contributing factors. An emphasis on citizenship rights and responsibilities taught at home and in schools is as important as holding up the consequences of illegal criminal behavior.  Once in the grip of the criminal justice system the average black male defendant, whether guilty or innocent, is less likely to have the financial resources to obtain the best possible legal assistance to mount an effective defense and thereby escape conviction.  The legacy of racial and economic discrimination is a current reality, which unfortunately adversely affects the socialization and development of many racial minorities.
          The disfranchisement of Americans for the commission of crimes-regardless of the nature of the offense, violent or nonviolent, property or personal, drug related or otherwise-is a direct threat to political empowerment and the exercise of citizenship rights and responsibilities. This carry over from the days of white supremacy has gained support from many Americans because of the fear of crime and the irrational fear of black males in our society.
          Punitive disfranchisement of incarcerated and nonincarcerated offenders must be challenged as vote dilution and vote denial-practices held suspect or unconstitutional under the Voting Rights Act.
          If 51 percent of incarcerated persons today are African-American males, then we must also look close to home for a solution. We must be willing to ask the hard questions and act on positive long term solutions-why does 12 percent of the total population represent over 50 percent of the nation's prison and jail population? An inside look into many black communities reflects negative behaviors which often glorify doing time as a badge of honor, a rite of passage. Parents-indeed, the community-must take more responsibility for guiding our children in firm, positive and encouraging ways. We must be willing to loudly warn against the consequences of dropping out of school, being combative with police, getting involved in any criminal activity, or doing anything that might get them arrested.
          If more African Americans do not register and do not exercise their right to vote, then we will never change this plague of disfranchisement. In the South we have made great strides in voter registration, voter participation and electing candidates of choice to public office. In fighting at-large voting districts, single-member districts were created to provide a better opportunity to elect candidates of choice. The push for majority-minority districts in the 1980s was successful in changing the complexion, tenor, and tone of civic life in communities across the South. Even in the face of strong opposition and hostile courts, community activists are exploring alternative voting methods that can preserve a strong level of inclusiveness and participation in the electoral process .
          Even with the Voting Rights Act the struggle to gain access to the ballot and have the ability to elect candidates of choice is constantly under attack in legislative halls, courtrooms, and the arena of public opinion. We must advocate for an end to criminal disfranchisement laws, not just because they are applied unjustly, but because they take away something so basic to freedom in a democratic society-the right to vote. With the right to vote, comes the responsibility for jury service.
          In the South and other jurisdictions covered by various provisions of the Voting Rights Act, vote dilution and vote denial are still compelling issues that will not vanish between now and 2007, when the Voting Rights Act is set to expire. Recent Supreme Court decisions in some of the reapportionment cases have the effect of hampering the ability of the U.S. Department of Justice to aggressively protect minority voting rights. It will take a long, organized mobilization effort to educate and encourage the continued enforcement and extension of the Voting Rights Act.
          
            Earl Shinhoster is the voter education coordinator in the Elections Division of the Georgia Secretary of State's Office.
          
        
        
          Dred Scott's Unwon Freedom:
The Redistricting Cases as Badges of Slavery
          By Blacksher, James U.James U. Blacksher
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 28-30
          
          In a half dozen cases decided over the last three terms, beginning
with Shaw v. Reno (1993) and, most recently,
Abrams v. Johnson (1997), the Supreme Court has held that congressional districts in North Carolina, Texas, and Georgia, drawn for the predominant purpose of producing black voter majorities, violated the Fourteenth Amendment. 
          The Court ruled that the states cannot use race in drawing these districts without satisfying new onerous legal burdens that the Supreme Court has decided to impose.The redistricting process is an especially important opportunity for black political association and participation in democratic government. Redistricting legislation is not merely another act of state government. In a real sense, it is not state action at all, so much as it is a bargain struck among the state's democratic constituents. The constitutional requirement that after every decennial census members of the legislature undertake negotiations to reconstitute their electoral base, like the Supreme Court recently said about party conventions, is a state-created framework for the exercise of private political rights. Representatives of the many political associations which constitute the state's body politic are supposed to agree on the new shape of their democratic compact, with the explicit understanding that the resulting district lines will have a powerful effect on the outcomes of elections for the next decade. Arguably, the federal judiciary bears an even greater burden of justifying oversight of the foundationally political redistricting process than its oversight of party activity.
          The ability to consent to the laws under which one is governed has
always been the essential difference between a free man (women not
gaining the franchise until 1919) and a slave in American political
tradition and constitutional jurisprudence. This was the principle on
which the Supreme Court rested its infamous decision in Dred Scott v. Sandford, (1857), that neither black
slaves nor their descendants are eligible to be citizens of the United
States. The Civil War and adoption of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth and
Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution during Reconstruction
reversed the Dred Scott  ruling that black persons may never be citizens, but they did not reject Chief Justice Taney's basic point, that until African Americans are recognized as equally free peoples and are allowed to consent to the terms of the constitutional covenant they will not be full members of the sovereign nation.
          To this day, the Supreme Court perpetuates the constitutional doctrine that the Reconstruction Amendments extended to blacks only equal legal rights, not equal social status and equal political freedom. According to this principle, only a negotiated consent to the constitutional compact can make the citizen a real partner in the democratic enterprise, a full member of the sovereign people, and a co-heir of national institutions. The mere grantee of citizenship rights, while entitled to the protection of law, is not recognized as an equal member of the sovereign people or as an author of those rights.
          After Reconstruction, in the Civil Rights Cases (1883), the Court ruled that the Enforcement Clauses of the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments had not given Congress the authority affirmatively to force whites to accept blacks as social equals, that is, to "establish a code of municipal law regulative of all private rights between man and man in society." Even more importantly, the Court did not consider the exclusion of blacks from private places of business to be one of the badges and incidents of slavery. The Civil War Amendments extended to the freedmen and their descendants only the right to be free from the most onerous legal disabilities. In the Court's view, this was all that was necessary for blacks to enjoy the essence of citizenship, and thus the essential distinction between freedom and slavery. 
          The dominion of whites was safe, because "Congress did not assume, under the authority given by the Thirteenth Amendment, to adjust what may be called the social rights of men and races in the community . . ." Of course, in that day as in this one, no white American would have accepted a bundle of legal rights as a substitute for freedom from domination by even a benign government not consented to. The first Justice John Marshall Harlan-grandfather of Justice John Marshall Harlan II who served from 1955 - 1971-acknowledged what the Court's majority chose to ignore: the status of blacks, nonmembers of the sovereign community was a badge of slavery more hateful and enduring than any restriction of merely legal privileges. White Americans would retain the exclusive power to decide what citizenship for blacks would mean.
          Justice Harlan's famous dissent a decade later in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) is rightly praised for
its eloquent de-fense of the American ideal and the Reconstruction radicals' aspirations that the Civil War Amendments be used to remove all "legal discriminations, implying inferiority in civil society."
          But it is important to understand why Harlan advocated this
seemingly more magnanimous view. Justice Harlan did not disagree with
the Plessy majority's basic proposition that even aggressive legal enforcement of all the civil rights of black people could not, by itself, produce social equality, for "social equality," said Justice Harlan, "no more exists between two races when travelling in a passenger coach or a public highway than when members of the same races sit by each other in a street car or in the jury box, or stand or sit with each other in a political assembly, or when they use in common the streets of a city or town, or when they are in the same room for the purpose of having their names placed on the registry of voters, or when they approach the ballot-box in order to exercise the high privilege of voting." Harlan did not doubt that whites were "the dominant race in this country," and that white America would "continue to be for all time, if it remains true to its great heritage and holds fast to the principles of constitutional liberty." Harlan's view was that white dominance in this country should last forever, but only if it respected the legal rights of blacks to the fullest. It was in this context, for this purpose, indeed in the same paragraph, that he wrote the famous phrase, "[o]ur Constitution is color-blind." What Justice Harlan was proposing was a wiser real politik, a more beneficent strategy for preserving white rule and maintaining social order.
          Brown v. Board of Education (1954)essentially adopted the first Justice Harlan's position that it is impossible to justify legal segregation of the races without openly endorsing white supremacy. This was the argument Chief Justice Warren used to win unanimity for the Court's opinion. Legal scholars still debate whether the Warren Court, as the chief legitimator of the Civil Rights Movement, wanted merely to remove all the official structures states had developed to prop up separate white and black societies, or whether it intended to use its constitutional power and moral authority to revolutionize America's social order and actually move blacks into the white "mainstream."
          We know the Warren era soon ended. Bit by bit, case by case, an increasingly conservative Supreme Court shifted its leadership policy from promoting racial integration to defending white Americans' freedom to associate in racially separate societies defined by both class privilege and ethnic identity.
          Today, the Court has come full circle to renounce the
Reconstruction social integration agenda for the second time,
restoring its view in the Civil Rights Cases that blacks should not be "special favorite[s] of the laws." As the Supreme Court eased away from any pretensions of overseeing the integration of black and white societies, it struggled to find new constitutional justifications for what might now be called white superiority. The old laissez faire conception of equal opportunity, as determined by social and economic markets, was still at hand. It would be used first to limit anti-discrimination laws in the name of associational freedom, then to denounce as preferential affirmative action any legal attempts to modify the institutional structure of the marketplace.
          The Supreme Court has rebuffed the efforts of the black community
to deploy more legal equality in its struggle to transform its subordinate status in civil society. Since they  reclaimed the franchise through the Voting Rights Act of 1965, African Americans have turned to the political forums of civil society itself, seeking the opportunity as legally coequal members of a democratic republic to negotiate practical arrangements that might lead to true equality in the American nation. The Voting Rights Act of 1982 reflected this new black electoral influence and the political compromise it was able to achieve with representatives of America's white majority. The Shaw cases, however, threaten not only the redistricting deals African Americans have been able to make, but also the constitutional legitimacy of their ability to bargain politically at all.
          The victim perceived by the Shaw majority is
not the white plaintiffs but their nation. In this light, the
plaintiffs are properly viewed as members and subjects of a collective
nation, rather than as citizens and rights-bearers in a democratic
republic. In the Shaw cases, the Court found a
majority of justices who want to define late twentieth-century
American national identity in terms of colorblind individualism. The
problem, however, is that in the group-defining context of
redistricting, colorblind individualism will perpetuate the primary
badge of slavery instead of removing it. Entrenched as constitutional
principle, colorblind individualism threatens to prohibit black
Americans and other ethnic groups from negotiating collectively with
white Americans over basic democratic structures, foreclosing the
possibility that African Americans as a people eventually might
achieve the ability to consent to the form of government and to become
coequal members of the nation. This poses a unique problem for African Americans in that they have never been given the opportunity to consent. 
          The Shaw cases are an attempt to synthesize
the judge-made desegregation and one-person, one-vote constitutional principles into an analytically-distinct constitutional cause of action that  can trump the deal African Americans thought they had made in 1982 for a broad group-based regime of rights based on political fairness, which takes into account all the historical and social realities that African Americans confront. As constitutional history, Shaw's definition of national identity is worse than disingenuous; as constitutional change, it serves only to perpetuate the American nation's historical refusal to negotiate with the descendants of slaves.
           Two original constitutional pillars of American national identity were nonblackness and nonsectarianism, the one to define Americans as white, the other to prevent white Americans from fighting among themselves. Both nationalist principles remain embedded in our constitutional jurisprudence. Since the beginning of the Republic, white Americans, in the name of national unity, have always been able to turn to the Supreme Court for constitutional protection against efforts to include blackness in the sovereign people's own understanding of who they are. 
          Today the Supreme Court is moving toward relaxing nonsectarianism, acknowledging that religious differences among white Americans no longer present the dangers of communal faction they once did, expressing a growing willingness to approve government support of religious communities, and tolerating more open involvement of organized religion in political activities
          The Shaw cases, along with their affirmative action cousins, represent the Supreme Court's countervailing strategy for keeping querulous whites united around their nonblackness. The Shaw cases exercise the presumed finality of constitutional edicts to outlaw the efforts of those white Americans who, with pressure from the federal government, have demonstrated some willingness to deal with African Americans as negotiating partners in state democracies. These openly black-white redistricting bargains are seen by the Shaw majority as threats to colorblind paradigms of whites, which have become crucial to the national and personal identities of some other Americans.
          There is a genuinely painful irony in this historical situation: In 1857, a Supreme Court dominated by Southerners declared that a unified nation could not tolerate treating even free blacks as coequal political agents; in 1995, a Court on which no white Southerner sits has declared that the American nation cannot tolerate Southern white legislators openly negotiating with African Americans as free political agents. The irony is not surprising, however, because the question of how free blacks fit in the American national identity has always transcended sectional differences.
          White America did not intend that the recent implementation of blacks' voting rights would lead to any renegotiation of national identity, and it is moving to cut off this route to fundamental change as well. This is the function of colorblind rhetoric. The same Court that resoundingly repudiated the incursion of civil rights in "amorphous" social affairs now is moving to bar the doors of political venues to blacks. The American nationalists who succeeded in keeping civil society out of bounds for constitutional courts are reversing their position and asking the judiciary to set strict limits on the ability of blacks to engage in free political bargaining. Colorblindness as a judicial justification for outlawing vital political negotiations between white Americans and peoples of color is not only hypocritical, it is rationally insupportable by any democratic theory.
          We should recall how in the late 1850s, proslavery forces converted "nonintervention" into intervention, contending that Congress could not interfere with the local institution of slavery, while at the same time insisting that the federal government act affirmatively to protect slaveholders in the territories and free states. In the 1990s, proponents of colorblindness are arguing simultaneously that the Supreme Court has no power to interfere with associational rights in civil society and that the Court must enjoin state legislatures from allowing free negotiations between representatives of white and black communities over the basic structures of government. They would make interracial legislative dialogue constitutionally illegitimate and black political influence once again impotent. Dred Scott would recognize a familiar American theme were he to return today.
          
            James Blacksher is a voting rights attorney practicing in Alabama.
          
        
        
          BOOKS: The Culture of Whiteness
          Reviewed by Ownby, TedTed Ownby
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 31-32
          
          Grace Elizabeth Hale, Making Whiteness: The Culture of
Segregation in the South, 1890-1940, New York: Pantheon
Books, 1998.
          In the past few years, historians have begun to tell the story of whiteness. Moved by the scholarship of historian David Roediger and the ideas of Toni Morrison, scholars are investigating what it is about whiteness that binds people together, what privileges the concept gives those who claim it, and how it divides those who claim to be white from those who do not. This form of analysis is one of the most inspired examples of the de-essentializing trend in contemporary scholarship that views supposedly inherited categories of identity as works of construction.
          Grace Hale's Making Whiteness is the best book in this genre. It is also the first work to analyze how the concept of whiteness developed in southern history. Rather than asking familiar questions about the origins of segregation, disfranchisement, or anti-black violence, she asks how people in the Jim Crow era came to understand and articulate the meanings of being white.
          Hale's explanations for the increasingly aggressive statements about whiteness around the turn of the century vary from the familiar to the new. Two-emancipation and urbanization-are well known. Hale begins the volume with a third explanation that the various forms of assertiveness of African Americans from emancipation through the early twentieth century stimulated new efforts to define the privileges of whiteness. A fourth explanation is the most novel. The development of a national consumer culture had the potential to undercut human differences by offering the privileges of spending money and enjoying goods to anyone who could afford them. Thus, in Hale's analysis, openly racist advertisements and "whites only" and "colored only" railroad compartments emerged as ways to create differences in situations that threatened to dissolve them.
          Perhaps as important as its conclusions, the book offers a powerful
example of history that investigates the stories Southerners told to
help them understand their society. Segregation and white supremacy
emerge as  works in progress, full of tensions and insecurities that
people tried to explain through different kinds of narratives. The
stories she describes from an astonishing variety of
sources--novelists, journalists, advertisers, lynch mobs, United
Daughters of the Confederacy speakers--reveal the work of people trying
to order their lives by using the notion that there was something
special about being white. The story of the well-dressed black woman
on the train was George Washington Cable's narrative that complicated
easy notions that whiteness implied special privileges based on
cleanliness and manners. The stories Joel Chandler Harris told in the
voice of Uncle Remus displayed African-American personality but also
gave whites reassuring notions of "the old plantation-bound ex-slave."
Stories of Mammy figures involved a love of idealized women and
slavery but also legitimated segregation as the story of adults who
had consigned those images to misty memories. Racist advertisements
that put African Americans in degrading positions reassured white
consumers that blacks could not gain dignity through new access to
goods. Lynchings told their own stories about unity among white men,
the willingness to use violence, and the denial "that any space was
black space," all in a modern environment facilitated by railroads and advertising.
          Far too much scholarly writing about identity construction is filled with excruciating jargon, as if to suggest that academics who are re-thinking basic assumptions have to write in their own language. Hale can play that game, but most of her work is powerful and direct. In fact, on occasion her prose has the sound of a W. J. Cash for our generation. The South of legend, she writes, was "the place of not now." Nostalgia about the antebellum South was "the fun house mirror of New South progress." This is simply a wonderful book to read.
          Hale's conclusion lies in the tradition of Winthrop Jordan's monumental White Over Black (1968). Jordan argued that change would come when individuals stop projecting the things they hate and fear about themselves onto other people they identify as an essentially different group (or race). Where Jordan stressed psychology and the need for individual conversion, Hale concentrates on societal ideals and regional identities. She calls on readers "to reimagine integration" by rejecting ideas of essential, in-born differences dividing people and by learning or remembering that southern and American history is the story of interdependence and shared experience.
          
            Ted Ownby is associate professor of History and Southern
Studies at the University of Mississippi.
          
        
        
          The Origins of Inequality
          Reviewed by Hagens, WinnettWinnett Hagens
          Vol. 20, No. 3, 1998 pp. 32-33
          
          Claude S. Fischer, Michael Hout, Martin Sanchez Jankowski,
Samuel R. Lucas, Ann Swindler, and Kim Voss, Department of Sociology,
University of California, Berkeley, Inequality by Design:
Cracking the Bell Curve Myth, Princeton, New Jersey:
Princeton University Press, 1996
          In truth this is a book far more about the origins of inequality
than a rebuttal for the tired neo-Darwinist arguments advanced by
Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray in The Bell
Curve (1994). The authors of Inequality by
Design return the continuing debate on inequality and its
correlate--racism-- back to basics in a way that nearly everyone can
appreciate.
          What re the basics of inequality and racism? Human appetite is
insatiable. No society has sufficient resources to satisfy the desires
of all its members. Inevitably, some get more than others. In its
most basic essence, racism is a nearly universal mechanism for
deciding who gets what in a world where the most desirable goods are
scarce. Ruling groups enjoying affluence or even opulence invariably
fabricate and perpetuate myths disparaging and debasing the ethnic or
racial groups they subjugate and exploit. Such racial myths play a
crucial role in perpetuating inequalities by rationalizing and
justifying oppressive mistreatment of enslaved or indentured
populations upon whose labor the social hierarchy ultimately
rests.
          According to the authors (Department of Sociology, University of
California, Berkeley) of Inequality by
Design, Herrnstein and Murray's The Bell Curve
is merely a contemporary version of a philosophy that is centuries
old: "[ordained by our creator] inequality is
fated; and people deserve, by virtue of their  native talents, the
positions they have in society...individuals' intelligence largely
decides their life outcomes." From this perspective, poverty and
wealth are the artifacts of a kind of cosmic game of chance that we
call genetics. The fault, if there is any, is in nature. If you lose
in the cosmic throw of the dice, blame nature.
          Readers interested in a classic expos of a failure in social science
research will find Inequality by
Design good reading. Is there really such a thing as
"intelligence?" Is intelligence one, a few, or many things? If you
want to get into the details of psychometrics, if you want a powerful
summary of arguments questioning current understandings (or, are they
myths?) of intelligence, this well written book will hold your
attention. You will learn, for instance, that subordinate racial and
ethnic groups around the world, today and in earlier decades,
invariably do worse in schools an don school tests than do dominant
groups regardless of the genetic differences or similarities between
them. The deprivations of oppression and exploitation--the hunger,
disease, ignorance, pervasive alienation, and self-hatred--that typically accompany inferior status often guarantee
collective failure in schools. The history of blacks and Latinos in
the United States fits the pattern. As the authors put it: "it is not
that low intelligence leads to inferior status; it is inferior status
that leads to low intelligence test scores. ...A racial or ethnic
group's position in society determines its measured intelligence
rather than vice versa."
          Yet, the real power of this book is not its devastating rebuttal
of the phony "prosperity of the fittest: argument, but it is more
central and compelling counter-theme that inequality is a property of now societies are
structured, not of how individuals talent is distributed. And
when it comes to inequality the United States has the greatest degree
of economic inequality of any developed country. This inequality
between classes in America has, moreover, been growing for the last
quarter century. In the United States, 120:1 is the ratio of the
average CEO's pay to the average industrial worker's pay. In Britain
the ratio is 25:1, nearly five times less. In Germany it is 21:1 and
in Japan 16:1.
          The kinds of extreme inequalities we see reappearing in America
today, according to the authors, are neither natural nor
inevitable. We help fewer of our citizens than do other
industrialized countries and when we do help we do so less
generously. For example, we provide medical insurance for some
residents; most nations provide medical insurance care for
all. According to the authors, in America we spend less on children
than any developed country in the world. We give families with
children tax breaks, most nations give family allowances. While it's
free enterprise for the poor in America, tax breaks, subsidies, and
cozy regulatory relationships all spell socialism for the rich,
especially the super rich, in America. There should be little wonder
that the gap between rich and poor, or even the rich and middle class
Americans continues to widen. 
          Many Americans, perhaps a majority, believe that inequality is
needed to motivate people to work hard and propel economic
growth. But, if this premise of American inequality is true, how
much inequality is needed? Some of the research the authors of Inequality by
Design present suggests that extreme inequalities in income
may actually impede economic growth rather than stimulate it. One
research study touched on in the book showed that key redistributive
policies (homeowners subsidies, health plans, child care, etc.) do
not inhibit the functioning of economies instituting such
measures. Another study mentioned in the book even showed that product
quality improved as the wage gap narrowed between managers and
workers.
          This kind of research is ground zero for a coming debate that,
unless our current prosperity is perpetual, will occur when good
times turn bad. Now, as the authors of Inequality by
Designinsist, is the time for Americans to accept
responsibility for the inequality our choices have created instead of
blaming nature. This book is an excellent place to enter a critical
dialogue that will, one day, reshape our nation.
          
            Winnett Hagens is director of Fair Representation
Programs at the Southern Regional Council
          
        
      
    
  
