
    
      
        
         Southern Changes.  Volume 22, Number 2,
	       2000
        
          New Century Politics
          By Johnson, Wendy S.Wendy S. Johnson
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 pp. 3-4
          
          The social activism of the 1960s gave us some of the most powerful and ground-breaking legislation of the last century--legislation that embraced the themes of freedom, justice, and democracy--most notably the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. As a result, millions of formerly disfranchised minorities gained a political voice through the power of voting. In the last two decades, we've seen a dramatic and disturbing rightward shift in our national policy. In this new century, we face a number of challenges as the future enforcement of these policies is thrown into doubt.
          As we prepare for the first presidential race of the new century and the much-anticipated and debated 2000 Census count results, minority voting rights are at a crossroads and questions continue to be raised in the enforcement of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
          Threats to minority voting rights increased shortly after the 1990 reapportionment/redistricting cycle, which resulted in dramatic electoral gains for African-American and Latino voters in the 1992 elections.
          Led by the case Shaw v. Reno, a series of lawsuits followed that threatened the erasure of minority opportunity districts. Since 1993 thirteen majority-minority congressional districts have been overturned. On the eve of the new redistricting cycle, the courts are still battling over redistricting plans developed after the 1990 Census. The North Carolina 12th district, first challenged in 1992, is back at the Supreme Court for the fourth time as we enter the new decade.
           While the Census Bureau crunches numbers for its
decennial report, Democrats and Republicans alike are
busy filling their political warchests in order to win as many seats as possible. This greedy grab for political seats by any means necessary could have direct impact upon the number of existing majority-minority districts that can be maintained and more importantly, the number that can be gained. Edwin Bender's article, "Soft Money Showered on the States: Redistricting and Election 2000," gives you the details of how party efforts are sucking in soft money to influence redistricting outcomes.
          The census data will introduce potential perils to the new
reapportionment-redistricting cycle--multiple racial and ethnic
categories. The reporting format of these multiple categories could
become a useful tool for advancing the effective enforcement of civil
rights laws or a
powerful weapon for opponents of fairness measures.
          With dozens of favor-seeking corporations contributing in excess of $100,000, Corporate America is revealed
as a key underwriter of both the upcoming Democratic and Republican national conventions. Jim Hightower's essay, "The Flim-Flam Campaign: Corporations Buy the Conventions," provides another sobering yet maddening example of the need for wholesale reform to get money out of politics.
          As we list toward the November elections do you
know which races to watch and candidates to watch out
for? In this issue Sarah Torian has provided an overview
of key contests around the South, where the candidates stand on issues that we care about including civil rights, affirmative action, education, and the environment.
          As we work to revitalize civil rights enforcement and
reduce racial inequality we must, in Barbara Jordan's
words, "make America as good as its promise..
          We, you and I, our neighbors, our voting age children, our clergy and labor leaders, our business leaders,
and our teachers must demand leadership in developing
proactive and effective responses to racial inequities and
civil rights concerns from our presidential, congressional,
and state leadership. We must make these same demands of community, religious, and political leaders where we live-because there is broad public support for revitalizing existing policies that offer equal opportunity and create new policies to meet the needs of the 21st century.
          Demanding accountability from our leaders can take many forms-from letter writing campaigns to community organizing initiatives. But arguably, the most basic and important way to demand this leadership is to make our voices heard on election day.
          We shared with you the results of our national survey
in our report Seeking on America as Good as its Promise,
which established that there is wide support for reducing
racially identifiable inequality through tools such as affirmative action among other approaches. Key findings of the publics' views on political participation and fairness remedies included:
83 percent believe that African Americans should be represented politically in proportion to their numbers in the population;It is in the best interests of the country if our elected
officials reflect the racial and ethnic background of the
entire population (76 percent);Most Americans support affirmative action (56 percent).
          These findings contrast starkly with the assertions of our conservative Congressional members and affirmative action opponents who deny the need and importance
of active civil rights enforcement.
          As a solution to deepening enforcement of fairness
measures, the American public is calling for proactive and assertive leadership. Leadership is critical in marshalling and mobilizing existing support for racial fairness. If our leaders are pro-active in nurturing these threads of hope, the next generation will be ready to follow.
          While two out of every three youth aged 18 to 24 do
not vote, more than three out of four of this age group (77
percent) say reducing racial inequality is a top or above
average priority, compared to 57 percent of older Americans. These same young Americans are somewhat more likely (88 percent) than older Americans (76 percent) to say it is important that voting districts be drawn so that blacks can obtain representation in office comparable to their numbers in the population.
          While the 2000 elections are only months away, the
expiration of Section 5 of the 1965 Voting Rights Act is
slated for 2007. Ellen Spears' article, "The 2000 Elections and Voting Rights Act Renewal" argues that it is not too early to make the connection between who we vote into office in November and the prospects for balanced and fair consideration of renewing and extending this critically important piece of legislation. Much is at stake.
          Findings of support for progressive leadership and
young people's faith in the power of political engagement signal hope for the future. However, if young people aren't making their opinions known at the polls, their impact is greatly diminished. Can the upcoming presidential election capture the imagination of our disfranchised youth and, hopefully, their votes?
           The article, "Young Voters Flee the Polls," addresses
the growing disconnect and disenchantment of young voters with electoral politics. Uninspired by party politics, our youth have abandoned the electoral process. What is our role as leaders, young and old, in nurturing a new attitude and understanding towards effective political engagement? Achieving a democratic and fair society is not a spectator spoil. What have you done lately to encourage young adults to exercise their franchise?
          
            Wendy S. Johnson is executive director of the Southern Regional Council
          
        
        
          Soft Money Showered on the States: Redistricting and Election 2000
          By Bender, EdwinEdwin Bender
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 pp. 4-5
          
          Early in the 2000 election cycle, as the presidential candidates began their campaigns in earnest, the Tennessee Republican State Executive Committee was rolling in
soft-money contributions passed down from the Republican National State Elections Committee. Usually low on the RNC's priority list for party-building funds, Federal Election Commission (FEC) records show the Tennessee Republican Party had received $423,000 as of August 1999,
putting it second on the priority list behind California.
          Why the largesse to a state that in the 1998 cycle
ranked eighteenth on the list of recipients of RNC soft money and fourteenth in 1996?
          Possibly the RNC is bent on embarrassing Vice President Al Gore on his home turf. But a more likely reason is how the 2000 Census and the subsequent redistricting will affect Tennessee legislative and congressional districts. If just two additional Republican state senate candidates win in 2000, then the Democrat Party's control of the senate will have been broken, and Republicans will have a stronger say in how the redistricting process plays out.
          Greg Wanderman, executive director of the Tennessee Democrat Party, told the National Institute on Money in State Politics (the Institute) that the Republican Patty of Tennessee has made winning two seats in the state senate a priority, specifically because of what that would mean to the redistricting process. Brian Eastin, executive director of the Tennessee Republican Party, agreed emphatically: in GOP circles. 2000 is the battle and redistricting is the war. It's crucial. Here in Tennessee it's the focus, taking (two seats in) the senate, because of redistricting." And the national party has expressed "a great deal of interest" in seeing that those seats and others in states with narrow margin go to Republican candidates. RNC Chairman Jim Nicholson announced that the national party will devote millions in contributions to the effort nationally.
          If the GOP succeeds in Tennessee, Eastin said, then the GOP-controlled senate could block any redistricting plan that th1 Democrat-controlled house may propose, moving the process to the courts. The state party feels it could live with a plan that was approved through the courts.
          A similar pattern can be seen in Georgia where five state senate seats will alter control of the redistricting process. Georgia was third in receipt of early RNC soft money, but was twentieth in 1998 and seventh in 1996.
          In Missouri, the RNC funneled more than $870,000 directly to candidates in the 1998 cycle in an effort to seize control of the legislature where Democrats now control
the house by ten seats and the senate by two.
          The campaign over who will control the decennial
redistricting process has been called "the D-Day of politics" by Tom Hofeller, a Republican organizer for the redistricting issue. Redistricting committees and commissions the nation over will be using new census data to reconfigure legislative and congressional election districts once census data is in. In states with legislatures that are controlled by narrow margins, a win or two in the state house or senate in 2000 could mean the difference between a redistricting committee controlled by Democrats or Republicans. And how those districts are drawn will directly affect the outcome of many congressional campaigns.
          As a result, national party organizations have been
flooding the states with both hard and soft money, to influence the
redistricting process, and enhance their candidates' 
chances of controlling Congress. The states where a win or two could make a difference, according to data from the National Council of State Legislatures, include: Arizona, Connecticut, Missouri, Nevada, New Hampshire, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, Vermont, Washington, and Wisconsin.
          An analysis of available campaign-contribution data by the Institute found that the Republican Party began its war early and has had a decided
advantage going into the 2000 elections. Republican Party comittees so fair in 2000 have received more soft money than their Democrat counterparts in thirty-five of fifty states.
          The contribution data analyzed was drawn from two
primary sources-the FEC, which discloses contributions from national parties and sources to all fifty states--and the Institute's databases of state records, which show funds coming to statelevel candidates and committees from all sources, including national parties and committees. This report and underlying data will be updated regularly as new state and federal data is released and processed, and will be available on the Institute's web site (www.followthemoney.org)
          
            Soft Money Debate Rages
          
          Soft money is a buzzword nowadays for all that's
wrong with the nation's political system. Special interests or
individuals that have given the maximum amount directly to candidates,
turn around and write enormous checks to the national parties and,
with a wink and a nod, are assured that that money will be used for
"party-building" activities only, as required by law. But they know
that much of the money supports the party's candidate du jour in so-called "issue advertising."
          It's all legal, thanks to the soft-money loophole written into the campaign finance laws that came out of the Nixon-Watergate era. It must be bad, though, otherwise why have all four major candidates for presidency in 2000 called for reducing or banning soft-money contributions? Why has Congress spent thousands of hours over the past twelve years debating campaign finance reform and the soft-money loophole?
          The debate continues over who can out-reform whom. All the while the checks keep coming in--more than $697 million to the two political parties over the last nine years, according to the Campaign Study Group. Expect a record amount of soft money to be contributed in the 2000 election cycle as the candidates vie for the "reformer" label, and as Gore prepares for an all-out general-election assault.
          As the debate escalates and the cash flows, only the public loses. Tracking who gives soft money, where it goes, and who spends it and on what, is difficult. For many, it's impossible. And because national party committees often funnel this money to state committees, which trade soft money for hard money to give to candidates, the money trail becomes even more difficult to follow. 
          
            Edwin Bender is research director for the National Institute on
Money in State Politics in Helena, Montana. For more facts and figures
on the role of soft and hard money in state campaigns, see the
Institute's website at: www.followthemoney.org.
          
        
        
          The FlimFlam Campaign: Corporations Buy the Conventions
          By Hightower, JimJim Hightower
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 pp. 6-7
          
          Ready or not, heeeeere they come. [music: Happy
days are here again] The Republican and Democratic national conventions have come to town! You've seen the pageantry on TV, the bunting and balloons, the speeches...
but what they haven't shown you is the bald-faced corruption behind the hoopla, the selling of the very conventions that formally choose the nominees of the two big parties.
          The Philadelphia Inquirer reports that major corporations in need of major favors from the White House, Congress, and other governmental agencies, poured major
bucks into the two national conventions. AT&T (lobbying for control of the long distance phone market), Lockheed Martin (lobbying for more Pentagon money), General Motors (lobbying for more global trade deals), Ernst & Young (lobbying for lax financial regulation), and Microsoft (lobbying to keep its monopoly position) are among the dozen corporations that underwrote both conventions. Microsoft, for example, already gave more than $5(X),000 to host the Republican convention in Philadelphia, and the same sum to host the Democrats in Los Angeles.
          This kind of payola not only puts the corporate stamp on the consciousness and consciences of both parties, but it also buys special access for the CEOs and lobbyists of the favor-seeking companies. While the charade of democracy plays out on the convention floor, these executives are in private skyboxes and at closed functions, wining and dining the nominees and top lawmakers of the two parties. As one CEO told the Inquirer when asked to explain why her company would sponsor both conventions: "We need these folks to know who we are."
          Republican and Democratic conventions once were
important to democracy, choosing the nominees, writing
the platforms, and debating big issues. But today, they're
political farces. The delegates are nothing but stage props for the TV show, while political and corporate powerbrokers meet behind the scenes to assure that plutocracy rules, despite the public pretensions of democracy.
          No matter which party wins, AT&T, Microsoft, Boeing, Disney, and Exxon win. They're among dozens of giants that put at least $50,000 each into the pockets of both camps, not only buying the loyalties of the candidates, but
also controlling the political debate. So, basic kitchen-table issues that matter to most people are not even on the table for discussion, because the money masters of the Gore-Bush flim-flam campaign don't want their candidate--or you and me--talking about such troubling issues. Here are just a few examples of what the Democrats and Republicans are NOT discussing, much less challenging
The Mugging of the Middle Class. Gore and Bush
gush about the glories of the razzle-dazzle Wall Street
"Boom," but neither mentions that eight-out-of-ten Americans are experiencing more bust than boom, with corporate downsizings, farm bankruptcies, and family debt soaring.Merger Mania. Every industry is being consolidated and
conglomerated by huge corporations swallowing each other to become
MegaHuge, gaining monopoly power that cuts our jobs, raises prices,
squeezes out small competitors, reduces service, and bullies our
communities. Yet Gore and Bush quietly take millions from the merging barons and stay eerily silent.Globaloney. Rapacious corporations are empowered and even
subsidized by our government to export U.S. jobs, exploit foreign
workers and the environment, and undercut our very right to self
government. Gore and Bush, however, are funded by the corporate
globalists, so neither see, hear, or speak any evil about this
outrage.
          Stopping the Money Corruption of Politics
          Gore and Bush are shameless poseurs on the reform issue, cynically prancing on the far edges of reform, while neither they nor their parties want even the modest changes they're willing to talk about Both are locked onto the matter of "soft money," the unlimited millions that corporations and unions give to the political parties (though overwhelmingly its corporate cash that plays in the soft money game). Gore would outlaw soft money, and Bush would outlaw it for corporations and unions, but allow CEOs, fat cat investors, and other individuals to continue pumping millions through the soft-money loophole.
          Not a whisper do we get from these two reform frauds
on public financing of all elections, which is the one way we finally could get the corrupting private money out of the process. If you want public policy to reflect genuine public
interest, rather than private interests, we've got to fund the
democratic process publicly, rather than privately. Doing this closes
all loopholes for special interest money, but it does something else
that might be even more important. it allows regular people to run for
office again, since a teacher. small farmer, retail clerk, cab driver,
or whomever could get access to the same pool of public campaign funds
to which incumbents and elites would have access. Already, Arizona
Maine, Massachusetts, and Vermont have passed state laws for public
financing, while Connecticut, Missouri, and Oregon will vote on it
this year. Why not a national debate?
          On these and dozens of other key issues--from the stupid drug war" to the crying need for universal health care--Gore and Bush are not engaged in an election, but
in a scurrilous scam to preserve the status quo And status quo" is Latin for "the mess we're in"
          
            Jim Hightower, author of "If the Gods Had Meant Us
to Vote They Would Have Given Us Candidates"> continues to
produce his daily talk radio show "The Chat and Chew," and gives
speeches nationwide. To find out more information about his newsletter
and other endeavors, go to www.jimhightower.com For detailed
information on soft money in the 2000 election and national pony
conventions, visit the Center for Responsive Politics website at:
www.opensecrets.org
          
        
        
          Young Voters Flee the Polls
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 pp. 8-9
          
          If nonvoters constituted a political party in America today, far and away more citizens would belong to it than to all other political parties combined-and that party would be growing rapidly. In the 1998 midterm elections, various surveys show that more than six out often eligible voters or 128 million registered voters failed to vote, a 2.5 million increase over the 1994 midterm election. This continues a thirty-eight-year trend of declining participation rates in both presidential and midterm elections. One recent study found that our electorate has decreased to the point that, among the 131 democracies in the world, the United States ranks 103rd in voter participation.
          One of the most alarming realities shaping the steady drift of
Americans away from the voting booths is that young people, eighteen
to twenty-four years of age, are far and away leading this nonvoting
trend. "I'm registered to vote and I guess I usually do, but that is
mainly because it helps me gain residential status for school
purposes," says Tara Mitchell, a twenty-two-year old African-American
student at Georgia State University in Atlanta. "I do see the bigger
picture, that each vote adds up, but I don't really feel like it does. Most of my friends do not vote. They just don't see it as a very big concern."
          The participation rate for young people in the 1998 midterm election was a startling 15 percent The eighteen to twenty-four year-old cohorts 32.4 percent participation rate in the l996general elections is seventeen percentage points lower than the next lowest age group--twenty-five to forty-four-year-olds--who turnout at an uninspiring rate of 49.2 percent. Comparing the youth vote with the voting age cohort with the highest participation rate--seniors (those sixty-five and older)--is even more revealing. Two of three seniors vote. Two of three youth do not vote.
           The trend towards nonvoting from the mid-1960s to 1996 is evident in every section of the country, but the South has led with a decrease of 11 percent The extent of youth nonvoting in the South has, up to this point, not been quantified. "There are no youth voting statistics for the South," explains SRC Fair Representation Director and Youth Empowerment Project (YEP) co-coordinator Winnett Hagens. "A comprehensive, longitudinal evaluation of youth political participation and nonparticipation in a region that is impacted across the board by nonvoting is critical to understanding what needs to be done to reverse these trends. That is just what we plan to do with YEP."
          A disproportionate share of the politically alienated in
America is drawn from an underclass with a limited stake
in the system as presently constituted. Many of the non
voters in this underclass are convinced that the system is
loaded against them. Minorities especially perceive policies formulated by predominantly-white legislatures and city councils with a suspicious and cynical eye.
          This nonparticipation among youth, however, crosses
racial and ethnic lines. Participation statistics for the 1996 presidential election show that 32.4 percent of black, 15.1 percent of Hispanic and 33.3 percent of white eighteen to twenty-four-year-olds voted in the 1996 elections. (The lower rate among Hispanic youth may be attributed to the fact that many Hispanic youth are immigrants and, therefore not registered to vote.)
          The current epidemic levels of nonparticipation erode
the legitimacy, capacity and the stability of our governing
institutions. Youth play a crucial role in the durability of a democracy because they constitute the substance of renewal which replenishes the democratic tradition across generations. Yet, says Georgia Representative Bob Holmes (D-Manta), director of the Southern Center for Studies in Public Policy at Clark Atlanta University and co-oordinator of YEP, "Young people seem to feel that the system is
broke and they don't want to be apart of it."With nonvoting
among American youth running at least 70 percent at its
lowest troubling questions arise regarding future leadership recruitment prospects for our democracy.
          The main benefit of broad public participation in the political process by young and old alike is the creation of public policy that advances the common interests of all rather than the particular interests of a few. The explicit premise of democracy has always been the proposition that the hardest problems confronting a social order demand the collective genius of all for successful resolution. Given the growing complexities of an unstable world order, to engage youth in the political order is not only a means of replenishing our traditions of civic involvement but it is also a way to bring into the public arena new perspectives, energy, enthusiasm, imagination, insight, and ingenuity sorely needed to solve the most difficult problems facing us today.
          There is no doubt that a great multitude of causes
languish because most voters, especially most young
voters, choose not to exercise their franchise. Indeed,
one way to appreciate the critical importance of youth disengagement is to ask the question: what issues are sufficiently relevant to youthful voters to draw them into active participation? "I think a lot of the issues that are important to older people are also important to younger people, but in a different way--welfare, healthcare, public education, censorship, how the government is creeping into our lives," says Matielyn Williams, a nineteen-
year old African-American student at the State University of West Georgia in Carroliton who is already registered and planning to vote in her first election this fall. "We are entering the working classes and are beginning to be impacted by these things and need to have a voice."
          In an effort to combat this growing alienation of American youth
from the political process, the Southern Regional Council, in
partnership with the Southern Center for Studies in Public Policy at
Clark Atlanta University, is undertaking the Youth Empowerment
Project, a sixyear project which will both document this trend in the
South and develop pilot youth leadership development programs to nurture and grow youth political engagement. "I think there is a growing alarm regarding the precipitous decline in youth voting and political participation, shared by the Southern Center for Public Policy and the SRC," explains Hagens. "We want to see youth coming back to the voting place."
          
            For more information about the YEP project, contact Winnett Hagens
at (404) 522-8764 x39, or by email at:
whagens@southerncouncil.org.
          
        
        
          Election 2000 Across the South
          By Torian, Sarah E.Sarah E. Torian
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 pp. 10-13
          
          Across the South, affirmative action, felony disfranchisement, the environment, and public education hang in the balance as states elect new governors, legislators, congresspeople, and judges. From the potential Republican ascension to complete statewide control in Virginia to the removal of more than sixty senior legislators in Florida due to term limits, this fall's elections will determine who is in control during the post2000 redistricting, whose agendas will be proposed and endorsed, and the extent of minority and female political representation as we enter the next century. Following are brief summaries of some significant elections and issues on the ballot across the South this November.
          
            Disfranchised Voters in Alabama
          
          In the state with the highest percentage of disfranchised black voters in the country (31.5 percent) and the highest percentage of disfranchised voters overall (7.5 percent), Alabamians are gearing up for an important judicial election year. Four seats on the state supreme court, currently with a five-to-four Republican majority, will be up this year, including that of Republican Chief Justice Perry Hooper. Etowah County Circuit Judge Roy Moore (R), who gained fame for defying a judicial order to remove the Ten Commandments from the wall behind his courtroom bench and stop Opening court sessions with a prayer, will face Civil Appeals Court Judge Sharon Yates (D), the first woman to sit on the Alabama Civil Court of Appeals, in the race to fill Hooper's open seat.
          Currently, there are two African-American judges sitting on the state's highest court-Judges John Henry England (D) and Ralph D. Cook (D).Although that number on a Supreme Court bench of nine correlates with the percentage of the Alabama population that is African American, they are the only two minority judges on a statewide bench in Alabama. Both will be facing Republican challengers this fall. England, who was appointed to his seat last year by Democratic Governor Don Siegelman, will be running against Jefferson County Circuit Judge Tom Woodall and Cook will face Baldwin County Circuit Judge Lyn Stuart Jerome Gray of the Alabama Democratic Convention believes that both England and Cook will prevail but that the races will be tight "Blacks do not make up a majority of the Alabama population and there is racially polarized voting. Those two factors will combine to make these close races."
          Alabama is one of only ten states in the country to
disfranchise first-time felons while in prison, under probation or
parole, and after their sentences have been
completed (Florida, Kentucky, Mississippi, and Virginia are other
Southern states that disfranchise first-time felons for life.)
Currently, more than 80 percent of Alabama's disfranchised citizens
have completed their sentences, and many of these are African
American. Of the 241,100 adults disfranchised in Alabama, about
105,000 (43.5 percent) are African-American men. In a state where
African Americans compose 26 percent of the population, this figure demonstrates the importance of having fair representation in the criminal justice system. Robert Smith, field coordinator of the Alabama Democratic Party Black Caucus explains, "The current system of disfranchisement is incredibly unfair. Most [disfranchised citizens] have already served their time, paid their retribution to society. And still they are
required to go through along, difficult application process
to the board of pardons that includes DNA testing and can take more than a year."
          
            "Eight Is Enough" Term Limits Pose Threat in Florida
          
          Florida is gearing up for more political action than usual between now and November 7. This year the state's "Eight is Enough" term-limiting constitutional amendment will take effect, opening up more than sixty of the state's 160 legislative seats. That is nearly one-half of the house seats and one-fourth of the senate seats. Two-term Republican U.S. Senator Connie Mack is retiring this year and a three-way battle is underway to fill that seat Also, spurred by state legislators Kendrick Meek (D-Miami) and Tony Hill (I)Jacksonville), efforts are underway to energize the African-American vote in response to Governor Jeb Bush's "One Florida" plan which eliminated affirmative action from the state's public colleges and universities.
          Many longtime legislators were forced to step down at
the end of the 2000 session due to Florida's term limits law,
including dean of the legislature Senator W.D. Childers (R-Pensacola) and house Democratic leader Representative Us Miller, Jr. Having taken control of the House and Senate in the 1996 elections and currently holding a seventy-five to forty-five majority in the House, the GOP is expected to retain control of the state house. But with a twenty-five to fifteen majoiityin the senate and eightRepublicansbeingtennedoutcompared to onlythree Democrata, the GOP could potentially lose control of the senate. Demo.' crats are working hard towards that end with hopes of having strong representation as the state begins the 2000
redistricting process.
          With the term limit-imposed turnover this year, there is a serious threat to current minority leadership. There are twenty, African-American legislators and about fourteen of these are being forced to step down because of term limits. There are also fourteen Latino legislators in Florida, four of whom will be stepping down because of term limits this year. For most of those seats, minorities are among the major candidates running for election, but they will lack the boost in name recognition and experience provided by incumbency.
          Maneuvering for retiring U.S. Senator Connie Mack's seat are three candidates. U.S. Representative Bill McCollum became the presumptive Republican candidate in June as state Education Commissioner Tom Gallagher
dropped out of the race. McCollum, called a "pugnacious ideologue" by the St. Petersburg Times, played a key role in the impeachment of President Clinton and is beloved by the Christian right.
          Florida Insurance Commissioner Bill Nelson, the only
Democratic candidate thus far, served twelve years in the U.S. House before being elected to his current position in 1994. Since his Republican challenger had been consumed in his battle for the Republican nomination until June, Nelson has only recently begun to campaign full force, emphasizing traditional Democratic issues from preserving Social Security and Medicare to enhancing public education and protecting the environment.
          State Representative Willie Logan (D-Opa-locka)
rounds out the field of contenders for Mack's seat. The victim of a statewide controversy in 1998 when white House Democrats dumped him as their choice to be the next speaker, Logan endorsed Jeb Bush for governor in 1998 and could potentially cost Nelson black votes this fall if he stays in the race. With $310,000 raised and mostly spent, Logan campaigned in May and June on a motorcycle tour that covered the length of the state but has received little media attention.
           Since Gov. Jeb Bush pushed through his anti-affirmative action "One Florida" plan this spring and Ward Connerly postponed his anti-affirmative action referendums until 2002, that issue will not be on the ballot this fall. State Representative Tony Hill (D-Jacksonville) and State Senator Kendrick Meek (D-Miami), however, are working hard to inject affirmative action into the election season. Neither representative is up for reelection, but both are travelling the state, campaigning for "Keep Florida Alive - Take Five," a get-out-the-vote drive that encourages people to take election day off and carry, five other
voters to the polls in order to make their voices heard 'about affirmative action.
          
            Flag Controversy Enters Georgia
          
          With the Confederate baffle flag now moved from atop the South Carolina capitol to the statehouse grounds, the flag issue is moving into the neighboring state of Georgia Remembering the repercussions of then-Governor Zell Miller's attempts to have the flag changed in 1993. most anti-flag Georgia legislators are "ring to hold oft the debate until after the 2000 elections when all 236 seats of the legislature are up for a vote. African-American Rep. Calvin Smyre (1)-Columbus) explains, "We made a decision this session to forego it and wait until 2001. I don't know if we would be able to put our finger in the dike again and keep the dam from breaking." Legislators might not be able to avoid the debate for long. Rep. Bob Holmes (D-Atlanta) predicts that Earl Ehrhart (R-Powder Springs) will try to force the issue of the flag into the debate. "It's a windshield issue. They will try to make people take a stand on it one way or the other and use that against them in the fall."
          The Confederate battle flag, popularly termed the 'Stars and Bars" was incorporated into the Georgia state flag in 1956, in direct protest of court-ordered integration. Mississippi and Georgia are the only two states which include the Confederate battle flag in their state flags.
          With GOP Senator Paul Coverdell's death in July, and Governor Roy Barnes' subsequent appointment of former Georgia Governor Zell Miller to fill Coverdell's seat,
battle is underway among Republicans to determine who will run for the seat this fall. Although many Republicans have considered a candidacy, the field has narrowed to one-term U.S. Senator Mack Mattingly (1981-1987). Mattingly, a longtime friend of Coverdell, argues that he
has the experience to assemble an effective campaign team.
Democrat Zell Miller maintained high voter approval during his two
terms as governor (1990 to 1998), making him a formidable foe for any Republican challengers.
          U.S. Representative Bob Barr (R-7th district; Rome) is up for
reelection this year and may be facing a significant challenge in
Altanta businessman and Bartow County farmer Roger Kahn. A moderate Democrat, Kahn is not attacking Bands infamous role in the Clinton impeachment trials, but rather is suggesting that Barr's time would have been better focused on issues that impact his constituents such as Social Security, education, traffic congestion, and urban sprawl After Jim Williams, Barr's Democratic challenger in 1998, garnered 45 percent of the vote on a budget of less than $10,000. Kahn, with his $700,000 and conservative positions on many issues, may be a strong challenger against Barr in the conservative district
          
            North Carolina: Vouchers and Vinroot
          
          For twenty years, the Tar Heel State has exhibited a trend toward
voting Republican, and has consistently gone Republican in the last
four presidential contests. That fact bolsters GOP hopes to replace
Democratic Governor Jim Hunt this year with a Republican and they are
hanging their hopes on Richard Vinroot, a corporate lawyer and former
two-term mayor of Charlotte (1991-1995). Vinroot, who battled with in
the Republican primary to position himself as the most conservative
candidate, gained prominence while mayor of Charlotte by privatizing thirty-three of the city's public services.
           Vinroot will face State Attorney General Mike Easley and Barbara Howe at the North Carolina polls in November. Easley, in his second term as state attorney general, won the Democratic nomination with much party support and currently leads both Vinroot and Howe in the polls.
          Howe is a homemaker and part-time aerobics instructor in Oxford and is targeting home schoolers, drug legalization groups, and death penalty opponents in her efforts to gain support and raise campaign funds.
          A recent statewide poll conducted by the Raleigh
News and Observer showed that education was far and
away the highest priority in voters' minds this year. Both major party candidates have proposals to improve the state's public education. Easley is proposing a lottery with the proceeds going to reduce class sizes, especially in kindergarten through third grade. Vinroot's agenda supports "parent choice" with an expansion of charter schools and tax-paid vouchers for private schools, and an end to busing for the purpose of desegregation.
          John Dornan of the Education: Everybody's Business Coalition, a nonpartisan coalition of education and business organizations that have surveyed this year's state candidate's education proposals and hosted debates, recognizes a stark difference between Easley and Tlmroot's education plans. 'The biggest divide between the candidates is their stances on vouchers," Dornan explains. "Vinroot, his proposals, and his campaigning style are very similar to Governor Jeb Bush's in Florida. He is calling for a voucher and opportunity scholarship plan very similar to Florida's." Dornan also noted that, although his organization and the broader coalition were nonpartisan and did not endorse candidates, all member organizations of the coalition, including North Carolina Citizens for Business and Industry, the state School Board Association, and the North Carolina Public School Forum, had "taken a strong opposition to vouchers and opportunity scholarships."
          
            Republican Control in Virginia
          
          Will Virginia, as it has for the past seven years, continue
its Republican revival? In 1993, after a twelve-year run of Democratic governors, Virginians elected George Allen. Since then, the Republican Party has gained control of the state senate, is one seat shy of controlling the House of Delegates, and holds every statewide office except for the seat of U.S. Senator Chuck Robb. Robb, a two-term incumbent; faces former governor George Allen this fall. If he should lose, it will be the first time in more than a hundred years that no Democrat holds a statewide office.
          Allen has amassed a campaign war chest almost twice
as large as Robb's. If successful in his Senate bid, Allen. with
close party ties across Virginia, is expected to gain the
mantle of state party leadership. Toward that goal, he is running on an anti-"Clinton-Gore-Robb" platform in a state that has voted Republican in all presidential elections since 1964, while proposing a $58 billion tax cut-including elimination of the "marriage penalty" and estate taxes, and a $1000 education tax credit During his tenure as governor (1994-1998) though, Allen had a poor record on environmental issues and is already facing critical television ads sponsored by the Sierra Club. The state's more than 140,000 state employees will also likely remember the derogatory statements Allen made about them while governor, while parents in the state exhibit mixed reactions towards the state Standards of Learning achievement tests that Allen implemented.
          Senator Robb, who defeated Oliver North (of Iran-Contra notoriety) in his last reelection, combines a conservative stance on defense and fiscal issues with a long-time support of civil rights issues, including support for gays in the military, federal affirmative action programs, and a woman's right to choose.
          Three unexpected Congressional retirements and a change of party also
add interest to Virginia's 2000 elections, as well as the situation of
representation of minorities and women. Currently, all thirteen
Virginia Congresspeople are male and white except for African-American
Represen-
tative Robert Sisisky. Nine-term Republican Representative Herbert Bateman (1st district, Newport News), will be stepping down this fall Lawrence Davies, an African American and former mayor of Fredricksburg, will-be the Democratic candidate facing Delegate Jo Aim Davis (R-York County) for the seat If Davis wins, she would become the first Republican congresswoman from Virginia. Davis supports traditional conservative measures including federal tax cuts, increased military spending, strict limits on abortion, and opposes gun control and gay rights.
          Another woman, Democrat Jody Wagner is running to fill Representative
Owen Pickett's (D-Norfolk) seat in the second district Wagner, a
Virginia Beach lawyer and civic leader, will face State Senator Ed Schrock (R-Virginia Beach). With two successful campaigns in the district, Schrock is expected to beat first-time candidate Wagner.
          Representative Tom Bliley, Jr. (R-Richmond) of the seventh district is retiring and vacating the chair of the commerce committee after twenty years in the house. Eric Cantor, a wealthy lawyer and businessman who served as Bliley's campaign chairman for the past three elections, will be the Republican candidate for the position and Warren Stewart, former superintendent of the Goochland County Schools, will run as the Democratic candidate. In a district that tends to vote Republican at every level of government, Stewart faces an almost impossible battle.
          Virgil Goode in the "Southside" fifth district (Danville)
is causing waves by declaring a change of parties. A two-term conservative Democrat, Goode is running this year as an independent with Republican endorsement. He will face no Republican challengers in the very conservative rural district in the heart of tobacco country, but will face Democratic challenger John Boyd, the President of the National Black Farmers Association. Boyd led the NBFA's complaint that the U.S. Department of Agriculture discriminated against black farmers in a lawsuit that won a
 multi-million dollar settlement against the Department.
          
            Independent Injecting Issues into West Virginia Race
          
          Representing the newly-formed, pro-environment Mountain Party, writer and activist Denise Giardina is raising important issues in West Virginia's gubernatorial race. Giardina, author of The Unquiet Earth, winner of the 1992 Lillian Smith Book Award, is campaigning against the environmentally-destructive form of mining called mountaintop removal. She is also challenging the absentee landownership of much of West Virginia's land, timber, and minerals by outside corporations that do not pay commensurate property taxes. She seeks to have corporate-owned land appraised and taxed for its actual value. Giardina also hopes to prevent the gaming industry--which in 1999 contributed more to the state's politicians than any other
industry, including coal--from spreading through the state. And, she wants to protect small community schools from the trend toward consolidation.
          Giardina will face Republican incumbent Cecil
Underwood and Democratic Representative Bob Wise (7th
District, Charleston). In a state where Democrats outnumber Republicans two-th-one, Republican Underwood won in 1996 with, much Democratic support after the Democrats split along business-labor lines in the primary. At age seventy-seven, he is the nation's oldest governor and is emphasizing family values, increased technology and road construction, and decreased welfare rolls in his bid for reelection. Wise, who has served West Virginia in the U.S. House since 1992, is highlighting Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) reform, increased economic diversity, and
affordable prescription medicine for seniors.
          Just getting her name on the ballot has proven to be difficult for Giardina in the current climate of two-party politics. In an effort to loosen ballot restrictions last winter, the West Virginia legislature reversed the law that prevented anyone who signed an independent candidate's petition from voting in the Republican or Democratic
primaries. The law, however, did not change the requirement petitioners must state that the signee will not be allowed to vote in the party primaries, discouraging many from signing independent petitions. By the petition deadline of May 8 though, Giardina was able to submit 18,000 names, well above the 12,562 required.
          Recognizing the stiff battle ahead, in which many political scientists see the election as a tossup between the two major party candidates, Giardina sees her campaign as more than the tally of votes on November 7. Here's what is crucial," she says. "I don't know if I will get the most votes in this election, but I have already won' by opening up the electoral process in this state. I have, won by starting to talk about real issues, not public relations fluff, by challenging other candidates to spend at least a tiny portion of their millions of dollars on the real needs of people in West Virginia. And all that before any vote is cast"
          Although most media attention this fall will focus on
the presidential election, across the South, 134 House seats, seven Senate seats, two gubernatorial seats, and hundreds of state legislative and local positions will be on the ballot in November. With only a six-seat GOP majority in the U.S. House and a five-seat GOP majority in the U.S. Senate, party control will weigh in the balance as will equal access to higher education, minority and female representation, the 2000 redistricting schedule, and the environment. 
          
            Sarah Torian is editorial coordinator at the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          The 2000 Elections and Voting Rights Act Renewal
          By Spears, EllenEllen Spears
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 pp. 14-15
          
          Alarmist email messages surfaced in the late 1990s
claiming that "African-Americans will lose their right to
vote in 2007." While the 110th Congress will not in any direct sense, be deciding whether or not black or Latino voters will retain the right to vote, key provisions of the Voting Rights Act of 1965--including Section 5, which gives the U.S. Department of Justice enforcement powers in covered jurisdictions--will end in 2007 unless Congress moves to extend them.
          Why does this event in 2007 matter so much right now, when
congressional action on renewal is seven years away? The 2000
elections will set the stage for political decision-making throughout
the decade: electing a president who may make more than one Supreme
Court appointment, installing state legislators who will decide the
contours of congressional delegations for the decade, and shaping the
partisan balance in Congress. The campaign to extend this important
protection, which gives a tool to effectively enforce
the Voting Rights Act, should begin now, on the thirty-fifth anniversary of the Act.
          
            Voting Enforcement Under Fire
          
          The new president will also name Justice Department leadership, whose enforcement authority in voting rights lawsuits has been under fire during the past decade. Opponents of majority-minority districts in the 1990s moved from arguing against the Justice Department's application of Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act to arguing against the constitutionality of Section 5 itself. This
assault on Section 5 is dangerous because this extremely important provision of the Voting Rights Act is temporary.
          Many of the provisions of the Voting Rights Act are
permanent, they do not require congressional renewal. This includes Section 201, which imposes a nationwide ban on literacy tests, and Section 2, which prohibits all discrimination in voting and secures victims the right to challenge such discrimination in court.
          However, the temporary Section 5-which requires certain jurisdictions, mostly in the South, with a history of voting discrimination to preclear all proposed changes in voting laws or procedures with the U.S. Attorney General or the U.S. District Court in the District of Columbia has been a particularly effective remedy for discrimination in voting.
          Under Section 5, within covered jurisdictions, the burden of proving that any proposed change has neither the intent nor effect of weakening the representation of minority voters lies with the state or local government, not the victims of discrimination. State or local officials must prove that a proposed change in voting laws is not discriminatory in purpose or effect Wore the amendments can be implemented. If Section 5 is not extended in 2007. however, jurisdictions will once again be able to pass and implement voting laws with discriminatory effects-laws which minority voters can then challenge only after-the-fact through the slow and expensive process of litigation.
          The preclearance provisions have already been weakened. The Bossier Parish, Louisiana case decided by the Supreme Court in January 2000, curtailed the effectiveness of Section 5, by holding that intentionally discriminatory changes in voting were objectionable only if they made minority voters worse off than under a previous practice.
          Currently sixteen states, or parts of states, are covered by Section 5: all of Alaska, Alabama, Arizona, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South Carolina, Texas, and
Virginia, and some counties or towns in California, Florida,
Michigan, New Hampshire, New York, North Carolina,
and South Dakota.
          Some of these states or parts of states were brought
under the aegis of Section 5 due to a 1975 amendment to the Voting
Rights Act passed to protect language minorities who had suffered
historical discrimination. Opposition to this amendment, which
requires bilingual elections in certain areas, surfaced during the
104th Con-
gress. A bill was introduced in the House that called for its repeal. The bilingual provisions will also come up for renewal in 2007.
          A further danger lies in the fact that any time provisions of the Act are opened up for debate, there is no guarantee that Congress would confine its review to the renewal of those provisions.
          
            A Fight lies Ahead
          
          The 1982 extension of the Voting Rights Act was
passed only after vigorous organizing by civil rights forces
at every level and by a Democratic Congress during a
Republican administration hostile to voting rights expansion.
          The 2000 elections will seat the state legislators who will begin the redistricting cycle after the census numbers become available in 2001. Those legislators will determine how congressional seats will be allocated, affecting who gets elected to Congress. As in previous cycles, Section 5 will be one of the most important tools in the hands of minority voters and their allies in the redistricting process.
          Challenges to redistricting plans made by states and localities are handled by the federal courts. An activist judiciary played an unprecedented role in determining the shape of state legislatures and congressional delegations during the 1990s. The Supreme Court is frequently divided five-to-four on voting rights cases, with Justice Sandra Day O'Connor often the swing vote. Supreme Court appointments and other nominations to the federal bench made by the administration elected in November 2000 will shape redistricting outcomes for the next decade. The Republican-controlled Congress has obstructed President Clinton's judicial appointments.
          The renewal debate will determine whether the Voting Rights Act has teeth in it--whether the influence gained by minority voters will suffer severely or progress. 
          
            Ellen Spears is associate director of the Southern Regional Council. You can reach her by e-mail at espears@southerncouncil.org. Preston Quesenberry contributed to this article.
          
        
        
          Teaching "Will the Circle Be Unbroken?" in South Carolina Schools
          By Raschke, DianeDiane Raschke
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 p. 16
          
          On June 14-15, SRC consultant and former education programs director Marcia Klenbort conducted an in-depth workshop for teachers from across South Carolina on using "Will the Circle Be Unbroken?" in grades 6 through 12. Following the workshop, the article below, entitled "Distant Voices to Recount South's Civil Rights Clashes: Key Civil Rights Voices Come Alive for Local Students in a New Documentary" appeared in The State newspaper.
          More than 250 new voices will help some Columbia, South Carolina, students learn about the Civil Rights Movement this fall.
          They belong to the men and women, both famous
and ordinary, who shaped civil rights history in the South from 1940 to 1970. Framed by narrative and period music, they speak through an award-winning audio documentary that will soon be heard in four Columbia schools.
          Educators from all over the state, including four from Columbia, will pilot a new curriculum that complements the Southern Regional Council's "Will the Circle Be Unbroken?" civil rights documentary. A June workshop at the South Carolina Archives and History Center taught educators how to use the 13-hour series in the classroom.
          Gussie Tucker, a member of the WA Perry Middle
School Task Force, said first-person narratives make the series outstanding.
          "The emotions when they're talking are something
you can't see in a movie because other people are playing
the part," Tucker said. "This is a primary source. You can
hear and actually know what they were feeling, being part
of the Civil Rights Movement"
          Teachers from A.C. Flora High School, Keenan High School, Heathwood Hall Episcopal School, and Joseph Keels Elementary School will pilot the program in Columbia, and Tucker hopes to sell WA Perry teachers on it as well.
          The documentary has won several honors, including
the prestigious Peabody Award in 1998.
          The full title of the series is 'Will the Circle Be
Unbroken? An audio history of the Civil Rights Movement in five Southern communities and the music of those times."
          The communities are Montgomery, Alabama; little
Rock, Arkansas; Jackson, Mississippi; Atlanta. Georgia;
and Columbia, South Carolina. Four of the series' twenty-six half-hour segments focus on the Midlands region of South Carolina.
          The series includes the work of the Richland County
United Citizens' Committee in integrating Columbia's
schools; the Clarendon County segregation case, Briggs v. Elliot and the "Orangeburg Massacre," the 1968 incident in which state troopers fired op protesters at South Carolina State University, killing three.
          This local connection is important, said Lalitha Shastri, a social studies teacher at Heathwood Hall.
          "That's away of saying to the kids that it happened on your doorstep," she said. "You're walking the streets where this happened, you're living in the area where this happened, you're living the legacy of this."
          Co-sponsors of the program with the Southern Regional Council are the South Carolina Humanities Council and the state Department of Education.
          
            Diane Raschke wrote this article for The State newspaper based in Columbia, South Carolina.
          
        
        
          REVIEWS: An Essential Toughness
          Reviewed by Dittmer, JohnJohn Dittmer
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 pp. 17-18
          
          Andrew M. Manis, A Fire You Can't Put Out: The Civil Rights Life of Birmingham's Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, Tuscaloosa: The University of Alabama Press. 1999.
          The first thing you need to know about the Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth
is that he was fearless. A case in point: during the 1961 Freedom
Rides, hundreds of Montgomery blacks were trapped inside First Baptist
Church, surrounded by a large mob of angry whites. Outside of that perimeter, Shuttlesworth had CORE leader James Farmer in tow. How to get to the relative security of the church? His biographer tells us what happened next:
          Shuttlesworth: "Jim, we have no choice. We'll have to go through them."
          Farmer: "We're going to have to do what?"
          Shuttlesworth: "We're gon' have to walk through that mob."
          Before Farmer could answer, however, Fred began to march into the
teeth of the horde and elbowed his way toward the church, shouting,
"Out of the way. Let me through. Step aside." Farmer, a much larger
man than his trailblazer for the day, scuttled up to follow in
Shuttlesworth's trail, while the ocean of angry white hoodlums obeyed
his word. In an occurrence Fred saw as tantamount to the parting of the Red Sea, a path opened up through an ocean of angry whites, allowing Shuttlesworth and Farmer to make an exodus into the "safety" of First Baptist Church.
          Perhaps it all goes back to the Klan's Christmas bombing of the Shuttlesworth home four years earlier, when Fred walked out of his bedroom after "eight to eighteen
sticks of dynamite went off within three feet of this] head." Shuttlesworth later testified that "I knew in a second.. that the only reason God saved me was to lead the fight"
          In A Fire You Can't Put Out, Andrew Manis has written
a fascinating biography of the life and times of the civil
rights activist who will always be associated with Martin Luther King's 1963 Birmingham campaign. Manis shows us that far from being a Southern Christian Leadership Council functionary. Fred Shuttlesworth, more than any other black minister/activist, embraced and articulated the spirit of the men and women at the grass roots level, those local people who made Martin Luther King Jr. possible.
          The early chapters are more autobiographical than biographical: Shuttlesworth is the major source for this
account of his growing up near Birmingham in a family dominated by wife-beating stepfather and a demanding mother. Fred's family lacked the social heritage, formal education, and professional status of the upper or middle class." In such an environment, Fred quickly developed -an essential toughness- that would serve him well throughout his adult life. What saved the young Shuttlesworth from a life of obscurity was his intelligence, ambition, and his conversion to
Christianity.
          A historian of religion. Manis firmly grounds Shuffles-worth in the African-American Church. Unlike King, whose formal education at Morehouse, Crozer, and Boston University prepared him to pastor an elite congregation. Shuttlesworth worked his way through blue.collar Selma University, developing a theology grounded in fundamentalist
belief rather than philosophical understanding. In the pulpit, Shuttlesworth relied on improvisation rather than on a more thorough preparation of his Sunday sermons. He instinctively knew how to move a congregation, and quickly rose through the ranks to become pastor of Bethel Baptist Church in Birmingham.
          
          Manis provides adequate treatment of the 1963 Birmingham
demonstrations, and the key role Shuttlesworth played in the SCLC-led
movement; covering familiar ground when he discusses Shuttlesworth's
resentment over the media attention King received and King's apparent
willingness to sacrifice local concerns for favorable national publicity. But the most interesting parts of this fascinating biography deal with Shuttlesworth's life in the 1950s, when he bravely fought a lonely battle against segregation in America's Johannesburg. His Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights (ACMHR) was the vehicle for the attack on Jim Crow, as time and again he stood up to Bull Connor and the Klan, despite jailings, beatings, more bombings, and psychological warfare waged against his family.
          What kind of person could not only survive, but apparently thrive in a
society built on white supremacist terror? Manis obviously thinks highly of his subject, but this is no
hagiography. Shuttlesworth comes across as a courageous but flawed human being. Whether in the home, in his church, or in the inner councils of the ACMHR, Shuttlesworth insisted on having his way. A male chauvinist (Manis says that Shuttlesworth's major redeeming quality as a husband was that he did not beat his wife, Ruby!), he ruled his family with an iron hand, neglecting his parental role while devoting his time to the Birmingham movement (One of his daughters recalled her surprise when her father actually showed up for her high school graduation.) Shuttlesworth loved the limelight; and his boastful comments about his relationship with famous people like the
Kennedys speak both to his ego and his insecurity.
          Still, the Fred Shuttlesworth who sticks in the mind is the militant warrior who stood up for human rights in Birmingham at a time when to do so was foolhardy if not fatal. Inside the movement he championed the progressive Southern Conference Education Fund (SCEF) and its spokespersons Carl and Anne Braden, while more cautious leaders like Andrew Young were warning against associating with SCEF, labeled "pro-communist" by such statesmen as Senator James Eastland.
           Andrew Manis observed that Shuttlesworth was "the
person most willing to sacrifice his own well-being for the
cause." Perhaps Diane Nash, the SNCC activist also known
for her dedication to principle, put it best when she said, "Fred was practically a legend. I think it was important for there to be somebody that really represented strength, and that's certainly what Fred did. He would not back down, and you could count on it. He would not sell out, and you could count on that?
          
            John Dittmer is a professor of history at DePauw University and is working on a book on the Medical Committee
for Human Rights.
          
        
        
          Civil Rights Unionism
          Reviewed by Harris, Leslie MarieLeslie Marie Harris
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 pp. 18-19
          
          Michael Keith Honey, Black Workers Remember: An Oral History of Segregation, Unionism, and the Freedom Struggle, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.
          Mention Memphis, labor, and the Civil Rights Movement and most
people will immediately think of Marlin Luther King, Jr.'s, ill-fated
visit to the city to support striking sanitation workers, and his
assassination in April 1968. King's visit was part of the late-1960's
turn from a focus on legal rights to economic equality. But as Michael
Honey's Black Workers Remember demonstrates, black
workers themselves had long struggled to overcome economic and
occupational hardships, without the help of high-profile civil rights
organizations such as the NAACP, SNCC, or CORE. Honey's work continues
a trend in Civil Rights history that examines the struggles of
southern blacks against Jim Crow racism before the 1954 Brown decision and the sit-ins and boycotts of the 1950s and 1960s. Through the voices of black men and women, Honey convincingly argues that the history of civil rights activism in the South should begin in part with the struggles of black workers as early as the 1930s to break through occupational color bars in industrialized urban areas.
          In a less well-known aspect of the Great Migration of southern blacks to the north, blacks also moved from the countryside to southern cities, and from the plantation to southern factories in search of better wages and greater freedom in urban areas. In Memphis, however, such hopes were only partially fulfilled. Black workers earned better wages in the city at the Firestone Tire Factory, Federal Compress Company, and Memphis Furniture Company than they had in rural areas, and factory work was sometimes easier than farm labor. Blacks were less isolated in Memphis than in rural areas, with greater opportunities for collective social and political lives. But the majority of black men and women who journeyed to the city still faced Jim Crow conditions on the job and off and limited opportunities for political and economic advancement From the 1910s until his death in 1954, the political machine of Mississippi-born white supremacist Edward Crump controlled the city. Crump bought the votes of blacks and whites, while incorporating Ku Klux Klan members into his political machine and the police department. Middle- and working-class blacks feared Crump's machine, with good reason: Crump's control of the police meant that any talk of civil rights or unionizing resulted in violence. In the late
1930s, several blacks who spoke up against Crump's machine were run out of town. As the police commissioner explained, the purpose of the Memphis police force was to keep Memphis "a white man's country.. . any negro who doesn't agree to this better move on."
          Northern companies that operated in Memphis quickly
acquiesced to the Jim Crow system. Black workers were paid less than whites, and given the hardest jobs. Jim Crow dictated segregated lunchrooms and bathrooms; in factories, for blacks that sometimes meant no lunchrooms and outdoor bathrooms that were little better than holes in the ground. Men's factory wages were so low that sometimes their wives returned to rural areas around Memphis to pick cotton. Black men and women often worked two or more jobs in order to make ends meet For thirty years, Ida Branch, a widow raising two sons, worked two jobs, seven days a week: she worked as a domestic for a white family from 9:00 a.m.to 4:00 p.m., and at Firestone from 10:00 p.m. to 7:15 am.
          Black workers joined unions to fight for better working
conditions and racial equality. Their "civil rights unionism" first
challenged the Jim Crow occupational structure in factories. With
"ambiguous" help from national and local unions, black workers forced
are-assessment of their wages and their abilities in factories. Black
workers in Memphis also used unions as a basis of support for broader
civil rights concerns, as when members of Local 19 travelled to Jackson, Mississippi, to protest the 1951 execution of black truck driver Willie McGee, who was charged with raping a white woman. In Jackson, the police rounded up members of Local 19 and threatened to "march [them] right on down to the river" and kill them before ordering them out of town "at their earliest convenience." Mississippi U.S. Senator James Eastland's Senate Internal Security Subcommittee, partner to the House Un-American Activities Committee, called Local 19's vice president Earl Fisher to a hearing about the union's alleged communist influences. Although Fisher's responses to the Committee's questions led Eastland to say that "the Negro officials here are dumb ...they have simply been used by designing people," Fisher won the larger battle by getting through the hearing without implicating himself or anyone connected with the union as a communist, and thus avoiding arrest.
          Such small victories chipped away at the edifice of Jim
Crow in Memphis. By the 1970s, wages were equalized
between blacks and whites, and a variety of factory jobs
(skilled, unskilled, and supervisory) were integrated, as
were restrooms and cafeterias. Unfortunately, such integration occurred as industrial occupations declined in number. Mechanization in factories, as well as movement of factories out of the country, pushed both blacks and whites out of industrial jobs. But while many whites had enough education to move into non-manual labor jobs, black men
did not. The income gap between black and white men widened again. Black women fared slightly better, many had more education on average than black men, and were able to enter teaching and "pink collar" clerical jobs. As a result, the income gap between black and white women narrowed between 1950 and 1990. Despite black women's better-paying jobs, black men's under- and unemployment continued to negatively impact the black family as men worked two or more jobs and were still eligible for welfare because of the low wages. And whites, even those who faced unemployment problems similar to blacks in an era of de-industrialization, continued to rely on the wages of whiteness to place themselves above blacks and avoid uniting
with them in struggles for equity for all workers.
          Honey's book brings together many compelling stories of life and labor in Memphis. Black men and women
tell in their own voices of their pride in their work and their anguish at the struggles they endured during and after Jim Crow. Honey has provided a valuable service in bringing to a wider public these less well-known voices of the civil rights struggle that demonstrate a person's ability to contribute to the creation of a more equitable society.
          
            Leslie Marie Harris is an assistant professor of history
at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia.
          
        
        
          Film/Television: Lost Highways
          Reviewed by Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 pp. 20-22
          
          "George Wallace: Settin' the Woods on Fire," a film in The American Experience series for the Public Broadcasting Service. Produced and directed by Daniel McCabe and Paul Stekler for WGBH, Boston. Written by McCabe, Stekler, and Steve Fayer. Executive Producer Margaret Drain. Based in part on The Politics of Rage by Dan T. Carter. 180 minutes.
          George Wallace, white reaction's pit bull in the desegregation and
voting rights battles of the 1950s and 60s. was--in his prime--a
corrupt, power-obsessed governor who cultivated a climate of terror, intimidation, and murderous violence. Bands played "Dixie," rebel flags waved, Klansmen blew up children and shot "agitators," police chiefs unleashed dogs and fire hoses, and state troopers broke the heads but not the spirits of demonstrators. There was, Martin Luther King Jr. concluded, "blood on the hands of Governor Wallace."
          By the 1970s, Wallace had
taught many Americans to speak his language in other words. As
perennial chieftain of Alabama and thwarted candidate for president,
Wallace abetted a changing political mood, wielding a coded language of backlash against "liberal" federal judges, coddled criminals, affirmative action initiatives, government safety nets, anti-nuclear protesters, women's-libbers, gays, and foreigners. Nixon, Reagan, Gingrich, Perot, Helms, Bush, Lott, and Delay are among the most well-known names that owe a debt to our downhome tactician of divisive swill. In retreat
on issues ranging from welfare reform to national health care, Clinton Democrats have also voiced phrases from the Wallace lexicon. Among national politicos, only Pat Buchanan ("I don't think the Governor owes anyone an apology") publicly and proudly acknowledges the legacy.
          Had not a would-be assassin's attack in 1972 left
paralysis and painkillers as constant companions, thickening his tongue and slowing his wit, George Wallace might have become the presidential spoiler he intended. Kingmaker for an election thrown into the House. Or perhaps an extended, rancid career in public bullying and logjamming such as that fashioned by Jesse Helms. Or, chief viper in the talk radio nest. His poisonous, slashing style anticipated this, too.
          On Easter Sunday and Monday nights this April,
PBS's The American Experience featured a television
rendering of the life and meaning of George Wallace. In Part One, the
miter-producer team of Steve Fayer, Daniel McCabe, and Paul Stekler
were rewarded when they stack close to the painstaking research and
main themes of Dan T. Carter's 1995 book The Politics of Rage:
George Wallace, the Origins of the New Conservatism, and the
Transformation of American Politics (now in a revised edition from Louisiana State University Press). With the second episode, however, as filmmakers and historian seemed to part company. "George Wallace: Settin' the Woods on Fire" turned toward the simplifications of an evangelical conversion narrative.
          In slighting our need for a realistic social memory of Alabama and
America's violent experience with
Wallace, "George Wallace" opts for a limiting biographical form that
comes to center too exclusively upon the tale of an individual's
ruthless rise, prideful fall, and redemptive suffering. As the
filmmakers lose their sense of historical proportion and perspective,
we lose sight (or never see) many who should be key witnesses
throughout--the persons most directly and lastingly affected by
Wallace's reign of white terror. After three hours, the film arrives
at its violin-stained ending, having squandered too much time tracing
the daily movements of batty gunman Arthur Bremer, having shown the
Maryland shooting over and over and over and over, and having milked for emotional effect the pathetic figure of a badly aging, addled, and
tormented Wallace.
          Also lost in "George Wallace,"
to the point of withholding evidence, is the important work
of Professor Carter's follow-up book From George Wallace
to Newt Gingrich: Race in the Conservative Counterrevolution, 1963-1994 (Louisiana State University Press, 1996)
which traces Wallace's legacy upon political strategy and
rhetoric in our supposed post-civil rights era Video clips of
present-day officeholders and popular pundits
echoing Wallace-style phrases would reveal that his nasty ghost
remains with us. Not making these connections is a critical omission
consistent with the filmmakers' naive political balancing act: is The
Governor to be reviled as a racial opportunist or admired for
sticking-up for states' rights against an overweening big government?
No wonder a huge majority of PBS viewers (see http://www.pbs.org wgbh/amex/wallace/sfeature/poll_results.html apparently came away believing that George Wallace's lasting impact on American politics was "positive."
          The television documentary gets off on a fine
footing, establishing the situation of sustained agricultural collapse in Wallace's hometown of tiny Clio
(namesake of the muse of history), Alabama, during the time of his childhood. Born in 1919 to a
"poor, but not desperately poor" family, George
Wallace was the son of a father with a reputation as a quick-tempered, alcoholic failure and a mother who sought for her family the civilizing influences of small town life. Young George, as Professor Carter points out in a key insight, forged an early
identity upon the "twin anvils of resentment and an almost pathetic
search for affection and respect." At age fourteen, standing where
Jeff Davis had once taken his presidential oath, Wallace vowed one day
to become governor. Already, he had spent years soaking up political lessons from Barbour County, a practice-ground that had produced five governors.
          Technically well-edited from material that took years to acquire,
"George Wallace" moves quickly with the commentary of family members,
long-time journalists who covered the campaigns and confrontations,
aging former cronies, a precious few past opponents from the streets
and courtrooms, and historian Carter. Congressman John Lewis and Selma
civil rights attorney J. L Chestnut offer keen firsthand
perspectives. The stars of both of these men continued to rise after
Wallace's flared and crashed. In compelling style, Chestnut recalls
Wallace's early career under the influence of the racially moderate
Governor Big Jim Folsom. The young circuit judge proved surprisingly
sympathetic to underdog blacks and whites, especially in cases pitting
them against Big Mule attorneys from Birmingham. Despite Wallace's
formal courtesy of insisting that Chestnut and his clients be
addressed as "Mr." by anyone practicing in his courtroom, the film
leaves unnoted and unanswered the deeper issue of whether Wallace ever
overcame his core belief--widely shared by his generation of white
Southerners--that African Americans were a separate, inferior race.
           Using archival photographs and broadcast footage to
striking effect, "George Wallace" has to labor against a miasma of vapid narration read by the apparently sleep-deprived actor Randy Quaid. Non-judgmental matter-of-factness, if this is the intended effect, conveys a lack of urgency, as if nothing much was, or remains, at stake. All along, the images are telling another story.
          The film does outstanding work revisiting 1958, that watershed year in
George Wallace's political life, the time of his first defeat and of
his "faustian bargain." It came in the Democratic race for Alabama's
governorship, when, badly misjudging the climate since the Brown decision and the Montgomery bus boycott, the "lightin' little judge" ran as a "responsible segregationist." Wallace's opponent, attorney general John Patterson, was a vicious racist who had the backing of the Ku Klux Klan. Wallace had spoken out against the KKK and refused its support, receiving instead the NAACP's endorsement. Wallace lost heavily and felt the sting deeply. He infamously vowed never to be "out-niggered" again.
          Soon Wallace turned to the demonizing of former friend, federal judge
Frank Johnson, and the cocky posturings of chip-on-the-shoulder
resistance that would win the votes of white Alabamians and stir a
climate of violence. In 1963, his theatrical stand in the schoolhouse
door, temporarily denying the admission of two black students under
the guise of resistance to the tyranny of the "Central Government,"
brought him national notice. Not mentioned is that the day following
Wallace's "stand," Medgar Evers was murdered outside his home in
Mississippi.
          
          Through speaking trips and media appearances--
and we are made to feel the high drama and intense feelings of these rallies--as Wallace explored presidential politics, he tapped into and aggravated anti-black resentment as well as the generalized anger of blue collar voters in and outside the South who felt alienated from both political parties and thwarted in their efforts to realize American Dream mobility. Bushel baskets of small contributions rolled in. From Florida to Michigan, California to Maryland, George Wallace hauled the invective.
          For those who don't remember or who are too young to know, major money
for Wallace's forays came through graft and kickback schemes that were
run out of the Alabama governor's office by brother Gerald and
henchman Seymore Trammell ("I was George Wallace's hatchet man and son of a bitch"). This is an extraordinary moment in the film, worthy of the best of "Sixty Minutes."
          With the no-doubt unintended effect of suggesting
that Wallace's menace and ensuing mayhem might, in
hindsight, be laughed-off like a good-ol'-boy joke, "George Wallace: Settin' the Woods on Fire" takes part of its title, and its misguided musical leitmotif from a wacky, Hank Williams party-hearty song. When played as background to the all-too-serious events of the freedom struggle years, the result is trivializing. The song proves inspired only once, when the surreal truly breaks through--as General Curtis ("Bombs Away") LeMay, Wallace's choice for vice-president in the 1968 campaign, is pressing his pro-nuclear, Dr. Strangelove option. As for the film's persistent, grating, original score, imagine soured Creedence with an occasional shuffle into the spasms of a distracted fiddle band. And, of course, violins near the end of the trail leading to forgiveness. Hank's "Lost Highway" would have more tragically evoked George and most of the white South in the twentieth century.
          "George Wallace," the film, begins to lose its overall
direction about halfway through. Part One ends with nothing like Birmingham's Fred Shuttlesworth saying: "Governor Wallace caused a lot of suffering, and a lot of misery, and I believe a lot of deaths." No, Reverend Shuttlesworth is made to say that early and speedily and then step aside. Instead, as the backlash politics of rage rolls across the United States in the late 1960s, and as Wallace trots to get in front of it, we get the monotonal Quaid gathering himself to read the script: "In the growing chaos of violence, protest, and rising crime, millions of Americans would come to believe that one man stood against the forces tearing the country apart." This may work as a teasing, tune-in-next-time call for a hero, but it dismisses the purposes of millions of other Americans' protests on campuses and in the streets.
          Part Two of "George Wallace" moves more toward what we expect from
A&E's Biography than what we need from PBS's
American Experience. The further into the film we go,
an as-told-to story of pain, personal scandal, and purgatory takes
over. Selective forgetfulness and the entropy of the forgiveness
narrative give the slip to more troubling social memory. The
conclusion is a missed opportunity for assessing--and mourning--the lengthy damage of the Wallace phenomenon, for examining the shifting tides of current racism, and for weighing the implications of Wallacism for our present moment. According to a Southern Poverty Law Center survey, Wallace's Alabama, mired for decades in racial obsession, now counts more hate groups than any other state. Is this coincidence or an instance of fruit falling near the tree? The film might have inquired.
          In "George Wallace: Settin' the Woods on Fire" the filmmakers end up letting the subject call the parting shots. But when measured by Clio's broader arc, how much does it matter that George Wallace ultimately found, or returned to, his mythical "true self'?
          
            Allen Tullos is editor of Southern Changes
          
        
        
          Peace and Power: Earl Theodore Shinhoster (1950-2000)
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 p. 23
          
          Life-long activist Earl Shinhoster was "one of the brightest stars
in the human rights galaxy," said SCLC President Emeritus Reverend
Joseph Lowery at the June 16 memorial service commemorating his life
and work. Mr. Shinhoster died June 11 in a single-vehicle crash near
Milstead, Alabama, about twenty-five miles east of Montgomery, while
accompanying visitors from Liberia, West Africa to Tuskegee
Institute. He will be revered for many contributions: a deep
commitment to family, an intense dedication to the struggle for
justice, and tireless work to enhance democracy and empowerment both in the U.S.
South and on the African continent.
          A life-long leader in the NAACP, Mr. Shinhoster also directed SRC's Voting Rights Programs during 1997. On June 16, family, friends, and colleagues joined his wife, Ruby Dallas Shinhoster and son, Michael Omar, in a moving celebration of his life at New Birth Missionary Baptist Church in Decatur, Georgia.
          Civil rights veteran W.W. Law, Mr. Shinhoster's mentor since his
childhood in Savannah, Georgia, recalled a story from Earl's teen
years. One day, Earl came to school with no socks, an early act of
resistance for which he was sent home from school. The next day, all the boys came to school with no socks. Said W.W. Law, "Earl led the 'no socks boys' right into the youth council of the NAACP, where he has been ever since--on the battlefront of the fight for full equality for black people."
          After years of service as the NAACP's southeast regional director, Mr. Shinhoster became acting executive director and chief executive officer of the NAACP from 1995 to 1996. He was recognized by
NAACP President Kweisi Mfume for erasing more than $1 million of a $4.8 million debt and promoting membership growth from 600,000 to nearly 1 million.
          Mr. Shinhoster led voter registration and turnout efforts that are credited with electing three Southern governors, including Governor Roy Barnes of Georgia, Governor Ronald Musgrove of Mississippi, and Governor Don Siegelman of Alabama, who attended the service. At the time of his death, Mr. Shinhoster was the director of the NAACP's National Voter Empowerment Programs. He organized and spoke out against persistent injustices in voting, including criminal disfranchisement laws (Southern Changes Fall 1998).
          He led gently, firmly, angrily--as necessary. A sensitive poet, as well as committed activist, his approach was "universal and ecumenical." said Reverend Lowery. His international work took him to several countries in Africa, including Ghana, Nigeria. and South Africa, where he assisted with voter education and mobilization for the African National Congress in recent elections.
          His African dress was an expression of his identity, a challenge to be authentic, said his sister. Yvonne Shinhoster Lamb. "His death is a call to action," said Ms. Lamb, a challenge to "take up a portion of the work he was doing." Action for peace and power-as Mr. Shinhoster closed his notes and letters.
          The Earl T. Shinhoster Memorial Fund has been established for the
higher education of his son. Michael Omar Shinhoster, who is
thirteen. Contributions to the fund may be made to Citizens Trust
Bank, West Side Branch, 965 Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive,
S.W. Atlanta,Georgia 30314.
        
        
          Rebel with a Cause: Albert Turner, Sr. (1936-2000)
          
            
              Tullos, AllenAllen Tullos
            
          
          Vol. 22, No. 2, 2000 pp. 24-26
          
          Albert Turner, Sr., a lifelong Alabama activist who led voting rights
campaigns, sit-ins, and marches for freedom and equal rights, who served
under Martin Luther King, Jr. in SCLC, who was elected to the Perry
County Commission, and who advised Presidents Johnson and Carter,
passed away on April 14 at the age of sixty-four. For many years, he
hosted the Perry County Civic League program on the local station WAJO
in Marion, Alabama, which combined political, spiritual, and community
activism. In 1990, Southern Changes editor Allen Tullos interviewed
Turner about his life, his experiences, and his activism. Following is an excerpt from that interview.
          I've never thought about leaving the Black Belt. I've always liked it here and I always wanted to live here. At the time I went to school, there were very few things that a black person could aspire to be. One was to be a school teacher and I didn't want to be that. The white community and the white superintendents treated them like they were children. They were respected highly in the black community because that was the only professional group we had, but the way they were treated by the white boards was just outrageous.
          I guess I have to admit--after I sat down and started back to thinking about my whole life--I've always been kind of a rebel. All the way through elementary school and high school. I didn't know this when I was doing it. I was president of my class in high school, for instance, and I was in the student council and led insurrections in school. In college, at Alabama A & M, lied a couple of cafeteria boycotts and I was in leadership roles. I was president of my fraternity and active in the student council and student government. It was just natural for me.
           I wanted to go to college and be educated, but I didn't want to be a school teacher. So I had to think about something that I could do that I could make a decent dollar and not be bothered by the society. I resented the structure. I didn't want to come in contact with the white folks' system.
          I chose being a bricklayer and nobody could understand why I would
want to go into bricklaying. It was not me at all. I've always been
kind of a studious person. I finished third in my class and always was
trying to be the best so it just threw everybody for a loop for me to
go into bricklaying. That was a cop-out. I just didn't want to face
the system and I thought that I could avoid it by being a
bricklayer. Not knowing that I was going to run into all of those
prejudices because the white man was the contractor and I still was
going to have to work for him. I thought I could go out there 
and lay some bricks and come home and go to bed at night and not be bothered. I really was that naive and silly.
          So I got fired a lot of times. I resented the boss-man thing and
sometimes the other blacks out there were not what I expected; they
would rat on you and they were cutthroats. I went into contracting. I
started taking my own little jobs, building churches for black folks
and stuff like this. I was a small contractor for about seven years
but I never was satisfied. There was always that inward urge for this
stuff that I am in and it was just covered for a little while.
          Before King came to town in 1965, we were well organized in this county in '62 and '63. As the Perry County Civic League, we had already been to court and gotten federal registrars. We had had some serious protests, and written letters to the federal government, and gotten the Justice Department working in here trying to get the right to vote. King came to bolster what we'd already done; it was a platform from which to work. Eventually I became the state director for King and I got on his paid staff but at the beginning I was not.
          People thought I was crazy at the time because I was really way out. I didn't expect to be living today. That was one of the things that my father was fearful about. I was so rebellious. I really didn't care. It didn't bother me at all. If I had got killed, it didn't matter. It really didn't matter. That never phased me. I was just that determined to make a change in society. That drove me day in and day out Whatever it took. I had a family but I completely stopped working. I just did this twenty-four hours a day. Some people are cut out for certain things.
          The problem of resources in the Black Belt is a big one. The resources are not in the hands of the black community and the white community is not in a frame of mind to share. So when they don't want to share, you have only one choice; that's take. And if you don't want to take, you have to do without.
          At this point in time, the black community has not brought itself around to a point of taking control. As a result, we are in a serious situation economically. Many black politicians who were elected were not prepared to go seriously at economic reform. The white community was able to influence enough of the black officials to basically keep things in status quo.
          In Perry County, for instance, if we have three out of five people on an elected board who are black, you may have one or two people like myself who work hard to see some things happen. But then there's the third black
person who will join with the two whites and you never really get things changed. The white community is able to find some black person who's only interest is in showcasing or grandstanding. What that means is that they still primarily keep their same programs or their same philosophy intact even though you have what the outside world sees as black control. But it's not truly black control. That's a great indictment, but it's the truth.
          Now this is hard and most people call it radical, but new life doesn't come until the old order passes.
          In the Bible they use the phrase that old wine bags could not hold new wine. The new wine was fermenting and it would burst the old bag; it wouldn't stretch. In the agricultural world, a new grain of corn is put into the earth and that grain of corn has to deteriorate and then a new stalk of corn comes up. In society our people cannot accept the fad that there is nothing new coming until the old gets out
of the way or dies. They feel that there is some miracle way that that the old and the new can coexist. It has never been that way. New life or new birth comes only through the process of removing the old. Until people recognize that, we will be in the stalemate of trying to create some situation where you and I can sit in the same chair. It's just impossible.
          I think if white children had a chance to come up from kindergarten on through high school and college with black people they would learn that black people are just other people and their prejudice wouldn't be the same. I think white folks also know that and I think that's one of the reasons why they are so staunch about school integration and just won't accept it. They will spend thousands and thousands of dollars trying to keep their children from going to school here because they feel that's one place that they will learn each other and it is. And those who do go to
school together, it's making a difference. It really is.
          White society has been able to interpret Martin King's
philosophy and use it against us better than we have been able to take it and use it for ourselves. The average black person feels that the whole goal that Martin was about was simply the association of the people--you and I sitting in the same room. The white community has been able to use that against black people by saying, "Well, Martin King's goal was to get the two races to sit down and be together." Be together. That's all they want to do is be together.
          That's not what Martin King was about by a long shot. But when you start taking about bringing on a new order or doing something different, they say you're going against what Martin was about
          Integration was a tool to bring us into the mainstream, not just so we could be with you. There was knowledge we could not get in the traditional black schools, for instance, because it was not being taught. We could not be doctors at Alabama A&M; they didn't teach it. There were many other subjects or professions that were not offered in the black schoolhouses. So we integrated schools for the purpose of learning how to be doctors, scientists, lawyers, etc., and people misinterpreted what we were integrating schools for.
          When this country realized that Martin King was not about integration for the sake of integration, that's when he was murdered.
          Martin's real goal was to bring black folks into the
mainstream of American society so that they could survive and have the economic situation and political situation and all situations. He wanted us to just be full citizens; do whatever we wanted to do. To not be limited because you were a black person. In order to do that, we had to first be able to get into these places so that we could learn how to do things.
           Most black people who had been cut off from white society or had worked as white servants feared white people and saw them as superior. The first stage of the Civil Rights Movement--the awareness or integrational stage--was to dispel that fear and have people understand that they had good minds and dignity and that they were the same as whites. But a lot of our people saw overcoming the humiliation of having to go to a separate bathroom as being the end. And in white society that's the only thing they preach about the Civil Rights Movement--that phase of integration.
          A lot of black folks let that hinder them from making real progress
because they are concerned about whether or not I'm going to mistreat
whites with it. Now that's an absolute fact That's a hard indictment,
but it's the truth. They cannot make these changes that's got to be
made in society because they are so concerned about whether I'm going to do wrong or mistreat this white man. But my thing is, as long as the society is messed up, then we cannot improve our economic plight under the same system that we had all along. We got to change that system. The system is where the problem is and we have not found enough black elected officials who are about changing that system. They want to sit in the same seat that Mr. Charlie sat in. That's all they want to do-take that seat that he had, but nothing about changing the whole structure so that the poor or oppressed people will be able to be more a part of this society.
          I see the new generation of blacks getting caught up
into that syndrome. I'm a part of the '60s and I understand
it, but here my sons and daughters transcended that period and we did not teach it to them. They don't realize what we came through. They got a chance to sit in the room with people at the University of Alabama and they really think they have arrived when there is almost as much prejudice today as it was then. We are still the last person hired and the first one fired. We still have to be able to do twice as much as a white person to be able to get the position. There are some laws or some court cases that demand that you have a few black people and that has created a worse situation for us because they always point and say all you got to do is work hard and you can have a good job because look where Charlie is. And we do have some percent of the black community now who is doing better but too often they seem to feel that all that the rest of the black people got to do now is do like I did-not realizing that they were put there through court cases. You have to have a certain number of black people everywhere now. So the rest of the blacks look down and say hey, you can get up here if you want to like I did. All you got to do is go to school and get a good education. That's not really the case.
          If there were masses of blacks trying to move, you'd have a problem. As long as you just got a few blacks in positions to satisfy a quota, nobody's worried about it But you just let the whole black community start trying to become a part of this thing. That's what Martin King's goal was. Martin King was not somebody preaching a social gospel or some good little old pious preacher. He was serious about trying to improve the plight of black people and get them into the mainstream. Education, jobs, everything. I think the greatest thing he did was change the thinking of people. And that what's wrong today. Our mentality again is not in the right way. Once people start thinking different, then they start acting different.
          
            If I had to choose from the many activities that I'm involved in trying to make a change in society and I was left with just one, it would be the radio program. I'm still pretty well thought about. I still have a right smart influence and effectiveness that comes from the radio program every Sunday morning.
            Now my radio program is a program in the traditional black way. It's
not billed as political. It's supposed to be a spiritual program, a
church program, a community announcement type thing. But because it is
paid for by the Civic League, it lends itself to community politics. I
think if it was strictly billed as political, there would be much
resistance. But a lot of people--including white people--listen not
necessarily because they like it, but they want to be informed.So I
tell them about what's going on in the government. State Senator Hank
Sander comes on ever Sunday morning with me and talks about politics
and Montgomery. We sit there and kind of chat and discuss things in a
funny, kind of jokefied way. But the effect that program has is
untold. Very few people ever mention it, but I know it's my hidden welcome.
            --Albert Turner Sr.
          
        
      
    
  