
    
      
        
         Southern Changes.  Volume 22, Number 1, Spring
	       2000
        
          Using our Past to Build the Future
          By Johnson, Wendy S.Wendy S. Johnson
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  pp. 3-4
          
          The struggle for racial equity in the South has no timetable.  As we advance the eighty-year mission of the Southern Regional Council-to promote racial justice, protect democratic rights, and broaden civic participation in the Southeastern United States-we must heed the lessons of decades past.
           Marion A. Wright, Council president in 1952 wrote "SRC is the lengthened shadow of many men and women." Since the beginning of our predecessor organization in 1919, the Commission on Interracial Cooperation, Southerners and our nation have been radically transformed.  In the midst of this movement for change has been the Southern Regional Council, driven by the single-minded purpose of conquering  racism and inequality, through  research, education and action strategies.
          Our history demands that we look back and borrow, as often as we need it, the wisdom, courage and lessons of our past.
          Those who came together in the first twenty-five years of SRC's existence, as the (CIC), had a strong dose of moral courage and purpose.  They were black and white ministers, teachers, sociologists and presidents from leading black academic institutions and white Southern colleges and universities. The leadership of women in the CIC began to rise, with Jessie Daniel Ames and others as they organized an anti-lynching education campaign.  The CIC believed that constructive ideas and sound information were important requirements to promoting racial change in the South.
          Significant inroads against the longstanding injustices of Jim Crow were made over the last half century. The period of the 40's, 50's and 60's gave us some of the most powerful legislation of the last century-legislation that embraced themes of inclusion, freedom, justice and democracy and was fueled and forged by the civil rights movement.
          For the next three decades, political transformation continued with the policies of Harry Truman, including the desegregation of the armed forces. Staff provided assistance to President Truman's Committee on Civil Rights, regularly briefing the Committee on the main concerns of the South.  This activity marked the beginning of SRC's commitment to federal intervention in civil rights, a position that set the organization well outside the white mainstream in the region.
          True dismantling of segregation, albeit slow, began with the 1954 Brown vs Board of Education decision knocking down the pillars of Jim Crow segregation.  The Civil Rights Act of 1964 ( introducing the concept and practice of  affirmative action) and the Voting Rights Act 1965 were the final blows to de jure segregation.
          Black voting rights emerged as a the main postwar issue for the Southern Regional Council. The 1944 Texas case Smith vs Allwright, a landmark Supreme Court decision banning the all-white primary-opened the door for black political participation throughout the South.
          The Voter Education Project established a precedent for institutional cooperation. The VEP used the organizing efforts of five civil rights organizations-Urban League, CORE, NAACP, SCLC, and SNCC- to do registration projects in communities. SRC served as the conduit for foundation money and the coordinating body to field staff.
          SRC adopted a policy to service the national press on its coverage of race in the South as a strategy to influence public opinion.  A reasoned and liberal view on desegregating the South was given voice by northern newspapers, especially the New York Times, since liberal Southern newspapers were nonexistent.
          Today, inequalities still persist and our challenges are much more complex. Employment discrimination continues to be a fact of life, even for highly educated minorities. Just witness over the last decade the range of lawsuits alleging racial discrimination in some of America's largest companies.
          Even though we have removed poll taxes, literacy tests, and other barriers to the political process, we are confronted today with new complex influences in voting. Majority Black and Latino  districts have been overturned by federal courts or legislative action--racial bloc voting and the growing influence of money in politics have all combined to disfranchise hundreds of thousands of voters.
          SRC is concentrating on specific action strategies for the 21st century. We believe that young voters are important to the electoral process and the advancement of progressive policies. Our new Youth Empowerment Project seeks to increase the number of voters ages 18-24 using research and intervention strategies. Our award winning audio documentary, Will the Circle be Unbroken? highlighting the civil rights movement in five southern cities, will serve as important curriculum in the middle grades and high schools.
          Over the last decade our education programs have focused on helping middle school principals, teachers, administrators, and parents affect the key elements that create a school culture that nurtures learning for all children. We now face a new landscape in public education and must rethink our role in the education reform conversation.
          Our work over the last eight decades has prepared us well for our newest initiative, Partnerships for Racial Unity. The historical signature of race relations has been the Black and white divide. While that struggle persists, the recent influx of immigrants into the region demands that we must implement programs acknowledging the changing racial and ethnic demographics. SRC will serve as a catalyst for strong alliance-building between Blacks, whites, Latinos, and Asians. Multi-racial and multi-ethnic coalition building will allow us to amass our strength to achieve the goals of fairness.
          The South of the future is in the hands of people like you and me--representatives of new and mature communities. We must lead the way and shape the new order of fairness and justice. We must hold up the mirror of history and meet the challenges of building an America as good as its promise.
          
            Wendy S. Johnson is executive director of the
Southern Regional Council
          
        
        
          An Adventure in Faith: A Brief Story of the Interracial Movement
in the South
          By Eleazer, Robert B.Robert B. Eleazer
          Vol.22, No. 1, Spring 2000 p. 5
          
          A booklet published by the Commission on Interracial Cooperation in 1930 reflected the CIC's concerns and goals from the 1920s. Robert Eleazer was education director at the time.
           The work of the CIC has been widely advertised as an "adventure in good will." It is that, undoubtedly, but it is something more. It is also an adventure in faith-a gamble on the essential soundness of human nature.
          At the close of the World War, when the country was seething with interracial suspicion, distrust, and hostility, when race riots were flaming in widely separated communities, and threatening to merge into a general conflagration, the Commission's mediatory work was inaugurated in the hope of tiding over the crisis. Its promoters believed that if white and Negro people understood each other they would not fight, and that if given the facts about any particular situation, the best of each group might safely be trusted to try to do right about it. They believed that Negroes were both capable and worthy of having a say-so in dealing with the problems affecting them. They believed that white people in turn could be appealed to successfully on the basis of good will, justice, and fair dealing. The Commission undertook, therefore, the stupendous task of establishing across the South, thousands of points of light of interracial contact through which mutual understanding might be created and the facts discovered and acted upon.
          The plan worked. Brought together for frank conference, the leaders of the two groups promptly came to terms, cast off their mutual distrust, and began to reestablish the relations of the races on the basis of friendly helpfulness.
          
            Notable Results
          
          The results have been notable. Assistance has been rendered in hundreds of educational enterprises for Negroes, involving millions of dollars; health campaigns have been promoted in every state, hospitals established, clinics conducted, public nurses employed; lynchings have been prevented and in a few cases, members of lynching mobs have been prosecuted and sent to penitentiary; legal aid had been extended to scores of helpless Negroes who were being intimidated, persecuted, or exploited; sewers, street pavings, water, lights, library facilities, restrooms, and other civic advantages have been secured for Negro communities; parks, playgrounds, and pools have been provided; Negro welfare agencies have been included in community chests; day nursuries and social centers conducted; colored probation officers secured-these are among a multitude of actual results achieved.
        
        
          The Mob Still Rides
          By Dr. Raper, Arthur F.Arthur F. Raper
          Vol.22, No.1, Spring 2000 p. 6
          
          During  the 1930s, the Commission on Interracial
Cooperation worked closely with the Association of Southern Women for
the Prevention of Lynching to end the brutal practice. Following an
increase in lynchings during the early 1930s, the Commission conducted
several studies on them. Below is an excerpt from a 1935 study,
The Mob Still Rides, written by Dr. Arthur Raper, research secretary at the Commission.
          The twenty-one lynchings of 1930--as many as took place in the two previous years combined--gave rise to an exhaustive case study of that year's lynchings by the Southern Commission on the Study of Lynching, an association of well-known citizens of the South who undertook the task at the request of the Commission of Interracial Cooperation. The results of that study were summarized in an 80-page pamphlet, "Lynchings and What They Mean" and later in a 500-page volume entitled, "The Tragedy of Lynching." These were written and compiled by Dr. Arthur F. Raper, Research Secretary of the Commission who directed and in large part conducted the studies.
          Five years have passed and the lynching habit seems as strongly entrenched as it was in 1930. The record, which meantime showed a most encouraging decrease to the "low" of eight in 1932, went up to twenty-eight the next year, and to twenty in 1935. Whatever the cause of this trend, it is most disquieting and indicates that the mob is still potentially and often actually in the saddle in large areas of the country.
          Confident that society continues to endure these barbarities chiefly because of misapprehension as to their nature and results, we are convinced that the fundamental remedy is to bring the facts into the limelight and keep them there. That, in brief, is the purpose of this little volume, in which Dr. Raper summarizes the results of careful studies, made by himself and Professor Walter Chivers, of the eight-four lynchings of the past five years.
          Summary of Findings
          A study of the eighty-four lynchings of the past five years reveals the following facts:
          1. A larger proportion of the lynchings of this period occurred in the South than ever before, and a larger proportion of the victims were Negroes.
          2. Eleven percent of the mob victims were not accused of any crime; an additional 30 percent were accused only of minor offenses. Of the other 59 percent, many were not guilty of the crimes with which they were charged.
          3. Contrary to the general impression that rape is the chief cause of lynching, only 11 percent of the victims were even accused of this crime. Scarcely one-fourth were accused of rape and attempted rape combined.
          4. Courts rarely indict lynchers, more rarely convict, and almost never impose sentences commensurate with the crime. Indictments have been returned in but one lynching in twelve, and convictions in scarcely one in thirty.
          5. There is evidence that the peace officers participated in several lynchings and connived in many more.
          6. Over nine-tenths of the lynchings occurred in the open country and a little over four-fifths in counties where the per capita income and taxable wealth were below those of their respective states. Over three-fourths of the threatened lynchings prevented were also in poorer counties.
          7. When a mob does not lynch it sometimes dominates the court, and so brings a "legal lynching."
          8. Nearly 20 percent of the persons lynched and threatened by mobs were mental defectives.
          9. The number of lynchings declines from a yearly average of 124 between 1895 and 1905, to seventy between 1905 and 1915, to fifty-three between 1915 and 1925, and to seventeen between 1925 and 1935. The past decade, however, shows more lynchings in the latter half than in the first half-the only decade in which this was true. The number of attempted lynchings also rose during the latter half of the decade.
          The optimism of ten years ago is waning; lynchings are not fading
naturally from the American scene; the mob still rides.
        
        
          Race and Suffrage in the South Since 1940
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol.22, No.1, Spring 2000 pp. 8-9
          
          In the June-July 1948 issue of New
South, the Southern Regional Council published an assessment of the progress made toward unencumbered access to the ballot for Black Americans in the 1940s. Below is an edited version of the Council's perspective.
          In any future history of suffrage in the South, the decade of the 1940s will probably be known as the time of an awakening among Negroes and of a change of attitude by many whites toward Negro participation in this phase of government. Certainly during the last eight years the Negro has advanced in the exercise of the right of franchise at a much faster rate than at any other time in the past half century.
          The new trend is noticeable to any investigator who makes a tour of the South. He finds considerable change in about seven of these states and a lesser change in the remaining ones. He feels highly encouraged as he passes southward through Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida; but his enthusiasm wanes when he strikes Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. Continuing the tour, his spirit revives as he proceeds through Texas, Arkansas, Tennessee, and Oklahoma. Throughout the section,  the investigator notes a decline in the barriers to voting in the urban industrial areas, while he observes but little change in the rural farm areas.
          Preceding the publication of this pamphlet is a report of
investigations made by Ralph Bunche and Gunnar Myrdal in 1940. The
gradual weakening of the poll tax and the abolition of the white
primary, which Myrdal forecast, have now been wholly or partly
realized. It is the purpose of the present writer, therefore, to reveal the lines and extent of progress since Bunche and Myrdal made their studies.
          One method of showing the causes for the unprecedented gains of Negroes in the Southern United States is to analyze the status of the poll tax, the system of registration, and the white primary as each has operated since 1940.
          The use of the poll tax has dwindled, though its severity varies considerably from state to state. Of the eleven Southern states which once required the fee, four have abolished it. These are North Carolina, Georgia, Florida, and Louisiana. South Carolina and Arkansas retain the levy, but in each instance the amount is only one dollar, it is noncumulative, and it is payable only one or two months before the election. Texas and Tennessee exact a larger sum of money than South Carolina and Arkansas, but the tax here is likewise non-cumulative. Oklahoma has never required a poll tax. Only Mississippi, Virginia, and Alabama remain, then, where this celebrated instrument constitutes a significant barrier either by the amount of money to be paid, by the time and method of payment, or by its cumulative features.
          The poll tax is merely one of the series of schemes which were contrived a half century ago to reduce the size of the electorate and to keep it under machine control. Greater than the poll tax as a barrier to voting, and far greater as an instrument for race distinction, is the registration requirement. This requirement entails hardships for many Negroes for the reason that every single registrar is a law unto himself. With very little centralized state control of registrations and elections, these officials are left to do as they please.
          Among the states of the Solid south, a change toward greater equality in most phases of the electoral process has come first in the states of Virginia and North Carolina. The reins are tightened on Negro registration in South Carolina, but here again not so tight as a decade ago. In Florida, likewise, there is a letting down of the bars except in most of the counties in the northern part of the State. In Georgia, a similar change has come, particularly in the cities.
          The old time devices hang on most tenaciously in Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana. The state of Texas is one of the most advanced in the entire South in the attitude of officials toward registration of Negroes. And a similar condition is developing in Arkansas. In Oklahoma race distinction in registration disappeared some time ago, while a similar condition exists for Tennessee, except for two or three river bottom counties.
          To generalize for the whole region, it would be difficult to point to more than a handful of Southern cities with a population of 25,000 or more in which there is vigorous opposition to Negroes becoming registered voters. It is in the rural south where 65 percent of the Negroes reside, that the greatest difficulty in meeting voting requirements is encountered.
          To make certain of the disfranchisement of the Negroes, the state Democratic organizations of the South forty years ago adopted the "white primary," whereby only white Democrats could vote in this, the only meaningful election of the region. In view of the fact that there were only a handful of Black Republicans left following the disfranchisement of around 1900, this racial requirement of the Democrats inflicted the most fatal blow which the Negro had yet received.
          The abolition of this electoral device [in 1944] struck at the root of most of the former difficulties of Negroes in their efforts to attain citizenship status. Among the factors which led to a 26 percent increase in the number of qualified Negro voters, none exerted a more powerful influence than the elimination of the white primary.
          It is in order at this point to evaluate this new development and suggest procedures for the future. Because of the poverty and limited education of hundreds of thousands of white Southerners, the forces of reaction in the South have always been powerful. This group stands ready to fight any movement which seems directed to the advancement of the Negro. Regardless of the reaction and demagoguery, it seems highly improbable that the progress made by the Negroes as voters during the 1940 decade will wane.
          For some time now electoral reform organizations and advocates of a
free ballot generally have attempted to abolish the poll tax. In this
effort they have enjoyed considerable success. But now it would be
well for them to consider leveling their guns at the discriminatory
registration practices in a half dozen Southern states. Since it is
registration which is now the greatest deterrent to voting by Negroes,
and since the law of all the Southern states, as well as that of the
Federal Government, provides for remedies for the numerous instances
in which these officials willfully debar many potential voters, the
parties aggrieved should make a much wider use of the courts than they
have in the past. These agencies wiped out the white primary; they
have diminished the rigours of registration in some places; and above
all else, they have been largely responsible for creating the
favorable public opinion noted throughout this pamphlet.
        
        
          Reflections on Redistricting in 2001
          By 
            McDonald, LaughlinLaughlin McDonald
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  pp. 9-10
          
          Despite the confusion created by the Supreme Court's recent decisions striking down majority black congressional districts, legislators would be advised to keep several things in mind as they approach the 2000 redistricting.
          The Court did not rule that majority-minority districts are unconstitutional. To the contrary, the Court held that a state may conduct redistricting "with consciousness of race" and that it may put minority communities in a district where they have "some common thread of relevant interest." What a state may not do, according to the Court, is subordinate all of its traditional redistricting principles to race or redistrict solely on the basis of race.
          The Court also affirmed the constitutionality of the Voting Rights
Act. That means that states covered by Section 5 of the Act, which
includes most jurisdictions in the South,must take race into account in redistricting to make sure that they do not enact plans that cause a "retrogression" in minority voting rights. For example, if a covered state with twenty majority black house districts were to enact a plan following the 2000 Census that contained only fifteen majority black districts, the plan would be retrogressive on its face, i.e., it would make minority voters worse off than they were under the previous plan, and would almost certainly violate Section 5.
          States, whether covered by Section 5 or not, must also comply with Section 2 of the Act. Section 2 prohibits the use of any voting practice that "results" in discrimination, or causes minority voters to have less opportunity than other voters to elect candidates of their choice. Thus, where reasonably compact majority-minority districts can be drawn, and where candidates favored by minority voters are usually defeated by whites voting as a bloc, the failure to create majority-minority districts could be vulnerable to challenge in court under Section 2. As Justice O'Connor has written, it would be "irresponsible" for a state to disregard Section 2.
          It would also be prudent in light of the Court's recent decisions for proponents of majority-minority districts to make a contemporaneous record showing that in instances where such districts were drawn, the legislature also took into account non-racial factors, such as complying with one person-one vote, maintaining the configuration of existing districts, maintaining an existing partisan balance, keeping together communities with similar interests or socio-economic characteristics, and drawing districts that were contiguous and reasonably compact. This list is not exhaustive, but if the legislature can show that it took these and similar factors into account it should be able to rebut any charge that someone might later bring that it drew districts solely on the basis of race.
          Another issue which is already causing controversy in some states is whether to use the actual or corrected census figures in drawing district lines. The census bureau and the National Academy of Sciences, the nation's most respected scientific organization, have concluded that the actual count, or enumeration, of residents will likely significantly undercount minorities. For that reason, the census will correct the undercount by surveys or statistical sampling conducted after the enumeration. The actual count and the corrected count will be released at the same time in 2001.
          The Supreme Court has held that the corrected count cannot be used
for purposes of apportioning, or allocating, congressional seats among
the states. But there is nothing in the decision that prohibits a
state from using the corrected count for all other purposes, including
drawing district lines. The states, for example, will no doubt insist
that the corrected count be used in allocating grants under various federal programs. Otherwise, if the enumeration were used, states could lose millions of dollars in federal money.
          There are at least three reasons for believing that legislation prohibiting use of any data in redistricting except the actual enumeration would be unlawful:
          First, it would likely violate the one person-one vote principle, which requires states to make a good faith effort to draw districts of substantially equal population. The state's are given some leeway in complying with this standard to accommodate reasonable state interests, but no state could claim that using admittedly inaccurate data, when accurate data was readily available, furthered any reasonable state interest. The use of inaccurate data would be especially suspect in the context of congressional redistricting, where the equal population standard is most strictly applied.
          Second, since the enumeration disproportionately undercounts
minorities, using it in redistricting could violate Section 2 and
Section 5. For example, it could lower the benchmark (or basis of
comparison) for determining whether a state's redistricting plan which
reduced the number of majority-minority districts was retrogressive
and/or resulted in the dilution of minority voting strength. It could also result in the "packing" of undercounted minorities in a district to limit their effectiveness in other districts.
          Third, the sponsors of legislation prohibiting the use of corrected census data have generally been Republicans who apparently believe that most of those who would be missed in the enumeration would vote Democratic. Excluding those individuals from the redistricting database could confer an advantage on Republicans by minimizing the influence of minority, i.e., Democratic voters. An effort by one party, however, that "consistently degrades" another party's influence on the political process would be an unconstitutional political gerrymander.
          Given the fact that more accurate data is available, the only conceivable purpose to be served by using the uncorrected census in redistricting would be to dilute minority voting strength or gain a systematic partisan advantage. Neither of these justifications would be constitutional.
          Redistricting is always a difficult and divisive task. It won't be any easier this time around as legislators wrangle over the meaning of the Court's new redistricting decisions and how to deal with the census undercount. Resolution of these issues is particularly critical for minorities, for it will determine whether there is further erosion of their political influence or continued fulfillment of the promises of the Voting Rights Act.
          
            Laughlin Mcdonald is director of the
Southern Regional Office of the American Civil liberties Union
          
        
        
          An Educator's View of Segregation
          By Travelstead, ChesterChester Travelstead
          Vol. 21, No. 1, Spring 2000 pp. 11-12
          
          On August 2, 1955, as Dean of the School of
Education at the University of South Carolina, Chester Travelstead
delivered a speech citing eight problems in education, an act which
led  to his dismissal. Shortly thereafter, Travelstead became dean of
the College of Education at the University of New Mexico where he
retired in 1977 as Provost Emeritus. A portion of Travelstead's speech
that addressed school segregation was published in the January 1956
issue of New South. It has been edited for inclusion below.
          The problem of integrating the races in our public schools is unprecedented.  Educators and laymen in this state [South Carolina] are faced with making important decisions related to this matter. The time has passed for us to hide our heads in the sand and ignore the existence of the problem.
          I must say in the beginning that I have been surprised and disappointed that the education profession in South Carolina has made no public statement giving its views on this matter. I have seen nothing in print, nor have I heard any official pronouncements from any of the official education organizations, including the State Board of Education, concerning their positions on this question.
          In the absence of such statements from the professional
organizations, we do not know how the members of these organizations
feel about this problem. It seems imperative to me that this or any
other issue of so great import deserves and demands public
discussion. As I examine the bases of our own government, the Bill of
Rights, and all other pronouncements of our forefathers-I find nothing
which requires, justifies, or even allows a notion of second-class
citizenship for any group. The fact that we have practiced segregation
on the assumption that it was right and just, does not make it right and just.
          Besides one's own personal beliefs in this matter, there is the legal side of the question of segregation. The highest court of our land has said that the practice of segregation in the schools is unconstitutional. Our oath of allegiance to this constitution does not allow us the luxury of upholding it if and when we think it suits our purposes and tastes. If we choose to circumvent these duly constituted agencies of law, how will we explain and justify this action to our children and [grandchildren]?  Our children will learn much by observation of our words and deeds. We certainly have an obligation to them in this respect.
          There comes to mind the question of what to do when parts of the state constitution are not in agreement with parts of the federal constitution. If one looks at this situation as a citizen of the United States, he can give only one answer. He must support the federal constitution.
          Such statements have not yet been made by state officials in South Carolina, but the fact remains that all South Carolina laws requiring segregation by race in the public schools are now null and void.
          In some sections of the South, boards of education have
gone on record as agreeing with the Supreme Court decisions and as
being willing to work toward an early implementation of these
decisions. As we boil down the various possibilities, we have left
four main alternatives:
Accept the Supreme Court decision and work sincerely toward its implementation;Reject completely the Court decision and work persistently to keep our public schools segregated by attempting to circumvent, delay, and out-maneuver the law;Submit to the appropriate court a plan of "good faith compliance" with the Supreme Court ruling;Abolish our public schools and attempt to set up private schools on a segregated basis.
          The decision to take any one of these four courses will be major. Therefore, such a decision by educators, community and state leaders should be made only after careful consideration of the possible consequences of each choice.
          The possible consequences which might follow the fourth
alternative--that of abolishing the public schools--are many. First,
we must ask ourselves if we are willing to turn back the clock on
education more than a hundred years. Most people do not want to
abandon public schools, if it can possibly be avoided. Thinking men
are not at all certain that abolishing the public schools will correct our troubles. Decisions concerning these matters must be made--and must be made soon.
          In this connection, I would like to close with [a] quotation from
John Ruskin. "Doing is the great thing. For if, resolutely, people do
what is right, in time they come to like doing it."
        
        
          When Public Means Private: School Vouchers
          By Greenlee, GaleGale Greenlee
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  pp. 12-13, 21
          
          As the presidential race 2000 heats up, Democrats and Republicans take their places at opposite ends of the political totem pole to debate issues such as campaign finance reform, the Confederate flag, and police brutality. On the education front, no issue is more controversial than school vouchers. Voucher advocates, generally conservatives, plug school vouchers-which are often promoted as "school choice" or "opportunity scholarships"--as the cure-all for a beleaguered and much maligned public educational system. Detractors, generally progressive, teacher unions, minorities and many high profile organizations (such as the ACLU, the NAACP and the National Education Association), have publicly denounced such schemes as poorly disguised attempts by the right wing to subsidize religious schools, push a conservative political agenda and, in the process, dismantle public education as we know it.
          Currently, only three programs--in Milwaukee, Cleveland and the state of Florida--use tax dollars to fund students' education at private schools. Though the voucher movement is growing, it faces many obstacles and opponents.
          On the national level, the voucher debate has gained widespread attention due to recent court battles. In 1998, Wisconsin's State Supreme Court upheld Milwaukee's voucher program. Last year, on December 13, the U.S. Supreme Court refused to hear an appeal from a Vermont case, in which parents wanted state money to subsidize their children's education at parochial schools. One week later, a federal judge in Ohio declared Cleveland's four-year-old voucher program unconstitutional, stating that it violates the separation of church and state; that case is likely to wind up before the U.S. Supreme Court. More recently, on March 14, Florida State Circuit Judge L. Ralph Smith Jr., declared Florida's school voucher program unconstitutional. The state plans to appeal that decision.
          "Voucher programs have become prevalent nationwide," says Steve Benen, spokesperson for Americans United for Separation of Church and State (www.au.org), a Washington, D.C.-based religious liberty watchdog.
          Benen notes that interest in vouchers is spreading throughout the
South, as states such as Alabama and Georgia consider programs, and
others like Virginia and Kentucky debate giving tax credits to parents
who send their kids to private schools. Additionally, Louisiana, which
has a strong pro-voucher lobby within the Catholic Church, has
repeatedly attempted to pass voucher legislation, albeit
unsuccessfully. Perhaps the most important move occurred in June 1999
when Florida Governor Jeb Bush signed into law the nation's first
statewide school voucher program. Following Judge Smith's ruling, the
program will not continue next year, but the debate certainly will.
          Under Florida's plan, all public schools would be graded "A" to "F," and students attending failing schools would be given the option of enrolling in another school, including religious schools-at the expense of tax payers. The plan faced stiff opposition, from the NAACP and the Anti-Defamation League, as well as local and statewide PTAs.
          In Escambia County, located in the panhandle approximately one hour from of Mobile, Ala., seven of the county's thirty-eight elementary schools and two of its nine middle schools were given an "F" rating for the 1998-99 school year.
          Barbara Frye, spokesperson for Florida's Escambia County Schools, says the A+ plan was based on a fallacy. "The fallacy is that the children are not 'trapped' and we will also maintain that the schools aren't failing," she says.
          She explains that schools are ranked based on the average score of fourth graders on the Florida Comprehensive Achievement Test (FCAT). She argues that using an average score, rather than measuring individual student progress, skews the results and obscures the fact that "You can have many students not learning, sitting in an 'A' school." She also criticizes the plan for not giving vouchers to low-achieving students, but rather to students who simply live in a district with a "failing" school. Furthermore, since the voucher schools are private, they are not required to adhere the same standards and regulations as public schools and therefore aren't accountable to taxpayers. "It doesn't make sense," Frye says.
          Regardless of the judicial challenges to Florida's plan, it seems
likely that Governor Jeb Bush's brother and presidential hopeful
George W., would, if elected, promote vouchers on a national level. In
fact, the February 29 edition of the New York Times quoted the Texas governor as calling "portable" federal education dollars.
          The South is also a key force in the school choice debate, not only because many conservatives live in the Bible Belt, but also because two organizations that fund private vouchers have roots in the region: Children First/CEO America Foundation and the Children's Scholarship Fund (CSF).
          CEO America, based in Bentonville, Ark. was started in 1992 and now
operates more than 70 programs across the country. Its website clearly
states its mission is "to promote parental choice in education through
private tuition grants and tax-funded options."
          "We use these programs to demonstrate how these public policies could look," says CEO America President Fritz Steiger. He says the organization proudly considers itself a "parent advocacy organization" that helps parents "understand how school choice works and how it helps them."
          Since 1992, the organization has given more than $1 million in scholarship money to students in Atlanta and Little Rock, more than $300,000 to ones in Chattanooga, almost $560,000 to ones in Mississippi and more than $8 million to programs in San Antonio, Texas.
          Targeting low-income children, CSF is a two-year-old $100 million foundation underwritten by Republican fundraiser and venture capitalist Ted Forstmann, and CEO America board member and Wal-Mart heir, John Walton. Incidentally, Walton is also founder of School Futures Research Foundation, which manages charter schools in California, and he is a director of a for-profit corporation that also manages charter and public schools. CSF, which offers opportunity scholarships to disadvantaged kids, initially identified 40 partner cities, 15 of which are in the South-including Atlanta, Birmingham, Alabama, Memphis, Tennessee, New Orleans, Louisiana, Savannah, Georgia, and Jackson, Mississippi. After its first year, CSF expanded its program nationwide to help needy low-income children.
          People for the American Way (www.pfaw.org) argues that the two organizations work hand-in-hand; while CSF strives to create a grassroots demand for vouchers, CEO America lobbies for voucher legislation, and then entrepreneurs eagerly await the opportunity to "supply the new privatized education system." Since privately funded programs don't use public money, it's difficult to criticize CSF's efforts, which are often publicized as mere philanthropy.
          If anything, the voucher movement has amassed a curious mix of conservatives and people of color advocating for better educational opportunities. In fact CSF's national board of advisors includes Dorothy I. Height, chair and president emeritus of the National Council of Negro Women, as well as Martin Luther King III and former Atlanta mayor Andrew Young.
          Still, vouchers are not without critics. Governors of some Southern states, like Mississippi and North Carolina, remain staunch voucher opponents. In February, while giving his 7th Annual State of American Education address in Durham, N.C., U.S. Secretary of Education Richard W. Riley called for a renewed fight against voucher programs, saying they "divert us from the real challenge of lifting up all of our children." Presidential hopeful Vice President Al Gore has also spoken out against vouchers, calling them a "big and historic mistake" that drains much needed funds from public schools.
          A prime example of the loss of funds is Edgewood, Texas, part of the San Antonio school district. Backed by CEO America, the Horizon voucher project diverted more than $4.5 million from public schools as roughly 800 students accepted vouchers, worth up to $4,000; the district lost $5,800 in public funds for each student who left. According to Steiger, the project is a success in that it gives public schools competition and an impetus to reform.
          As Benen notes, "Their [CEO's] program is perfectly legal because it's doesn't use government funds. Still, I find it troubling that these 'philanthropists' have enormous funds to put into education but are using it in ways that I feel are counterproductive."
          Donna Fowler, spokesperson for the American Federation of Teachers (AFT) agrees. "It's hard to be opposed to them [CEO America] because it's private money," she says. "But we have to look at what the effects are over time, and we're seeing that the effects are minimal at best, and harmful in some cases."
          The jury is still out concerning whether voucher programs can actually raise student achievement. According to AFT, an evaluation of the Milwaukee program by University of Wisconsin-Madison professor John Witte found no difference in achievement levels for voucher students versus public school students. Still, that same data was later re-analyzed by pro-voucher advocates, and not suprisingly, showed that voucher students outperformed public school students in math and reading.
          Whatever the case, voucher advocates and public school supporters continue to go toe to toe. For many Southern states with rural communities that lack private schools, public school is the only viable option. But for those with increasing numbers of charter schools, as well as private schools, publicly funded school voucher programs remain will continue fuel debate in the year 2000.
          
            Gale Greenlee is a writer and editor at the Carolina Peacemaker in Greensboro, North Carolina. She served as a training and technical assistance coordinator for the Corporation for National Service's LEARNS program at the Southern Regional Council until October 1999.
          
        
        
          The Federal Executive and Civil Rights
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  p. 15
          
          In 1961 the SRC submitted a forty-eight-page report to the Kennedy administration entitled the "Federal Executive and Civil Rights" in which it advised the implementation of eighteen steps for the administration to model in order to improve civil rights. Reproduced here is a truncated version of the report which appeared in the March 1961 issue of New South.
          The Southern Regional Council has submitted to President Kennedy and his administration a 48-page report proposing actions by the executive department to strengthen civil rights and improve race relations.
          The report, entitled "The Federal Executive and Civil Rights," states that the President holds power under the Constitution and existing statutes which, if used, "could carry the country far toward good race relations."
          It furthers declares: "Presidential action should not be so emphasized as to blunt the drive for remedial legislation. But the existing powers of the office should be used, and every governmental program administered in such ways as to move expeditiously to end discrimination and to open all careers to talent.
          "The federal government's own operations need to be a model of just race relations, or else the credentials of the government to lead others are weak."
          The eighteen proposals made by the Council are summarized as follows:
          1. Appoint a staff adviser on race relations and create a single office to review all federal programs to ensure nondiscrimination in the government's own operations.
          2. Use the influence of the executive office to broaden Southern support for civil rights.
          3. Announce as a national goal the full and free development of all our human resources, thereby setting the moral tone of America.
          4. Direct overseas information programs to interpret our racial strife and change truthfully and candidly.
          5. Continually review federal employment to insure nondiscrimination, rather than rely on the current processing of complaints.
          6. Frequently appoint qualified Negroes to high level administrative posts in government service here and abroad.
          7. Affirm support of the Supreme Court's 1954 decision and opposition to segregated schools; direct the Department of Justice to test in court its existing authority to intervene in or initiate school desegregation suits.
          8. Give special attention to racial equality in federal aid for vocational training and the schooling of children of military personnel.
          . Give no federal research funds to colleges and universities that restrict admission because of race, creed, color, or national origin.
          10. Direct the Department of Justice to be vigilant in the prevention or control of violence and intimidation connected with school desegregation or sit-ins.
          11. Adequately staff the Civil Rights Division of the Department of Justice.
          12. Sponsor a national voter registration drive, supported by wide distribution of information on voter qualifications and procedures in every state.
          13. Require all National Guard units to drop racial bars.
          14. Examine the "separate, but unequal" clause in the Hill-Burton hospital construction for unconstitutionality.
          15. Make a final, decisive effort to end segregation on common carriers in interstate or intrastate traffic.
          16. Require large contractors of the government to recruit Negro employees as a condition for contract award.
          17. End at once federal cooperation with discrimination in the apprenticeships and employment services.
          18. Guide federal housing programs with a policy of encouraging
integration.
        
        
          Youth Building the Rural South
          By Othow, Ajulo E.Ajulo E. Othow
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  p. 14, 18
          
          Ajulo E. Othow is the Project Manager of the Southern Rural Development Initiative's (SRDI) Community Development Corporations projects and programs. SRDI is a unique collaborative of community-based institutions working in the poorest communities of the rural South based in Raleigh, North Carolina.
          I'd been working for the Southern Rural Development Initiative (SRDI) for only two months when we had our third Annual Assembly (trial by fire is integral to our institutional culture). Yearly we bring together our 33-member collaborative of community-based development institutions to learn and share, to be rejuvenated by our connection to a larger movement, to reaffirm our collaborative model, and to highlight our regional identity. 
          As a neophyte staff person, and relatively new person to the community development field, I felt almost completely detached from this group of people who shared a history of struggling for justice in the South. Still, I searched for someone like me, someone who seemed unfamiliar with the surroundings, culture and language, someone who didn't seem to know the whole story of the movement and its actors. I found no one. 
          Later, at our post-Assembly debriefing, when my turn came, I
casually yet tentatively (so as not to offend anyone) remarked that I
didn't see anyone under thirty. All of my colleagues agreed and immediately began to inventory the participants, particularly those members who sent a staff or board member under thirty. Again, zero. I then realized that every time I was introduced to a board member or partnering organization, it went something like this: "This is Ajulo, our new staff person ... She single-handedly brings down the average age of our office." I always found the remark funny and thought it a compliment to my youthful genius. But I quickly realized that it had nothing to do with me, and almost everything to do with our field, and the individual institutions that comprise it. 
          Here's my soapbox analysis. First, through the pervasiveness of popular culture and the lack of critical thought, young people are vilified. They are not considered as assets but are viewed as issues, threats, crowds in need of unfettered controls. They are difficult to understand and impossible to communicate with. Some of the folks I met were surprised by my position, frequently asked my age, and were curious about what made me different.
          Second, too few young people are visible in the community development field; an entire segment of our constituency is not being actively engaged. We are building communities of the future without building leaders for the future. 
          And third, SRDI's work is focused on persistently poor places in the rural South. Both history and perception support the notion that young people must leave their rural communities to lead productive and prosperous lives. We are challenged with understanding the impact of this on rural communities and community-building work.  And then there's technology--what does this revolution have to do with youth staying in rural communities? 
          SRDI, has picked up this issue and turned it into the start of a
long-term strategy to build the capacity of our member institutions
around engaging young people. This initiative has two sub-themes which
we will address at this year's Annual Assembly, Claiming Home: Youth Building the Rural South of 2000 and Beyond. The first theme concerns internal sustainability. Our institutions must create space for young people in governance and management, ensuring that these institutions are sufficiently flexible to reshape themselves when faced with new ideas from young people in power. The second theme is around our community building work. We must ensure that our institutions are accountable to the young people in their communities by involving them in visioning and shaping stronger communities.
          The planning for the Assembly involves young people--ages fifteen to thirty--as designers, participants, and evaluators. Young people will also lead presentations and workshops on issues of importance to youth including education, political participation, starting a family, and working in the rural South.
          Over the course of three days of workshops, speakers, small and large group activities, and cultural presentations by folks of all ages, SRDI, our members and fifty youth from around the region will generate ideas, share models, ask tough questions, and build momentum for a long term strategy to engage tomorrow's leaders and community builders today.
          The intergenerational nature of the assembly will even extend to the entertainment. Carpetbag Theater, Inc., a community-based nonprofit theater group, will perform, addressing issues of racism, classism, sexism, and ageism.
          Our annual Assembly will  look very different from last year's, and
with some measure of success we'll find that our institutions and our
communities will too.
        
        
          Making the Promise of America Its Practice
          By Herman, Alexis M.Alexis M. Herman
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  p. 16
          
          The good news comes from everywhere, virtually every day. America is on a roll. More than twenty million new jobs have been created since President Clinton and Vice President Gore took office in 1993. Wages are up, and at 4.1 percent, the nation's unemployment rate is way down-especially among women.
          When the Commission on Interracial Cooperation, the Southern Regional Council's predecessor, was created in 1919, approximately one in five women worked. Today, women are nearly half the American workforce.
Not only has the number of working women more than doubled, but the jobs have also changed. In the past twenty-five years, the percentage of female attorneys has jumped from 7 to 29 percent, while female physicians have increased from 13 to 25 percent. One in three businesses is owned by a woman. In today's information age, women are web developers and online financial advisors, jobs never imagined by our foremothers.
          But the bright light of our country's prosperity isn't shining on all American workers. And even though more American women are participating in the workforce than ever before, there is still a substantial gap in the wages paid to men and women.
          As we enter the twenty-first century, it is simply wrong that women earn about seventy-five cents compared to men. Working women pay the same for goods and services, and should be paid the same for the work they do.
          Of course, there are people who claim that pay discrimination is a thing of the past. One study even claimed that we don't have to worry about it anymore because very young women with no children had essentially achieved parity with their male counterparts. That would be fine if women never aged, or never had children. But we aren't living in Pleasantville. We are living in the real world, and we need to take real action.
          Thanks to the leadership of organizations like SRC we have made progress, but we need to continue focusing America's attention on closing the pay gap once and for all. The truth is, that women who make less build up less in their employers' pension plans. So, pay inequity adds up to pension inequity. This is money women never get back. And when it comes to retirement savings, instead of compounding interest, we are compounding injustice.
          At the Labor Department, we are addressing the pay equity issue in three ways. First, we are putting a focus on helping workers-particularly women-get the skills, training and education to get ahead. In today's economy, how you grow depends on what you know, and we are calling on the resources of government, business, community and faith-based leadership to help more women get on the road to success.
          We are also supporting women who are making the delicate transition from welfare to work. For them, the thin line of trustworthy child care, reliable transportation, housing and training often separates failure from success. And we are creating security nets across the country to ensure these women not only have jobs, but also a real future.
          Finally, we are continuing to speak out about the need to raise the minimum wage. More than 10 percent of the 10 million Americans who would benefit directly from the increase are African-American women. Over one year, a dollar an hour increase is enough for a low-income family of four to buy groceries for seven months: or pay rent for five months, or invest in their own training with a year and a half of community college education.
          As America's workplace evolves at warp-speed, these are the things we must do to ensure that we leave no one behind-particularly our nation's women. We must continue to work together, to create policies together, and to lift our voices together, until we have truly made the promise of America, the practice of America.
          
            Alexis M. Herman is U.S. Secretary of Labor. She co-founded the Black Women's Employment Project at SRC in 1972.
          
        
        
          Democracy in the South
          By Suitts, SteveSteve Suitts
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  pp. 17-18
          
            Like an old Chinese proverb coming south for the winter, one side of  democracy in the American South today shows troubling, even treacherous signs  of crisis, and on the other side are rare moments for important opportunities. This  contrast is, of course a part of the ironic history of political participation in the South which has delivered the region from the land of segregation of thirty years ago to being home for most of the nation's registered black voters today. It is that  essential characteristic of a region that can encompass in one year more violations of the voting rights of its minority citizens than any other while electing more minority officials than all others. 
          The dangers to democracy which haunt the South today are both immediate and  far-reaching. The region's population growth over the last ten years presents real obstacles to maintaining the voting strength of minority citizens beyond the local level. Most of the growth, for example, has been in suburban Congressional and legislative districts where minorities are a small part of the population and where incumbent voting records often show indifference or even hostility to the interest of black and Hispanic citizens. Racial bloc voting continues throughout the region, fencing out minority voters from any substantial influence in presidential elections. And Southern state officials--often elected with the support of minority voters--appear today as adamant in their opposition to the enforcement of the Voting Rights Act as they were decades ago. (Witness the never-ending oppositions of state officials to a fair redistricting of the Arkansas legislature and the judicial districts in seven Southern states.) 
          Other signs of crisis are no less troubling. In three Southern states during the last year, whites claimed "reverse discrimination" in federal courts as they invoked the Voting Rights Act to promote their own political rights, apparently oblivious of the need to show that they had been the victims of a history of racial discrimination in voting and in society. In 1989, a state court judge in Georgia dismissed local criminal indictments because of jury discrimination--not enough whites were on the jury, he claimed. And in South Carolina a public restaurant openly defied the provisions of the federal public accommodations law, apparently on the belief that those laws were not going to be enforced any longer. 
          These peculiar events took place within the backdrop of the U.S. Supreme Court's recent decisions on "race-based remedies." Holding that efforts to assist minority contractors by the City of Richmond were unconstitutional, the U.S. Supreme Court stated: "Classifications based on race carry a danger of stigmatic harm. Unless they are strictly reserved . . . they may in fact promote notions of racial inferiority and lead to a politics of racial hostility." 
          The Court's reference to a "politics of racial hostility" reflects the language used by opponents of renewal of the Voting Rights Act in the Congressional debates in 1982: "All too often the task of racial classifications in and of itself has resulted in social turmoil...[and]...the proposed changes in Section 2 [of the Voting Rights Act] will inevitably 'compel the worst tendencies towards race-based allegiances and divisions.'" 
          These similarities are more than linguistic: the fundamental rationale undergirding the Supreme Court's ruling against minority contracting--and affirmative action in employment in its other recent cases--applies to all remedies for racial discrimination, including the creation of majority black districts in voting cases. Increasingly, race-based remedies are suspect in the federal courts no matter what they're aimed to correct. 
          These signs of the times are serious indicators of dangers amid both our  folkways and stateways. When the city council of Richmond, Virginia--the old seat of the Confederacy--is frustrated by the U.S. Supreme Court--the authors of legal equality in the twentieth century--in an attempt to remove the vestiges of race discrimination, we should realize that no longer will traditional institutions defend and expand opportunity for all in the future. We must take seriously the jeopardy that can befall both the letter and the spirit of democracy in the South from both old friends and old foes. 
          Nonetheless, the South is poised to deliver another set of historic
advances. With an expected gain of ten Congressional seats in Southern
states after the 1990 Census, minority voters have a chance to
increase their strength through the creation of additional
Congressional districts with a majority of black and Hispanic
voters. The legal movement for enforcing the federal Voting Rights Act
is continuing to remove old and new barriers to full political
participation, and the numbers of black, Hispanic, and white officials
elected by the votes of minority citizens continue to enlarge. It was not, for instance, a change of heart, but a change in the voters of Richmond that moved the city council to embrace local legislation promoting minority contracting. 
          Of course, only one of these contrasting signs will become the signal feature of the South's future--depending upon what Southerners of goodwill do now and in the future. As in the past, these times call for perseverance with those enterprises that have worked and experimentation with others that promise new results in promoting political participation. It is a time for redoubling and improving upon current, effective work, for reinforcing the public understanding of the necessity for such work, and for boldly searching for new ways to further democracy for all. 
          In this spirit the Southern Regional Council has a time-honored place as an institution which believes in, and whose work enlarges, the promise of democracy in the American South. More than any other private institution in the region during the twentieth century, the Council has been able to bring both vigilance and innovation to the challenge of expanding democracy. These qualities, hopefully, will also be evident in the strategies and activities which both the Council and other Southerners engage over the next few years for enlarging democracy in this region we stubbornly call home.
          
            Steve Suitts, a native of Alabama, served as executive director of the Southern Regional Council from 1977 to 1995. He wrote the following essay which appeared in Southern Changes in  June of 1990.
          
        
        
          Affirmative Action Battle Hits Sunshine State
          By Spears, EllenEllen Spears
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  pp. 19-20
          
          More than 11,000 students, teachers, union leaders, and grandmothers marched to the Florida State Capitol on March 8, 2000 to register their opposition to a two-pronged  assault on affirmative action: Sacramento businessman Ward Connerly's latest state initiative drive and Republican Gov. Jeb Bush's "One Florida" plan. The Florida fight is being shaped by presidential election-year politics and spurring fresh activism in the Sunshine State. 
          Recognizing that affirmative action will not be easily eliminated through state legislative action (see Amy Wood's articles in Southern Changes, Spring 1998 and Summer 1999), opponents of affirmative action have sought other means-initiatives and executive orders. Florida is facing both.
          The "Florida Civil Rights Initiative" (FCRI) is actually a package of four constitutional amendments that would end consideration of race in overcoming discrimination in state hiring, contracting, and college admissions.  FCRI has gathered 10 percent of the requisite signatures.  A judicial review in mid-April will consider two questions: whether the initiative deals with a single subject and whether the ballot language is clear. Though Michigan, Oregon, and Colorado are potential targets, Florida is the only state where Connerly's organization, the American Civil Rights Institute, is attempting such an initiative this year.
          After winning in Washington state in 1998 where nearly 89 percent of the population is white, Connerly had several reasons to choose Florida for the next attempt to spread his anti-affirmative action ballot campaign. One of the few Southern states with a citizen initiative process (others are Mississippi and Arkansas), Florida boasts multiracial demographics much like California, where the "California Civil Rights Initiative" succeeded in 1996. The state also ranks high in the number of elderly voters, who tend to show less support for affirmative action remedies. 
          A win in this heavily urbanized Southern state with a large
African-American population would be significant. Said Connerly in an
on-line interview March 27, Florida is a "hotly contested state in the presidential race...[being the] fourth largest state with all those other factors that I mentioned is tremendous."  
          Governor Jeb Bush, whose brother Governor George W. Bush of Texas has all but secured the Republican nomination for president, has positioned the "One Florida" plan as an alternative to the outright ban that would result from Connerly's initiative. Like the initiative, the Bush program targets state hiring, public contracting and public education. A controversial ingredient in the plan is the "Talented 20" program, which guarantees admission to the state's public colleges and universities to students who graduate in the top 20 percent of their classes.  But Florida colleges already have an open admissions policy, and some of the  low-achieving schools with high minority populations purported to benefit from the program do not offer all of the  nineteen college prep courses the students need to qualify.  
          Some believe that the Bush plan was motivated by the fear that the Connerly initiative would greatly increase election turnout by women and minorities. Bush's "One Florida" plan "was generated clearly to be an effort to minimize female and minority voters at the polls in November," said Leon Russell, past president of the Florida NAACP Conference of Branches.
          
            Tallahassee Sit-in
          
          When Bush proposed "One Florida," he didn't bank on the vigor and militancy of the opposition, said Russell.  Utilizing a variety of tactics-a sit-in, hearings, protests, and legislative strategies-the new movement in Florida is working to retain fairness programs. State Sen. Kendrick Meek (D-Miami) and Rep. Tony Hill (D-Jacksonville) sat in at Lt. Gov. Frank Brogan's office January 18-19 in Tallahassee, forcing Gov. Jeb Bush to delay his executive order ending affirmative action.  The sit-in brought public hearings before a Select House-Senate committee in Tallahassee, Tampa, and Miami.  A Board of Regents decision in Orlando February 17 to pass the educational provisions of the Bush plan faces a state administrative challenge brought by the NAACP to be heard in April. 
          Bush has already altered (in the cabinet departments he controls) the way state contracts are awarded. White-owned firms already do 98 percent of the state contracting, according State Senator Daryl Jones (D-South Dade), a member of the Florida Conference of Black State Legislators. Commercial contractors, represented by the Florida Associated General Contractors Council, are supporting the Bush plan and the ballot initiative.
          A broad coalition, Floridians Representing Equity and Equality (FREE), is taking the offensive.  FREE helped to organize the March 8 rally and is gathering signatures for a pro-affirmative action ballot measure, possibly next year. Legislative proposals include two wage equity bills that make up the Fair Pay Act of 2000, but legislative outcomes are unpredictable since sixty-three of the 160 Florida legislators must retire this year due to term limits.  
          The real test of the state politics of affirmative action may come in November, when Florida's twenty-five electoral votes are at stake.  In neighboring Georgia, a Republican candidate's attack on affirmative action helped galvanize large black voter turnout, propelling Democratic Governor Roy Barnes to a win in 1998.
          
            Ellen Spears is managing editor of  Southern Changes.
          
        
        
          BOOKS: Breaking the Wall of Resistance
          By Braden, AnneAnne Braden
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  pp. 22-24
          
           In 1954, Anne and Carl Braden purchased a home in an all-white neighborhood in Louisville, Kentucky, on behalf of a black couple, Andrew and Charlotte Wade. The Wall Between is Anne Braden's first-hand account of the consequences of that simple, bold action-mob violence against the Wades and the bombing of their house and Carl's imprisonment on charges of sedition.  A finalist for the 1958  National Book Award, The Wall Between was republished by the University of Tennessee Press in 1999. In an epilogue to the new edition, Braden brings the story up to the present. Below in an excerpt from that epilogue, Braden raises the challenge to today's social justice movement.
          I came into social justice movements at the height of the repression of the Cold War. The labor movement was being decimated by anti-Communist hysteria: the CIO's "Operation Dixie" to organize the South, lay shipwrecked on this division. Organizations seeking civil rights, peace, and justice had been crushed everywhere.  People were being told that social change groups were subversive. Communists, and then many others, were fired from their jobs, careers were destroyed, many people went to jail, and some committed suicide. Most people became afraid to speak, to meet, to organize; the "Silent '50s" descended. Social problems festered that still plague us today....
          Suddenly, in the depth of this repression, in Montgomery, Alabama, a new movement arose. From there, the movement ignited the South, and the flames fanned out across the country. The movement of African Americans in the South, ultimately joined by an increasing number of white people, won victories that many would have said were impossible. It also  broke the pall of the 1950s, opened up everything in our society to question, and made it possible for all people seeking justice to be heard. It brought longstanding struggles of Latinos and Native Americans to the nation's center stage. And it set in motion the mass antiwar movement of the 1960s, the new women's movement, new openings for workers to organize in the South--and later movements of other oppressed people: the disabled, lesbians and gays, environmentalists.
          Bob Moses, one of the architects of the voting rights movement that shook the country from Mississippi, made a profound comment in 1964:
          "The Negro seeks his own place within the existing institutional
framework, but to accommodate him society will have to modify its institutions--and in many cases make far-reaching fundamental changes.... The struggle for jobs for Negroes forces questions about the ability of the economy to provide jobs for everyone within our present socio-economic structure: lack of legal counsel for Negroes brings into focus the general lack of legal counsel for the poor. . . . The function of the white American is not so much to prepare the Negro for entrance into the larger society--but to prepare society for the changes it must make to include Negroes."
          As African Americans moved for freedom , it was as if the foundation stone of a building shifted, and the whole structure shook. That movement never achieved political power in the 1960s, but for a few shining years it set the agenda of the country--and it was a humane agenda.
          Some years ago, I interviewed the Rev. C.T. Vivian, one of Martin
Luther King's top aides. C.T. put his analysis of the 1960s in
theological terms. "You know it is really true," he said, "what it
says in the Bible, that a person must repent of his sins before he can
be saved. That's true of a nation, too. In the 1960s this nation took
just the first step toward admitting it had been wrong on race. As a
result, creativity burst forth everywhere."
          People in power who felt threatened by these new upsurges became frightened. And they knew that the root of their problem lay in the African-American freedom movement, and in similar movements among Latinos and Native Americans. They acted to destroy those movements. During that intense period of repression, the late 1960s--ignored by too many white people at the time, and today ignored by many historians--Black Panthers were murdered all over the country; organizations were destroyed by COINTELPRO operations, and activists were framed on a wide assortment of contrived charges. I was traveling the region then for The Southern Patriot, and could visit hardly any community where the Black organizers were not either in jail, on their way, or just out by dint of much local struggle. The attack was massive.
          No people's movement is ever totally destroyed. But the African-American movement was blunted at a critical moment--just as it was launching major offensives for economic justice, which remains today the unfinished business of the 1960s revolution.
          Meantime, there was a tremendous propaganda assault on the minds of white people. More and more in the late 1960s, we began to read in the mainstream media about the "white backlash,"  although public opinion polls were showing that a greatly increased number of white people favored measures to ensure equal justice and opportunity (including affirmative action) for people of color.
          Soon white people were hearing--from the media, from academics and later from the government itself--that what African Americans had gained had taken something away from them. The exact opposite was true. Everything Blacks had won had benefited most of the people in the country. For example, job programs were set up, and young unemployed whites got jobs too. Blacks demanded access to education, and scholarship programs opened college doors to masses of young whites too.
          But the dominant propaganda said otherwise, and soon whites were hearing they were victims of "reverse discrimination."  The most pernicious danger our country faces today is the widespread acceptance of this myth. And over the decade of the 1970s, as so many whites were led to feel threatened, a total reversal in the country's mood occurred--from one that encouraged the solving of social problems by collective efforts that would benefit everyone, to an atmosphere that encouraged each man and woman to turn inward and seek to solve problems for self alone, in private backyards, far from the arena of public issues.
          Some civil rights advocates blame the administration of Ronald Reagan for the drive to reverse the gains of the 1960s. I think it worked the other way. The attack on the African-American movement that began in the late 1960s and the campaign for the minds of this nation's white people that permeated the 1970s created the base that put the Reagan administration in power and dictated that the 1980s would be a time when everyone would be encouraged to "get what you can for yourself alone."
          New movements erupted in the 1980s, antiracist action against new hate groups, the mass movements around the two Jesse Jackson presidential campaigns, new stirrings of organizing within the labor movement. But as we moved into the 1990s the visions of a  just society that had fired the 1960s had been narrowed so far that even the most minor reforms--for example the addition of more Head Start programs, important but a far cry from the needed massive overhaul and expansion of our educational system--seemed like great victories.
          
            Hopes for a New Antiracist Movement
          
          So we stand on the verge of the twenty-first century with a significant new black middle class produced by the decades of struggle--but with the great masses of African Americans living in poverty, with hopelessness destroying a generation of youth, and the poor being told they are the cause of their own problems. The truth is that this society has not yet done what Bob Moses said in 1964 it must do--make the changes necessary to make room for African Americans. According to every statistical table, people of color have only half as much of the good things of life as whites (housing, health care, jobs, educational opportunity, income) and twice or three times as much of the bad things (infant mortality, slums, unemployment, and prison cells). In effect, it is as if our society has decided that a person of color is only 50 percent of a human being.
          Because this society has never made room for African Americans, it
is moving toward a situation in which it does not have room for people
of any color. The new global economy is being built on the cheap labor
of people of color around the world, with fewer and fewer opportunities for masses of people  at home. Today, statistics tell us that 1 percent of American households own the same amount of wealth as the total owned by  92 percent. Between 1979 and 1997, the real income of the poorest one-fifth of U.S. families declined by 7 percent, while the income of the top 20 percent increased by 34 percent and the top 1 percent by 106 percent. The average U. S. corporate executive now earns 326 times that of the average factory worker, and 728 times the annual income of a minimum wage earner. In other industrialized countries, this ratio of executive to factory worker is about 21 to 1; in this country in 1970, it was 41 to 1. "The rich get richer, and the poor get poorer" is a cliche, but it describes our society today. This disparity has led to the collapse of many societies.
          A new massive thrust toward racial justice will not by itself solve all the problems that face us. But as long as people of color can be written off as expendable, and therefore acceptable victims of the most extreme inequities, the basic injustices in our society will only get worse.
          Until a huge new crusade for racial justice develops, the white people who today are asking, "What can I do?"--and there are many of them--can help hasten that day by taking visible stands against specific manifestations of racism in their communities. In so doing, they create a break in what sometimes seems to be a solid wall of white resistance to justice--and often even a refusal to admit that a problem still exists. It helps to create a pole to which other whites can gravitate when the time comes that they realize they must act. We need to create in our communities what I call an "antiracist majority."
          Unfortunately, it is not likely that white people in significant numbers will take such action on their own initiative. They will do it as they began to do it in the 1960s when organized mass movements of people of color force them to face unpleasant truths. I have hope today because I see arising at the grassroots in myriad local communities new movements of people of color demanding justice.
          Right now, there is no cohesive force bringing these localized movements together in a united crusade. Mass movements always come as the product of years of mundane work by unsung heroes, and no one can predict when the upsurge will crystallize. I am not at all sure I will live to see it. But I am convinced that it will happen. And when it does, a huge question will be how many white people will understand that this upsurge holds hope for their lives too, and will therefore go through the personal metamorphosis needed to join this new movement.
          
            Anne Braden is the co-chair of the board of directors of the Southern Organizing Committee for Economic and Social Justice in Louisville, Kentucky.
          
        
        
          Freedom Election Campaign
          By Curry, ConstanceConstance Curry
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000 pp. 24-27
          
          Early in 1963, the Voter Education Project had been firmly established in Greenwood, and local participation was increasing satisfactorily. The Negroes of Greenwood and Leflore County were facing the anticipated reprisals and intimidations, but general morale seemed to be holding up. Then on the night of February 28, as they drove out of Greenwood, Bob Moses and two coworkers noticed that they were being followed. Earlier, they had spotted a late-model Buick with no license plates parked in front of their headquarters and had seen several white men in it. Jim Travis, a local worker, was driving along with Moses and Randolph Blackwell, a representative of the Southern Regional Council in Atlanta. As they were talking about the trailing car, it pulled alongside of them, and thirteen .45 caliber bullets came shattering into their car. Two struck Travis in the shoulder and neck. The Buick sped away, and Moses, who was sitting in the middle, guided the car to a stop as Travis slumped down in the seat. Neither Moses nor Blackwell was hit.
          Moses called me later that night to tell what had happened. He said that Travis was seriously injured but that doctors at the Greenwood hospital expected him to recover. He was being transferred to the hospital in Jackson. Moses had alerted the local authorities, but the assailants' car, without plates, could only be given a general identification.
          The day after the shooting, Wiley Branton, director of the Voter
Education Project in Atlanta, made a statement to the press asking
that all of the voter registration workers scattered across
Mississippi converge on Greenwood and show the people that there would
be no backing down. He noted that it was of paramount importance that
no degree of violence cause the workers to lose their initiative. His
statement concluded, "Leflore County, Mississippi, has selected itself
as the testing ground for democracy, and we shall meet the challenge
there."
          
          Branton was a descendant of Greenwood Leflore, the French-Indian millionaire slavetrader for whom the county and town are named. The whites in Greenwood probably thought Branton's ultimatum was a foolish stand for a native Mississippi Negro to take, but the county did become a testing ground. Workers from SNCC, CORE, the NAACP, and SCLC flooded the town and county to the saturation point, and soon the area was bubbling with voter registration activities on every corner.
          The patterns of action, reaction, and counterreaction continued, and a wave of violence swept Greenwood as the white response to the influx of civil rights workers. The most serious incident was the bombing of the building where the COFO office was located. Everything in the office was destroyed, including all voter registration records. Authorities said that there was no evidence of arson.
          Another COFO car was blasted with a shotgun, but without injuries. Shotguns were fired into several homes, but again providence spared us injuries. These forms of intimidation and reprisals against local Negroes continued, then increased, and it was difficult to retain the following that had been established. Less than a month after the Travis shooting, Bob Moses led a voter march to the county courthouse. They were turned away with police dogs, cattle prods, and riot sticks.
          
            The Freedom Election
          
          The most ambitious and perhaps most worthwhile COFO effort of 1963 was the mock participation of an interracial slate of candidates in the state gubernatorial election in November. The two leading regular candidates were trying their best to outdo each other in racist statements. It also came at a time when Senators James O. Eastland and John Stennis were in Washington telling Congress that the only reason Mississippi Negroes did not vote was that we were too slothful and unconcerned to register.
          Allard K. Lowenstein came down in July 1963 to offer his help to COFO and our voter registration efforts. My friendship with Al went all the way back to 1949 when I was a delegate from Xavier to the United States National Student Association Congress. He later became president of that group and was respected by students on many campuses throughout the country. The plan that emerged was that we would attempt to show the nation that we would indeed vote if allowed to do so. It would be the first big test of our concentrated program of voter education and registration. We hoped to show how meaningless Mississippi's lily-white campaigns were and to show that each major candidate promised to do more than the next to deny us political rights.
          James P. Coleman had been eliminated in the Democratic primary for governor, mainly because of his support for John Kennedy, so the November race was between Democrat Paul B. Johnson, Jr., and Republican Rubel Phillips. The crucial issues were clouded by a thick haze of racial prejudice. Johnson's main campaign issue was that he "stood in the doorway at Ole Miss" when James Meredith was trying to enroll. His supporters said proudly, "Paul stood tall at Ole Miss," adding, with reference to his stand against legalized whiskey, "Paul will stand tall against alcohol." Johnson also said that a strong and united Democratic party would make it easier to keep a sharp eye on Negro activities.
          Rubel Phillips maintained that Johnson had been willing to "sit
down and play cowboys and niggers with the university." He said that
with a Republican governor and two strong parties, the state could
keep two sharp eyes on the Negroes. He was saying that, with his
election and the election of Republican Barry Goldwater to the
presidency in 1964, the Negro problem would be solved. So these were
our top contenders for governor. They both referred to Mississippi's
being the greatest state in the union, but neither was openly
concerned  about the economic issues--our gravest problem. Thirty-two
percent of the people earned less than three-thousand dollars a year,
26 percent earned less than two-thousand dollars annually, and, in the Delta, 51 percent of the people--black and white--earned less than two-thousand dollars a year. This was real poverty. The candidates made superficial allusions to bringing more industry to the state, but the campaign standard was seeing who could yell "Nigger" the loudest.
          We could do nothing "official" to combat these forces, so COFO decided to have an "unofficial" election of our own. I would be the candidate for governor, and Edwin King, a white Methodist minister from black Tougaloo College in Jackson, would run for lieutenant governor. Ed King was a Mississippian from Vicksburg. Bob Moses would manage the campaign, and we would stress the important issues that Phillips and Johnson were ignoring, as well as show the potential strength of our vote.
          Among our many problems, the lack of a good political speechwriter
was the greatest. We also needed national publicity and coverage that
would reflect the significance of our effort. We needed people who
knew about political organizing-we had had little experience in this
field. Once again, we turned to the outside for help. Joe Lieberman,
editor of the Yale Daily News, was in Mississippi at the time doing a series of reports on the activities and programs of SNCC. He became interested in our plans and assured us that he would spread the word at Yale about the type of help we needed. He thought our needs would have strong appeal to students majoring in journalism and political science.
          Within a few weeks the students came--from Yale, Harvard, Dartmouth, and Fordham--forty strong, and their interest in the campaign was as keen as our own. They knew how to write campaign literature and how to organize meetings and rallies. They were able to get the news media to almost every mass meeting that we held in the state. Our main instrument for spreading the word was a little newspaper, "The Free Press," and Bill Minor and R. L. T. Smith helped us get it printed.
          I toured the state making speeches and waving my hands and yelling, and I guess some of the Negroes thought they had their very own Bilbo or Barnett. I spoke in Holly Springs, Oxford, Greenville, Clarksdale, Jackson, Gulfport, and Hattiesburg. We had good campaign tours in Clarksdale and Greenville, because whites left us alone and did not try to break up the rally. In Greenville, they even let us use the Washington County Courthouse and--most amazing--the police even arrested several whites for harassing participants.
          Gulfport, Vicksburg, and Hattiesburg were another story. In Hattiesburg, the police barged into the civil rights headquarters the day of the rally and closed it down as a fire hazard. We had to go to a church. When a white girl tried to join the rally, the police arrested her and put her in a patrol car. She was screaming and kicking and biting, but they wouldn't let her come in. And the rally had barely started when we heard seven or eight police cars circling the church with their sirens growling. Then came four or five fire trucks with their whistles screaming and their bells clanging. It was impossible to speak above the roar of the official harassment. In my speech I shouted to the audience that we were glad that the fire department was outside but that the fire within us could not be extinguished with water. Lawrence Guyot, then, director for SNCC in the Hattiesburg area, spoke right after me. While he was speaking, some firemen came charging into the church yelling that they were looking for a fire. Guyot yelled for the crowd to let the firemen through. A couple dozen firemen soon stood in the front of the group, in full regalia, some snickering and some actually looking around for a fire, but all looking like damn fools. There was a moment of silence, and the firemen were looking to their captain, Moore, to tell them what to do. Then Guyot told Captain Moore, "We're going to have a meeting here tonight, and we don't give a damn what you do." Captain Moore did not reply but turned and led his men out of the church.
          We had the same sort of official harassment in Vicksburg. The police and firemen surrounded the building making all the noise they could muster, but they had gotten the word from Hattiesburg that it was best not to go into the building and be laughed at by a bunch of progressive Negroes. In Gulfport we held the rally at the Back Bay Mission, which was staffed by and served both races. It was just between a Negro and a white neighborhood and had never had any problems over its integrated ministry. But during the rally, a large number of whites converged on the building, and we heard sirens wailing. The noise increased, and finally rocks and bottles started crashing through the windows. The police were there in full force. They stood and watched the whites throwing whatever they could at the windows. Every window in the mission was broken.
          We were aware that we were trying to be politicians on this trip, so in a statement to the press we made the most charitable remarks that we could contrive about our reception in Gulfport. We said that we were sorry that some hoodlums had broken the windows and marred what would otherwise have been a pleasant visit. The next morning outside of the mission several white ladies came up to me and said, "Those weren't hoods that threw those bricks. It was us."
          We covered as many communities and rural areas as possible and dipped into places as yet untouched by any civil rights activity. The campaign reminded us of how much remained to be done, as we saw thousands of new faces wrinkle with fear at the mention of total desegregation of the schools. We went to places where Negroes tried to escape even being asked to come to the rally. We added all of these places to our list of areas to reach in the future.
          But there were some counties that we did not go to at all because of plain fear and good sense--like Issaquena, Amite, and Neshoba, where we were afraid we would be shot. Any Negro we might approach in these sections would have feared for his life, and the collusion between the lawless elements and law enforcement officers would have made our effort foolhardy.
          We ended the campaign with a jubilant, backslapping fish fry at a country church in the backwoods near Lexington. We felt we had done well and were relieved that we had made it through with no deaths or serious injuries. Our public relations were remarkably successful, and, even as far out in the country as we were, a big passel of reporters, photographers, and television people were on hand for the event and enjoyed it as much as anybody.
          We got as much attention during the race as either of the major candidates. No newsmen in the state had any doubt about what Johnson and Phillips were going to do and say, and they were delighted to have a little diversion. For the first time in over a century there was a real campaign, unofficial as it was, dealing with the real problems facing the state. We provided a chance to air these problems in the press, and no doubt white Mississippians learned a few things as well.
          To tabulate the results of our efforts, we set up ballot boxes in churches, businesses, and homes. Ballots had all names of candidates for governor and lieutenant governor, which gave our voters a choice of three slates. Voting took place over a whole weekend from Friday until Monday. Many church congregations voted at Sunday services, and records were kept to keep people from voting more than once. In some places, such as Greenwood, there was trouble from the authorities when five voters were arrested and charged with disturbing the peace.
          When the "freedom votes" were counted, it was found that more than eighty-thousand people had participated in an election which they knew they could not win. Quite a turnout for a people who Senator Eastland said were too lazy to even register. Those eighty-thousand votes for freedom quashed whatever hopes he and other segregationists might have had for continuing to sell our laziness as the sorry excuse for lack of Negro voter registration.
          We knew that there were also a few write-in votes all over the state for Ed King and me, but we could never find out the exact count. Under Mississippi statutes, write-in votes invalidate a ballot unless the official candidates happen to die before the election. To my knowledge, Clarksdale was the only community to tabulate the number of write-in votes, and the election officials announced that write-in votes received by Henry and King had reached about six hundred, and then there were no more reports.
          The election had shown the country that Mississippi Negroes would vote if given the chance. It was established that the sacrifices of the people and the labor of the civil rights movement were not in vain, and this evidence was to spur groups on to even more industrious activity. And perhaps most important, white college students from the North had seen what a significant role they could play in the Mississippi struggle. Al Lowenstein, with his wide contacts at Yale, Stanford, and other colleges, had played a major role in bringing these students down. Within a week after the freedom election, plans were being made for a massive influx of college volunteers for Freedom Summer, 1964.
          And there were other encouraging signs. Paul Johnson defeated Rubel Phillips using old issues, but, in his inaugural address, Johnson hinted at a change in the state's official line on race. He may have been frightened by the strong expression of would-be Negro voters and had a legitimate reason to say, "I want my people to know that Paul Johnson is fully aware of the forces, the conflicts, that fashion our environment. Hate or prejudice or ignorance will not lead Mississippi while I sit in the governor's chair." He spoke of industrial development: "I would point out to you that the Mississippi economy is not divisible by political party or faction, or even by race, color, or creed." Never before had a Mississippi governor uttered such bold words--a fine reward for our freedom election.
          
            Constance Curry first met Aaron Henry in 1964
while  combing the Clarksdale area for whites interested in peaceful
school desegregation in Mississippi. Thirty-three years later, a group of Henry's friends, after reading Curry's first book, Silver Rights, asked her to write Henry's biography. After reluctantly agreeing to the project, Henry died in 1997 just as the project commenced. Below is an excerpt from Aaron Henry: The Fire Ever Burning, published in spring 2000 by the University of Mississippi Press.
          
        
        
          Who and What Runs Georgia?
          By Kytle, CalvinCalvin Kytle and Mackay,  James James Mackay
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  p. 28
          
          In 1948, four years after the Supreme Court nullified  the white primary, Herman Talmadge ran for governor of Georgia equipped with a strategy to keep the white primary intact. Alarmed, George Mitchell, then- executive director of the Council commissioned Calvin Kytle and James Mackay to conduct a study to determine what had precipitated this development and what could be done in response. Below is a segment from the report, first published in book form by the University of Georgia Press in 1998  as Who Runs Georgia?: A Contemporary Account of the 1947 Crisis that Set the Stage for Georgia's Political Transformation.
          Money, we repeat, does run the politics of Georgia. But this does not refute the fact that ignorance is the root evil. The powerful men of wealth who back a candidate for private gain, who block legislation for the general welfare to gratify immediate self-interest, are ignorant. If the rich and privileged were not so ignorant, they would prefer to invest their money in honest government rather than pay it to shakedown administrations; they would know that government by the few can only lead to government by the fewer; and they would put their surplus profits in a program for human advancement.
          All this considered, before we can plan any campaign to rid ourselves of a perpetuating condition of political injustice, we must answer these basic questions:
          Is it possible to educate our people to the responsibilities and sacrifices of democratic government?
          If we can educate only those people without property interest who now  benefit little from government, would the resistance of men with money now controlling the government be so great as to keep the majority politically sterile?
          Is there enough money to be had from people opposed to the present political setup to launch and sustain such a campaign?
          If these three questions can be answered yes, then the general pattern of a long-range program is clear. But equally clear is that any potentially successful program will require two complementary statewide organizations--one to awaken Georgians to what "good government" can be, the other to show how good government can be achieved.
          An education agency is needed that can effectively reach people of all ages and economic groups. Its purpose should be threefold: (1) to acquaint people with the facts of Georgia politics and government; (2) to stimulate thought and discussion on the needs of the state; and (3) to sell actively a nonpartisan program of advancement. Its program should be directed toward a mass audience, and it should employ the full resources of all communication media.
          At the same time, a second party is needed to build a shorter route to reform. Two things argue for this: (1) under the county unit system of the  Democratic Party, the state's progressive forces are virtually disfranchised; (2) the current leadership of all too many county election committees is  indifferent to democratic values. Since the county unit system perpetuates itself through assemblymen dependent on it for election, the only way to bypass it is to force the decisive vote into the general election, where the winner is determined by popular vote. Similarly, rather than try to replace the present Democratic Party's election managers, it would be easier to elect new managers for a second primary and to ensure an honest count of general election returns by the presence of trained poll watchers.
          If these recommendations seem too demanding, then it is only because these are demanding times. The situation is such that nothing less can offer a prospect of constructive government and guarantee its permanency. We can no longer afford to default to the cynical men of wealth and to the politicians of vaulting ambition, whose pursuit of profit and power degrade the idea of democracy and would deny us the right and the means to make it real.
          
            Calvin Kytle is a writer and former publisher who lives in Chapel Hill, North Carolina. James Mackay is a former Georgia state legislator and U. S. Congressman. He now lives in Rising Fawn, Georgia.
          
        
        
          Freedom Hammer
          Reviewed by Moye, ToddTodd Moye
          Vol. 22, No. 1, Spring 2000
          
          >Chana Kai Lee. For Freedom's Sake: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1999.
          Fannie Lou Hamer emerged from deep poverty and anonymity in the Mississippi Delta to become easily the most recognizable and influential poor person of her time. Her Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party challenged an all-white Democratic state party delegation at the 1964 Democratic National Convention and forced the national party to confront its historical exclusion of African Americans  from the democratic process. It is not an exaggeration to say that Hamer forced Americans to reconsider the notion of democracy itself. 
          Hamer told a national television audience at the 1964 convention about the trials she had endured because she wanted to exercise her rights as a citizen. She concluded her address by asking, "Is this America, the land of the free and the home of the brave where we have to sleep with our phones off the hooks because our lives be threatened daily because we want to live as decent human beings, in America?" Mrs. Hamer later lectured Lyndon Johnson, "If this is a great society, I'd hate to see a bad one." By then she had become the conscience of the civil rights movement. She shamed white liberals in the Democratic party who could not make room for the participation of free-thinking African Americans, but saved the worst of her wrath for elite blacks who supported what she called the "National Association for the Advancement of Certain People."
          Hamer's message was powerful. She had few peers in Mississippi as a grass-roots organizer, or outside of the state as a fund-raiser for civil rights causes. Thousands of Americans from Boston to Seattle crowded into auditoriums in the late 1960s and early 1970s to hear Mrs. Hamer sing freedom songs, recount her harrowing experiences as a Black woman in the Deep South, and demand that America do more to extend its promises to all of its people. When she died in 1977 a United States congressman, an assistant secretary of state, a United Nations ambassador, and a who's who list of civil rights figures made the pilgrimage to Hamer's hometown of Ruleville, Mississippi. Dan Rather covered the funeral for CBS News.
          But Fannie Lou Hamer is the American hero about whom most Americans know nothing. Few Americans at the turn of the twenty-first century would be able to place her name. Kay Mills' popular 1993 biography, This Little Light of Mine: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer, did much to correct this problem by introducing Hamer to a relatively wide reading audience. Chana Kai Lee, a professor of history and women's studies at the University of Georgia, builds on our traditional understanding of Hamer in a new, highly thoughtful and deeply analytical treatment of Hamer's life. Lee recasts Hamer's activism, and her book may change the way we look at the personal lives of political activists.
          Lee focuses on the importance of pain--physical, emotional, and
spiritual--in Hamer's life, and her analysis is persuasive. The long
list of physical abuses that Hamer was forced to endure because she
was an African-American woman who was determined to live as a free and
equal citizen in a racist, misogynist society is staggering. In 1961
she entered North Sunflower County Hospital to have a stomach cyst
removed, and subsequently learn that doctors had also performed an
unauthorized hysterectomy. On August 31, 1962 she tried to register to
vote; that night she was told to rescind her application or leave the
Marlow plantation on which she and her husband Perry sharecropped. She
left the plantation, and two weeks later someone fired shots into a
friend's home where she had been staying. In 1963, on her way back
from Septima Clark's voter education workshop in South Carolina, Hamer
and several co-workers were arrested in Winona, Mississippi, after
some of the women attempted to desegregate a lunch counter. Hamer was
beaten mercilessly inside the Winona jail. Blinded in one eye, kidneys
permanently damaged, and left with a limp for the rest of her life, she would later remember, "Every day of my life I pay with the misery of this beatin'."
          There are countless other examples, but Lee's contribution is not her chronicle of these abuses. Rather, the importance of Lee's work lies in her examination of the role the attacks on Hamer as a person played in Hamer's life as an activist, and how the abuses themselves were symptomatic of a violently racist society. Lee argues, for instance, that the unauthorized sterilization "robbed [Hamer] of an important aspect of her creative capacity, and this must have affected her view of self, especially her gendered, sexual self." She constantly reminds us that Fannie Lou Hamer was above all a poor rural woman with attitudes and ideas--and obstacles to overcome--that reflected this background. 
          Lee places these attitudes and ideas at the center of Hamer's activism. It is not hard to explain why Hamer placed so much trust in the vote after she had endured so much to achieve it. But Lee uses this lens to examine the whole of Hamer's political life; the focus on Hamer's personal life illuminates her political life in the best sense of the old feminist canard, "the personal is political." By placing pain at the center of Hamer's personal/political life, Lee is better able to explain why Hamer felt so bitterly disappointed both by the middle-class Blacks whom she said had forgotten their people and the poor rural folk who were often times too terrified to stand up for themselves. 
          The movement message that emerges in this portrait of Hamer bears less resemblance to the traditionally defined civil rights movement of the mid-twentieth century than to a human rights movement. Hamer fought less for equality than for justice, which she measured in terms of equal voting rights but also in terms of adequate housing, minimum income, guaranteed health care, and a decent diet. (These last concerns became especially important to Hamer in 1967, when her adopted daughter Dorothy Jean died from the effects of malnutrition.) It was not enough for Hamer and her followers to fight for inclusion in American society; they fought also to transform and improve American society.
          Hamer, of course, did not live to see that transformation completed. She was abandoned by the members of her beloved Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee. She despaired in 1966 that many of her dear movement friends had turned "cold and unloving"--the creation of a "beloved community" was a very real goal for Hamer, and when the civil rights coalition that had nurtured her earlier activism disintegrated, she took it personally. That same year, after Hamer fought vainly a SNCC proposal to exclude whites, separatists in the organization determined that Fannie Lou Hamer was "no longer relevant." 
          Hamer turned her attention to fighting poverty. After a bitter, internecine struggle for federal War on Poverty dollars divided Hamer's civil rights community in Sunflower County, Hamer changed course and founded Freedom Farm, a co-operative venture that offered membership to any local farmer. With the support of donations from Hamer's extensive national fund-raising network, Freedom Farm produced thousands of pounds of fresh vegetables and meat for the African-American farmworkers of Sunflower County who were being displaced by mechanization (in 1969, 32 percent of the county's Blacks were on welfare, 70 percent lived in deteriorating homes, and 60 percent lacked indoor plumbing). Between 1969 and 1973 Freedom Farm successfully channeled federal money into the construction of seventy houses, and the institution helped dozens of farm families obtain federal welfare assistance and social security. Hamer's work literally saved people from starving to death.
          But fighting poverty in Sunflower County, Mississippi, was an uphill battle, to say the least. Freedom Farm, Inc. was plagued by financial problems from its inception, and the co-op went bankrupt in 1976. As her civil rights coalition deteriorated and Freedom Farm foundered, Hamer became increasingly bitter and depressed. At the same time, her physical health faltered. Hamer died in 1977 after bouts with diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and breast cancer. 
          It is far from enjoyable to read about Hamer's myriad painful experiences, but this book will be meaningful for many readers inside and outside of academia. Lee balances the detailed accounts of the terrible things that happened to Hamer with the wonderful things she was able to accomplish in her lifetime. In her hands, Fannie Lou Hamer's story is not one of "complete triumph over all odds," but neither is it one of "complete victimization or defeat."
          A school of thought among historians of the civil rights movement has argued for years that the struggle involved much more than the leadership of Martin Luther King, Jr., and the litigation of the NAACP, and that the literature of the movement should reflect this complexity. We now have two first-rate biographies of Hamer, the grass-roots organizer who in this context might be thought of as the anti-King, to add to the spate of recent studies of the civil rights movement on the local and statewide levels. Surely by now the grass roots camp has won this historiographical battle.
          Lee's biography is far from a "me-too" hagiography meant to lift Hamer into the pantheon of civil rights heroes, however. She cautions against depicting Hamer as a type, as a "strong black woman." There are many reasons to consider Hamer heroic; indeed, it is impossible to read this book and conclude that Hamer the political activist was anything but. But it is also important to examine Hamer's life as a daughter, wife, mother and friend who both endured and inflicted hardships in her personal life and, as Lee puts it, to reflect on "the meaning of Hamer's life for Hamer." This is a different sort of biography, but it introduces an approach that should bear even more fruit in the future.
          
            Todd Moye is a postdoctoral fellow at the Avery Research Center for African-American History and Culture in Charleston, South Carolina. He is working on a book about the civil rights movement in Sunflower County, Mississippi.
          
        
        
          Crazy Caucus
          By Curry, ConstanceConstance Curry
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  p. 32
          
          Harriet Keyserling. Against the Tide: One Woman's Political Struggle. Columbia: University of South Carolina, 1998.
          In 1944, Harriet Keyserling left New York City and moved to Beaufort, South Carolina, with her husband Herbert, a physician and native son.  While raising their four children, she volunteered for local projects in education, health, and the arts and organized a chapter of the League of Women Voters.  Thirty years later, in 1974, she jumped, or maybe waded, into political waters.  She was a woman, a yankee in a southern world, and Jewish in a predominantly Christian society.  She describes herself as "shy, not great at small talk, and not even assertive, much less aggressive."
           After her 1974 election and two-year service on the Beaufort County Council--the first woman--she won a seat as representative to the South Carolina General Assembly.  She remained sixteen years until her retirement in 1992. Those years were a transition time for many southern state governments. Richard W. Riley, who wrote the Foreword for the book, was governor of South Carolina during that period and points out that he "plunged headfirst into the deep water of change, of reform, of shifting emphasis from power politics to the power of ideas."
           Keyserling was right beside him, and the heart of her very personal memoir is an insider's view of the workings of the General Assembly.   She brings the story to life by introducing the "Crazy Caucus," the group that attracted her from the beginning--"bright, progressive funny and very energetic."  Their major opponents were the "Fat and Uglies," a group of young conservative representatives and the "old guard" who often controlled leadership positions through the traditional seniority systems.
           The "Crazy Caucus" took on reforms on every level--health, safety, education and the arts.  Keyserling was recognized for her leadership in the debates on filibustering and she facilitated the 1982 passage of a bill with rules changes, one of which helped invoke cloture on filibusters.  She feels sure that the rules changes helped pass controversial legislation on education improvement, living wills, accommodations taxes, court reform and solid waste and energy policies.
          In 1992, Keyserling decided it was time to leave the legislature. Many members of the "Crazy Caucus" were gone, and she describes the changes that were draining her spirit, energy and good health: "We didn't listen to each other and we didn't respect each other. The civility was gone and was replaced by a tense, acrimonious confrontational atmosphere."  It was a far cry from the era of exciting and hopeful days of change and reform described by Riley. Fortunately, her son Billy won that seat and is a leader is his own right.
           Since her retirement, Keyserling has discovered that there is indeed life after being a legislator and devotes time to environmental and arts issues, her family, and her friends.  She is amused by her transition from the shy, non-aggressive woman of earlier days to a "new persona" that incorporates passion on certain issues and people and little fear of confrontation.  "I want more women to have power," she reflects, "to build their egos, to become passionate, to get involved in making this a better state and a healthier nation." But this book is not just a call to women to join in political struggles.  It is an inspiration on another level--as proof that one courageous person can bring about change in the face of overwhelming odds.	
          
             Constance Curry lives and writes in Atlanta.  She is co-author of, Aaron Henry: The Fire Ever Burning, just published by the University Press of Mississippi.
          
        
        
          Southern Changes Social Justice Database 
Now On-Line 
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  p. 33
          
          The veteran writers and new voices who have written for the journal Southern Changes for more than two decades make the continuing movement for social justice come alive-often reporting stories before they became news in the mainstream press, consistently providing alternative interpretation. Now the analysis and observations of these writers is available to students, teachers, researchers, activists, public officials, and citizens-at no cost- from an online website and digital database: http://beck.library.emory.edu/southernchanges  
          Where else but in Southern Changes can you read ...
Julian Bond reminding us that "democracy demands memory," legendary filmmaker George Stoney telling how he and Judith Helfand made the textile workers documentary film "The Uprising of '34," author Denise Giardina discussing Appalachian culture, Pulitzer Prize winners David Garrow, Harry Ashmore, and Claude Sitton writing on the history of the civil rights movement. Essays and reviews by distinguished historians such as Dan T. Carter, Paul Gaston, Peter Wood, Patricia Sullivan, Mary Fredrickson, David E. Whisnant, and Theda Perdue. Commentaries and interviews by John Egerton, Congressman John Lewis, Texas populist Jim Hightower, Rev. Will D. Campbell, voting rights attorney Laughlin McDonald, director of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund Julius Chambers, novelist Pat Conroy, Selma attorney J. L. Chestnut Jr., Septima Clark, Viginia Durr, homeless activist Rev. Murphy Davis, U. S. Secretary of Labor Ray Marshall, Rose Gladney, Lillian Smith, political economist Barbara Ellen Smith, Stetson Kennedy, Leslie Dunbar, Steve Suitts, Tony Dunbar . . .  and many, many more observers and interpreters of the American South.
          In collaboration, the Beck Center for Electronic Collections at
Emory University and the Southern Regional Council have launched the
on-line, searchable database of Southern Changes, the Council's quarterly journal.  This digital archive contains full-length original articles, reviews, interviews, essays, and reports that explore the variety of social conditions and cultural issues affecting the South.  By entering a key word (e.g. "voting rights," "desegregation," "poverty"), author, or date in the website's search interface, researchers can locate and retrieve appropriate articles from the back volumes of Southern Changes
          "We applaud Emory University's commitment to making this extensive resource on Southern politics and culture, the freedom struggle, and racial justice widely available," said Wendy Johnson, executive director of the Southern Regional Council.
          The project used scanning and optical character recognition (OCR)
to make digital versions of Southern Changes. Next, the staff of Emory's Beck Center proofread and marked-up the issues in SGML (Standard Generalized Markup Language) to make the articles searchable. The digital edition of the journal currently contains Volume 4 (1982) to Volume 14 (1992) with the Beck Center staff continuing to add material daily.  
          The collaborative team at Emory University and the Southern
Regional Council who worked to produce the digital archive available includes Joan Gotwals, Vice Provost and Director of the Emory libraries; Elizabeth Patterson, director of the Virtual Library Project; Wendy Johnson, Executive Director of the Southern Regional Council; Alice Hickcox, Charles Spornick, Scott Ellis, and Brendan Corcoran of Emory's Beck Center; Allen Tullos, editor of Southern Changes; David Dreger, Information Systems Manager at SRC; and Ellen Spears, managing editor of the journal and communications director at the SRC.
          The launching of the Southern Changes digital database coincides with the commemoration this spring of eighty years of work by the Southern Regional Council since the founding of its predecessor organization, the Commission on Interracial Cooperation, in 1919.  A major event, "The Homecoming," on April 27, 2000 will highlight the past and present contributions of Southerners in promoting racial justice, protecting democratic rights, and broadening civic participation.
        
        
          In Memoriam: Philip G. Hammer (1915-2000)
          By Kytle, CalvinCalvin Kytle
          Vol. 22, No. 1, 2000,  p. 34
          
          Philip Gibbon Hammer, a pioneering urban planner and an
influential figure in the movement to end segregation in the South,
died January 21 in Edgewater, Maryland. He was 85.
          Philip Hammer served as an organizer and supervisor of the ad hoc
team that produced the research material from which Pulitzer-Prize
winning editor Harry Ashmore fashioned "The Negro and the Schools."
Published in 1954 one day before the U.S. Supreme Court rendered the
Brown decision, the book gave Southern leaders
indispensable and immediate policy guides for desegregation of the
public schools.
          In Atlanta during the fifties, Hammer served on the boards of the
exclusively-white Chamber of Commerce as well as interracial
organizations like the Urban League and the Southern Regional
Council.
          Phil Hammer belongs to a generation of Southern progressives who
fought for equality and justice at a time and place when for a white
person merely to shake hands with a black American was to rick social
ostracism and the loss of a job," said presidential adviser Vernon
Jordan Jr., a friend since their days together in Atlanta. "The civil
rights movement of the sixties owes more than historians can ever
document to the courage and political skills with which he and the
other members of this white minority attacked institutionalized race
prejudice after World War II."
          Hammer was born on September 18, 1914, in Philadelphia, but five
years later the family moved to Wilmington, North Carolina. He went
to public schools in Wilmington and grew up in a typical white middle
class Southern environment. He attributed his social awakening to his
experiences in the mid-thirties as a political science major at the
University of North Carolina in Chapel Hill, then under the gentle
presidency of Frank Porter Graham, an early civil rights advocate.
          Hammer successfully pursued interwoven careers in business and
public service. He moved to Atlanta in 1947 and became chief staff
officer of a commission to study the extension of the city limits and
the merger of municipal and county facilities. He launched his own firm
in 1954 and became an urban adviser to successive, politically
disparate administrations in Norfolk, Savannah, Indianapolis,
Cincinnati, Washington, and St. Louis. In 1968 President Johnson
appointed him chairman of the National Capital Planning Commission, a
position he also held under President Nixon.
          To many of his friends, Phil Hammer's most significant work
occurred out of the spotlight, as a facilitator and quietly effective
mediator. In 1960 he introduced Harold Fleming, then executive
director of the Southern Regional Council, to a client,
philanthropist Stephen Currier. The result was the formation of
Washington's Potomac Institute, the first of whose many achievements
in race relations was to develop the strategies that ended workplace
discrimination in defense industries during the Kennedy
administration.
          Phil Hammer is survived by his wife of 63 years, Jane Ross Hammer
of Edgewater, Maryland, three sons, and four grandchildren.
        
      
    
  