
    
      
        
        Southern Changes.  Volume 22, Number 4,
	       2000
        
          Redistricting for Inclusive Democracy
          By Hair, PendaPenda Hair
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 pp. 4-6
          
          As a direct result of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, U.S. democracy is more inclusive now than at any time in its history. As our nation faces the next round of redistricting and celebrates the 35th anniversary of the Voting Rights Act, it is important to mark this progress. In 1965, no African American represented any Southern state in Congress. In Congress today, thirteen African Americans represent the states of Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee. The ability of Latinos, Asian Pacific Americans, Native Americans, and other minorites to elect representatives of their choice also has increased significantly. These improvements did not come about voluntarily, but derive largely from enforcement of the Voting Rights Act and particularly from the Act's pressure on jurisdictions to create single-member districts which provide minority constituencies an equal chance to elect their preferred candidates.
          Much of the progress in minority representation has occurred very recently and its hold is quite fragile. The Voting Rights Act remains a vital tool wherever racially polarized voting or other barriers prevent racial and ethnic minorities from exercising a full and equal political voice.
          The process of redistricting federal, state, and local voting districts usually is conducted in the year following the census, when new census data becomes available. The next round will commence in the spring of 2001.
          The creation of fair districting plans is essential to
democracy. Where these lines are drawn
determines which residents are grouped together for electing representatives. How these lines are drawn determines which voters are able to elect representatives of their choice. In addition to determining who is elected to office, the redistricting process fundamentally affects the basic civic act of self-governance. Citizens who lack even a chance to elect candidates of their choice may opt out not only from the individual act of voting, but also from the broader process of civic participation.
          The voting rights field and population figures have changed
dramatically in the past decade, necessitating shifts in strategies to
protect minority populations and redistribution of existing
populations among the states will create very challenging multi-ethnic
settings in many areas. While the Voting Rights Act still provides
legal protection from districting plans that unjustly split minority
communities, pack minority residents into super-majority districts, or
otherwise dilute minority voting strength, the legal protections have
been weakened by the Supreme Court's Shaw v. Reno line of cases. The upcoming round of redistricting and the events that will follow are going to take place in an environment created by a backlash against the political gains of minorities in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The Voting Rights Act is under attack in the courts  and in public opinion. The values underlying the passage of the Act--an equal opportunity to vote and elect representatives, true self-governance, and a participatory democracy--are at risk of being lost or forgotten.
          From the 2000 Census through the 2007 decision on renewing Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, there is an opportunity to address the contentiousness surrounding the Voting Rights Act and strengthen the values of an inclusive democracy. The new focus in the courts on drawing districts based on documented "communities of interest" offers an opportunity to build bridges across racial and ethnic lines.
          In a recently-released report based upon more than seventy interviews with voting rights activists, lawyers, scholars, and community leaders, the Advancement Project summarizes the following strategies  to help ensure that minorities have a fair chance to elect their representatives of choice.
          
            Organize
          
          Community involvement builds  local knowledge which will help construct fair districts for minority voters, that represent common interests, local geography, and other factors  not based on race. It will be necessary for communities of common interest to be informed, organized, and ready to effectively deal with situations where some redistricters will be openly hostile to the idea of protecting voting rights for everyone.
          Grassroots organizations should focus attention on those drawing
the district lines--in most circumstances the state legislature and
local governing bodies. It will be critical for residents to:
 Show up in large numbers at and participate in redistricting meetings, hearings, or events held by local districting officialsPresent alternative districting plans and be prepared to offer comments on those presented by othersNegotiate the drawing of district lines effectivelyUse the media and other forms of advocacy to make the case for plans that are fairWork with districting officials and their staff members to influence the process.
          
            Work Across Racial Lines
          
          Redistricting and the creation and preservation of minority opportunity districts has the potential to be a "wedge" issue, dividing members of different racial groups. The need for multiracial cooperation and coalition building is an important part of the fight for fair minority representation.
          The Latino population has grown in numbers and political maturity, and is poised to make greater claims for equal representation. On a smaller scale, growth is occurring among Asian Pacific American population. Balancing these different cultures and needs will intensify the complexity of redrawing district lines.
          Building a solid multiracial coalition requires acknowledging the difficult issues. Multiracial cooperation can occur if attention is paid to the real causes of unfairness and the need to develop joint strategies. Communities must recognize the issues they have in common, but common interests cannot simply be assumed and conflicting interests cannot be ignored. Real cross-racial communication must occur, bringing data and the lived experiences of each group's members to the table. Such dialogue takes time and should be started immediately, so that a level of trust can be developed before the tough issues can be resolved.
          Historically, redistricting has been framed as a winner- takes-all pursuit. However, the focus should remain on the critical issue: ensuring that all Americans, regardless of their race, have an equal opportunity to participate and elect candidates of their choice.
          
            Race and Districting
          
          Race can be considered in drawing district lines. Majority-minority districts are still allowed. In the aftermath of cases striking down majority-minority districts, communities need to be clear on the rules for drawing lines.
          When race is used without consideration of other common interests
of constituents, the districts are more likely to be challenged. The
safest way to use race in redrawing district lines is to use it as one
of many rather than as the most significant factor. Other factors can
include:
Compactness (districts should not be too stretched out or distorted in shape)Contiguity (no disconnected segments)Political subdivisions (for instance, county lines)Communities of interestsIncumbency protection (not drawing lines to make it harder for current office-holders to win re-election).
          Redistricters should take into account factors other than race to
avoid drawing districts that either will be easily challenged or easily overturned. Districts that represent community interest among residents are more easily defended, even if the district is predominantly made up of one racial group. A key question under the Supreme Court's Shaw doctrine is whether a genuine community of interests exists or whether race is being used to assume common interests.
          While "community of interests" has not been clearly defined in the case law or in social science literature, districts should strive to include residents with similar income and education levels, church memberships, civic-social organizations, common transportation issues, and common economic interests (e.g. agricultural versus industrial areas or rural versus metropolitan areas).
          The Supreme Court has overturned some minority opportunity districts, partially based on the statements of the individuals who redrew the district lines. For example, a plan for Georgia redistricting called "Max Black" was interpreted as a signal that race was predominant.
          The name of a proposed redistricting plan should represent goals of unity or democracy--giving minorities a fair chance to electing officials of their choice. Names like "Opportunity Plan" or "Unity Plan" tell the story better.
          
            Using the Media
          
          Strategic and coordinated campaigns to educate the public and the media about the foundations of the Voting Rights Act and the importance of a representative democracy are essential. These efforts help create broad public support for fair districting plans.
          During 2001, the Advancement Project plans a communications
initiative to reconnect the goal of minority representation to the
principles of democracy. To be successful, such a campaign to
recapture the moral high ground will require voting rights supporters
to join together on the messages and images that  communicate the
values of minority representation and "minority opportunity
districts." We must use these messages consistently in speeches,
interviews, and other outreach activities. The Advancement Project
will work jointly in this effort with the Communications Consortium, a
public interest media center with expertise in media and public
education campaigns. By improving public understanding of the history
of the Voting Rights Act, and the continuing need for its protection,
we have the opportunity to shape the electoral landscape in which
public policy decisions are made.	
          
            Penda Hair is co-director of the Advancement Project in Washington, D.C., a public policy advocacy organization and resource center devoted to finding, creating, and promoting innovative and effective strategies to advance racial and social justice.
          
        
        
          Minority Vote Dilution Is Still Illegal
          By Wright, BrendaBrenda Wright
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 pp. 7-10
          
          The 1990 round of redistricting brought a significant increase in
minority representation in Congress, state legislatures, and local offices. The key to this success was the creation of many new districts in which minority citizens comprised a majority of the population. The backlash that followed, culminating with the Supreme Court's creation of a new constitutional claim of reverse discrimination in Shaw v. Reno, is well-known.
          Seven years after Shaw, with numerous
Supreme Court and lower court decisions interpreting and applying that
decision, the message is clear: it is still legal to draw majority-minority districts. Opponents of majority-minority districts like to deny that fact. One of the most important obstacles that minority advocates face is overcoming such misinformation in the upcoming redistricting battles . What follows are some key principles that minority advocates need to promote as they gear up for redistricting 2000.
          
            Section 2 Requires
 Equal Opportunity for Minorities
          
          Districting plans that dilute minority voting strength are still
illegal under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. Even after Shaw v. Reno, courts have continued to strike down
redistricting plans under Section 2 when the plans fail to create
adequate majority-minority districts. For example, in Sanchez v. Colorado, Colorado's legislative
redistricting plan was struck down in 1996 because it did not include
a majorityHispanic district. Tennessee's legislative redistricting
plan was struck down in 1998 in Rural West Tennessee African-American Affairs Council v. Sundquist because it did not include sufficient majority-black districts.
          The federal courts have also continued to strike down local-level
plans for failing to create adequate majority-minority districts, even
after Shaw v. Reno,  including: Teague v. Attala County (Miss.); Clark v. Calhoun County (Miss.); Houston v. Lafayette County (Miss.); and Barnett v. City of Chicago (Ill.).
          These and other judicial decisions have rejected a variety of
arguments made by opponents of majority-minority districts, including
the argument that Shaw makes it unlawful
intentionally to draw a majority-minority district, and the argument
that a districting plan must achieve ideal compactness in order to
serve as a valid Section 2 remedial district. The lesson of these
post-Shaw cases is clear: Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act still makes it unlawful to adopt a redistricting plan that denies minority voters an equal opportunity to elect candidates of their choice.
          If a state (or other redistricting authority) has substantial evidence that voting is polarized along racial lines, that minority voters have had difficulty electing candidates of their choice to office in majority-white districts, and that the minority population is sufficiently large and geographically compact to form a majority in one or more districts, then the state (or other redistricting authority) has a compelling interest in creating majority-minority districts to avoid a violation of Section 2.
          The intentional creation of a majority-minority district is not
inherently suspect under the Fourteenth Amendment unless race
predominates over all other factors in drawing the district. One of
the biggest questions initially raised by the 1993 decision in Shaw v. Reno was whether redistricting plans would automatically be suspect under the Fourteenth Amendment if the plan intentionally created a majority-minority district. In decisions subsequent to Shaw, Justice O'Connor, whose vote was critical to the 5-4 Shaw majority, has made it clear that the intentional consideration of race in drawing a district is not, by itself, enough to make the plan suspect.
          One of Justice O'Connor's clearest statements along these lines
came in her concurring opinion in Miller
v. Johnson, in which she said, "To invoke strict scrutiny [of a
majority-minority district], a plaintiff must show that the State has
relied on race in substantial disregard of customary and traditional
districting practices."  Justice O'Connor also took pains in the Texas
redistricting case, Bush v. Vera, to make it
clear that Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act will often require states to draw majority-minority districts, and that states are entitled to assume that Section 2 is constitutional.  Justice O'Connor's views really establish the controlling guidelines for redistricting, because without her vote, there would have been no majority for striking down any of the districts that the Supreme Court has invalidated in the wake of Shaw.
          According to Miller v. Johnson, to create
majority-minority districts that will withstand a challenge under Shaw, plan drawers should avoid districts that "substantial[ly] disregard . . . customary and traditional redistricting principles." The Supreme Court and lower courts have identified a variety of factors such as compactness, contiguity, respect for political subdivisions, respect for communities of interest, and protection of incumbents (and other political factors), as traditional redistricting principles.
          That does not mean, however, that majority-minority districts must
necessarily achieve the maximum possible compactness, or maximum
possible respect for political subdivisions. The Supreme Court held in
Bush v. Vera that a majority-minority district
need not defeat other districts in a "beauty contest" in order to be
sustained.  Justice O'Connor also said, in Miller v. Johnson, that the Court's "basic objective" was "making extreme instances of gerrymandering subject to meaningful judicial review." 
          Obviously, the rules that have emerged out of the Supreme Court's
decisions are fairly subjective-it's permissible to have some
departure from ideal compactness, but a "bizarre" district will be suspect. What does that mean in practice? It means that the lower courts end up with a lot of discretion in deciding how much departure from traditional redistricting principles is too much. In Illinois, a three-judge district court upheld Illinois' 4th Congressional District-the famous "earmuff" district (see district top right above)-against a Shaw challenge, and the Supreme Court summarily affirmed that decision. The Supreme Court also upheld the constitutionality of Florida's Senate District  21, even though it split three counties and crossed Tampa Bay.  On the other hand, districts less bizarre than either of these have been struck down by other federal courts under Shaw.
          The best advice for redistricting, then, is to attempt to observe
traditional districting principles to the greatest extent possible while still creating districts that afford minority voters an equal opportunity to elect candidates of choice to office. Even though split counties or cities will not automatically invalidate a plan, minimizing the number of such splits will increase the chances of a district being upheld against a Shaw challenge. In particular, plan drafters need to be careful about using racial data at the census block level-below the precinct level-in creating a district, if your mapping software does not also permit you to examine other, nonracial characteristics at the block level. Splitting precincts along racial lines was a primary basis for the Supreme Court's conclusion that race unlawfully predominated over all other factors in drawing the Texas congressional districts that were challenged in Bush v. Vera.
          Similarly, even though "ideal" beauty is not a constitutional requirement for district shapes, minimizing the numbers of odd-looking "fingers," "appendages," and "tentacles,"  will help in sustaining the constitutionality of a district.
          It is also very important to understand that departures from traditional redistricting principles are permissible if they can be explained in terms of race-neutral factors. For example, if a majority-minority district is distorted in shape because of the need to meet one-person, one-vote requirements; to keep two incumbents separated; because the political jurisdiction itself has odd boundaries; or to link communities of interest that are not defined solely in racial terms, then the district's shape will not necessarily render it suspect. It is particularly important to make sure that the record of the redistricting process, including any public hearings or legislative testimony, documents the race-neutral factors that went into the redistricting plan.
          If a redistricting plan increases the percentage of minority
population in a particular district-for example, raising the minority percentage from 55 percent to 60 percent-special care must be taken to document why this increase was either  the result of race-neutral redistricting goals or was necessary to overcome a clear pattern of minority vote dilution. Some court decisions after Shaw have tended to assume that any district that far exceeds 50 percent in minority population is an example of "maximization" and therefore suspect.
          
            Section 5 and Retrogression
          
          In states covered by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, the requirement of nonretrogression is still a powerful tool to protect minority voting strength. States and localities covered by Section 5 must obtain preclearance from the United States Department of Justice or the United States District Court for the District of Columbia before implementing new redistricting plans. A redistricting plan is retrogressive, and therefore cannot receive preclearance under Section 5, if it would reduce the ability of minority voters to participate effectively in the electoral process.
          There are many ways in which a redistricting plan may be found to cause unlawful retrogression, the most common being reducing the total number of effective majority-minority districts in a plan, or reducing the percentage of minority population in a district where minority voters previously were able to elect a candidate of choice. When a covered jurisdiction reduces minority voting strength in this way, it is vulnerable to an objection under Section 5.
          States and localities covered by Section 5 are not free to adopt
retrogressive redistricting plans merely by pointing to Shaw v. Reno and arguing that a majority-minority district might be unconstitutional. A jurisdiction's existing plan should be regarded as the benchmark for determining retrogression unless a federal court has already struck down the plan as unconstitutional.
          Unfortunately, in Reno v. Bossier Parish School
Board the Supreme Court held in January 2000 that, in the absence
of retrogression, the Department of Justice cannot object to a voting
change under Section 5 on the ground that it was based on a racially
discriminatory purpose, or would result in a violation of Section 2 of
the Voting Rights Act. Nevertheless, given the tremendous increase in
the number of majority-minority districts created after the last
census, and given the large number of these districts that have
survived the decade without a successful challenge under Shaw, the
nonretrogression principle of Section 5 remains an important tool for
the 2000 round of redistricting.
          
            Brenda Wright is managing attorney for the National Voting Rights Institute in Boston, Massachusetts
          
        
        
          The Supreme Court's Recent Redistricting Decisions:
Change of Heart or Lack of Interest?
          By McDonald, LaughlinLaughlin McDonald
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 p. 9
          
          After a series of blockbuster decisions beginning with Shaw v. Reno in 1993, it looks as if the Supreme
Court has, at least for the moment, had its fill of the so-called
reverse discrimination gerrymandering cases. During the current term
it has thus far declined to review a lower court decision rejecting a
challenge by white voters to a majority black councilmanic district in
Jefferson Parish, Louisiana (Theriot v. Jefferson
Parish, Louisiana), as well as a similar challenge to two
congressional districts in Florida (Chandler v. Harris).
          In another case, without deciding the merits, the Court set aside a
successful challenge by white voters to two majority black state
legislative districts in Alabama on the ground that the plaintiffs,
who lived in adjacent majority white districts, lacked standing to
complain about the way the majority-minority districts had been drawn
(Sinkfield v. Kelley). The Court also refused
to review a case from Tennessee in which the state argued that a lower
court's decision ordering into effect an additional majority black
house district in the six county area of Rural West Tennessee was an
unlawful prescription for "black maximization" (Sundquist v. RWTAAAC).
          Do these recent decisions, all of which were resolved in favor of
minority voters, suggest that the Court is having second thoughts
about the Shaw line of cases and the fairness
of singling out majority-minority districts for strict, and generally
fatal, constitutional scrutiny? Probably not. There is no reason to
believe that the architects of the Shaw doctrine (Rehnquist, O'Connor, Kennedy, Scalia, and Thomas) have had a real change of heart. A more likely explanation is that as the decade draws to a close, and the constitutionality of existing plans is rapidly becoming moot in light of the new census, the Court is simply no longer interested in redistricting, at least for the time being.  
          A notable exception is congressional redistricting in North
Carolina, a matter the Court has taken up for the fourth time in seven years (Hunt v. Cromartie). It heard oral argument in the case on November 27 and will shortly decide if the state's plan, which no longer contains any majority black districts, violates the Fourteenth Amendment.  
          It would help if the Court were to use the North Carolina case as an occasion to clarify its conflicting redistricting standards, described charitably by the dissenting members of the Court (Stevens, Ginsburg, Souter, and Breyer) as "unmanageable." Under the Court's present rules, a legislature can only guess if it properly took race into account in drawing a plan, as it is required to do to comply with the Voting Rights Act, or if it placed too much emphasis on race.
          It would also help if the Court were to apply the same standards to
white voters that it applies to black voters who challenge
redistricting plans on constitutional grounds-that they show they have
suffered an actual injury or dilution of their voting strength and
that the state intended to discriminate against them. But whether the
Court will do that, or continue to write the rules to favor majority
white districts, remains to be seen.  
          
            Laughlin McDonald is director of the Voting Rights Project at the American Civil Liberties Union's Southern Regional Office.
          
        
        
          The Department of Justice: 
Enforcing the Voting Rights Act
          By Hodgkiss, AnitaAnita Hodgkiss
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 pp. 11-12
          
          The U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) has the authority to take steps to protect voting rights when election district lines are changed. The Department can file a lawsuit in court under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act to challenge racially discriminatory districts anywhere in the country. In certain states and local jurisdictions (see box on page 16), covered by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, all changes in laws affecting voting, including redistricting plans, must be submitted to DOJ or to the District Court for the D.C. Circuit, to be reviewed before they can be put into practice. DOJ has sixty days to review redistricting plans submitted under Section 5. The Department will then either grant "preclearance" giving the state or local jurisdiction the go ahead to implement the change, or the Department will object to a redistricting plan if it has the purpose or effect of making minority voters worse off. When DOJ objects to a plan, it does so by writing a letter to the jurisdiction, outlining the reasons why the new plan makes minority voters worse off. (Recent objection letters are available through the Department's website at: www.usdoj.gov/crt/voting/sec_5/obj_activ.htm.)
          The DOJ's role comes fairly late in the redistricting process, after a redistricting plan already has been adopted by a state legislature or local governing body. The Department does not introduce redistricting plans in the state legislatures. Similarly, DOJ does not take a position on what redistricting plan should be adopted by any jurisdiction, unless they are parties to a matter that is in litigation.
          In addition, it is not the role of the DOJ to object to new redistricting plans if the districts are oddly shaped. In reviewing redistricting plans under Section 5, the Attorney General may not deny preclearance on the grounds that the new plan violates the one-person, one-vote principle, that it violates Shaw v. Reno, or on the ground that it violates Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.
          
            When to Contact the Department of
Justice?
          
           • Contact DOJ if you believe that community groups or citizens are not being given an opportunity to participate appropriately in the redistricting process because of their race or color, anywhere in the country.
          For example, you should contact DOJ if your state is refusing to
allow representatives of a minority community group to speak at public
hearings on redistricting proposals or to have access to the state's
redistricting computers, when other civic groups are allowed to speak
or use the computers. The Department should examine, under Section 2
of the Voting Rights Act, whether purposeful racial discrimination is
occurring and, at a minimum, be aware of concerns about the fairness
of the redistricting process if the jurisdiction is one that must
obtain Section 5 preclearance.
           • Contact DOJ if the redistricting plan passed by your legislature or local jurisdiction is retrogressive and the jurisdiction is covered by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act.
          "Retrogression" is a term the Supreme Court first used in 1976 to define how discriminatory effect is evaluated under Section 5. With regard to redistricting plans, the Justice Department evaluates whether a new redistricting plan is retrogressive by comparing it to the benchmark plan. The Department calculates the population data for the benchmark plan using the new 2000 Census data. The racial composition of the benchmark plan is then compared to that of the new redistricting plan submitted by the jurisdiction. Retrogression occurs if the new plan, evaluated together with election history and voting patterns in the jurisdiction, voter registration, turnout, and other information, reduces minority voting strength.
          The Section 5 guidelines identify a number of factors that DOJ
considers in determining whether a new redistricting plan is
retrogressive when compared with the benchmark plan, including whether
the new plan:
Reduces minority voting strength in any district;Has fewer districts in which minority voters can elect candidates
of choice;Splits minority communities among several districts;Over-concentrates minority voters in one or more districts;Departs from or is inconsistent with objective redistricting criteria set by the jurisdiction;Ignores available natural or artificial boundaries without
explanation.
          If you believe that the new redistricting plan in your jurisdiction
is retrogressive, contact the Department of Justice to request that
the Attorney General object to the plan under Section 5 of the Voting
Rights Act.
           • Contact DOJ if the redistricting plan passed by your legislature or local jurisdiction is discriminatory, anywhere in the United States.
          A redistricting plan is discriminatory when it dilutes the voting strength of minority voters and can be challenged under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. In general, a redistricting plan violates Section 2 when minority voters have less opportunity than other members of the electorate to participate in the political process and to elect candidates of choice to office. 
          Unlike retrogression under Section 5, which requires comparison to
the jurisdiction's benchmark plan, discrimination under Section 2 does
not necessarily require showing that the new plan makes minority
voters worse off than they were under the old plan. 
           • Contact DOJ if the redistricting plan passed by your legislature or local jurisdiction is fair to minority voters and the jurisdiction is covered by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act.
          If you live in a Section 5 jurisdiction, and you believe that the new redistricting plan is fair to minority voters, you can contact the Department of Justice to explain why the Attorney General should preclear the new plan.
          
            How to Contact DOJ
          
          Call the Civil Rights Division, Voting Section, toll-free at 1-800-253-3931. Letters should be addressed to: Chief, Voting Section, Civil Rights Division, Department of Justice, P.O. Box 66128, Washington, D.C. 20035- 6128.
          The Section 5 guidelines provide that comments by individuals or groups concerning any change affecting voting may be sent at any time; however, individuals and groups are encouraged to comment as soon as they learn of the change. Even though DOJ has sixty days to review a redistricting plan, the earlier they have your information, the better. Occasionally, the Department will preclear submissions before the end of the sixty-day review period, where expedited consideration has been requested.
          Department of Justice officials and employees will comply with the request of any individual that his or her identity not be disclosed to any person outside the Department, to the extent permitted by the Freedom of Information Act. In addition, whenever it appears to the Attorney General that disclosure of the identity of an individual who provided information regarding a change affecting voting "would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy," the identity of the individual shall not be disclosed to any person outside the Department.
          For more information: The Voting Section of the Civil Rights Division maintains a Website with Section 5 guidelines, summaries of Supreme Court cases, descriptions of the Section's work and frequently asked questions. The Visit: www.usdoj.gov/crt/voting/index.htm.
          
            Anita Hodgkiss is co-director of  the Voting Rights Project at the Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights Under Law in Washington, D.C.
          
        
        
          Fighting the "New" Disfranchisement 
with a New Voting Rights Movement
          By Spears, EllenEllen Spears
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 p. 14
          
          The raft of disfranchising mechanisms, old and new, that served to delegitimize the 2000 presidential election place the need for electoral reform at the top of the national agenda. More than at any time since the passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act, the workings of the system are exposed, revealing undemocratic practices that affect many voters and pervasive disfranchisement of voters of color. Calls for national unity and healing will have no meaning unless these persistent wrongs-including the overwhelming influence of money in politics-are righted. 
          The experience of disfranchisement by voters unaccustomed to it in Palm Beach County bared the innards of an electoral system that does not fairly count the votes. But much more needs repair. Partisan-initiated voter purges conducted during spring and summer 2000 that removed 173,000 voters from the roles had a disproportionate impact on African-American, Haitian-American and Latino voters. The Florida felon disfranchisement law, like laws in twelve other states, permanently withholds the vote from persons who have paid their social debt. These policies affected an estimated 400,000 voters of all races in Florida; similar policies deny the vote to an estimated 1.4 million African American voters nationwide. Perhaps most troubling is the black vote suppression in Duval County, with an African America population of 26 percent, where an estimated 10.2 percent of the voters' ballots were invalidated.
          Three separate investigations into racial bias in the voting irregularities in Florida-by the U.S. Department of Justice, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, and Florida state government-need full public airing. But greater electoral democracy requires a range of reforms in every state. 
          Federally funded updating of election machinery in poor and urban areas to provide a full and fair count is only the beginning. Many elections are won or lost long before most voters are attuned or many candidates have paid their filing fee, during the decennial remap process.  Insuring that the lines are fairly drawn will be a particular challenge in what is likely to be an especially partisan and bitter redistricting cycle.  Full implementation of voter registration laws and an end to discriminatory purges are crucial. 
          A range of election day practices that work to disproportionately suppress the turnout of voters of color must be stopped. Voters turned away at the polls, polling places moved, intimidation, threats and harassment of African-American voters, failure to provide bilingual ballots, as required by law, or failure to provide language assistance with ballots-all these practices have no place in a genuine multiracial democracy.  Absentee ballot irregularities require particular attention. 
          Clear principles for judicial review of elections must be set. The Supreme Court majority that decided this election by the slimmest of margins has evidenced hostility toward the Voting Rights Act during the past decade. If legitimacy of elections and the Court are to be retained, uniform standards must be applied.
          Beyond each of these prescriptions lie even deeper structural or institutional reforms:  further consideration of proportional voting and Electoral College reform rank high among them. The South has, once again, wielded disproportionate power in the national election.  Though 53 percent of African-American voters (who vote 90 percent for Democrats) reside in the Southern states, the combined effect of winner-take-all elections and the Electoral College system acts to prevent those votes from counting.  Writes ColorLines magazine editor Bob Wing, "the result was the same as if blacks and other people of color in the region had not voted at all."
          The corrosive power of money in politics places the need for campaign finance reform at the top of this long list. We cannot decry low U.S. voter participation rates, yet fail to act to get money out of politics; we must press for structural reforms to policies that inhibit involvement or deny access. To do so, as Harvard law professor Lani Guinier points out, we need a new voting rights movement. If we hope for a genuine, multiracial democracy, we cannot make obsolete the solemn promise of the vote.
          
            Ellen Spears is associate director of the Southern Regional Council.  She can be reached by email at espears@southerncouncil.org.
          
        
        
          Racial Discrimination in Florida: Election 2000
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 pp. 15-16
          
          Testimony about racial discrimination in the Florida elections was received at a hearing sponsord by the NAACP on November 11. Following is one personal story  from the NAACP hearing and an excerpt of a report by the Lawyers Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, the Advancement Project, and The Leadership Conference on Civil Rights documenting charges of racial discrimination on November 7, 2000, as minority voters exercised their right to vote in Florida. For more information, visit www.lawyerscomm.org.
          Donisse DeSouza testified she has been registered to vote in Florida since 1982 and has voted in all major elections.  She has lived in the same majority-black precinct for the past six years.
          On Election Day, DeSouza, an African-American resident of Miami, went to the polling place listed on her new Voter ID Card. She had waited until late in the day so she could take her five-year old son to teach him the importance of voting. She arrived in the vicinity of the polls at 6:30 p.m., but a police officer was keeping voters' cars in a long line waiting for parking spaces. A small lot provided the only place to park. After waiting for twenty minutes, DeSouza entered the polling place and presented her driver's license and voter registration card to a white poll worker who explained that DeSouza was not listed on the registration rolls and instructed her to move to another line to address the issue. DeSouza stood in the other line with approximately fifteen others.  At 7 p.m. they were informed that the polls were closed. They were not offered an affidavit ballot or other assistance; they were told that nothing could be done if their names were not on the registration rolls.  These citizens were refused the right to vote.
          After the election, DeSouza went to the Board of Elections and
found that her name did appear on the voter register. She was also
told that all voters inside the polling place at 7 p.m. should have
been permitted to vote and that the Board of Elections continued to take calls and clear up irregularities after the polls closed.
          Since November 7, there have also been substantial,  credible allegations, like DeSouza's, of disfranchisement of minority voters in several Florida counties.
          There are compelling reasons to address these complaints of
disfranchisement immediately, and with the utmost gravity:
Florida has a long, well-documented history of
discrimination against African-American voters. Because of their
history of discrimination, five Florida counties are "covered"
jurisdictions under Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act. There have been reports of  hundreds of African Americans, Haitian Americans, and Puerto Ricans who may have been denied their constitutionally guaranteed right to vote in the November 7 election in Florida.
          Civil rights organizations associated with the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCR) received complaints of widespread denial of the right to vote, predominantly affecting minority voters and heavily-minority precincts.
          
            Alleged Abuses
          
          The information gathered by civil rights organizations, including the NAACP, details allegations of several forms of denial of the right to vote, intimidation, and barriers that prevented or discouraged voting. All of the following types of disfranchisement-alleging serious violations of the U.S. Constitution, the Federal Voting Rights Act and the National Voter Registration Act, as well as Florida Election Law and Florida Civil Rights Laws-have been described in complaints to LCCR organizations.
          Longstanding minority voters reportedly were told that they did not appear on the voting lists. Some said they were turned away because they did not have photo identification, even though Florida law provides that registered voters without photo IDs may cast "affidavit ballots." In some counties there were reports that minority voters were asked for a photo ID while white voters were not. Some minority voters were turned away even when they appeared at the polling place with both their voter card and a photo ID. 
          Voters who did not appear on the voting list or have a photo ID were shunted into a "problem" line, where they waited for long periods of time after being told that election officials were trying to telephone headquarters. Because phone lines were jammed and many of these calls never went through, many voters said they became discouraged and left without voting.
          Voters reported being sent from polling place to polling place, with no real effort to determine where they were supposed  to vote. Some claimed to have been turned away from not just one, but three or four polling places.
          Other voters reported being denied the right to vote because of minor, immaterial discrepancies in their names as they appeared on registration lists and in their proof of identification-such as their use of middle initials.
          Poll workers reportedly were instructed to be particularly "strict" in challenging voter qualifications because of aggressive voter registration and turnout efforts.
          Large numbers of minority voters who claimed they registered before the October 10 deadline, did not receive their voting cards before November 7. When they appeared at the polls, they were told they were not on the voting list and were not permitted to vote.  
          Witnesses also reported that one, and possibly more, polling places were moved without notice to the voters and without the placement of a sign at the site, as required by Florida law. Minority voters served by this polling place had to locate their new polling place on their own.
          
            Intimidation and Irregularities
          
          Witnesses reported police checkpoints or stops of voters  near several polling places in African-American neighborhoods.
          Some voters who requested absentee ballots alleged that they did not receive them and were not allowed to vote when they went to the precinct in person on election day.	In addition, a witness has reported that, in one county, hundreds of absentee ballots of registered voters were rejected by the Supervisor of Elections and not counted.
          Miami-Dade County passed an ordinance in 1998 requiring that ballots in Creole be provided at forty-seven majority-Haitian precincts in the county. Complaints allege that these ballots were not available at some of these precincts.
          Many Haitian-American voters also requested the assistance of a volunteer Creole/English speaker willing to translate the ballot for those with limited English proficiency, but were denied such assistance, despite provisions of Florida election-law.
          Voters also reported being denied a second ballot to correct an error in the first one.
          
            Democracy Denied
          
          The allegations of exclusion and intimidation that civil rights investigations have uncovered show a possible pattern of disfranchisement of large numbers of minority voters in several counties. African-American, Haitian-American, and Hispanic voters who tried to vote, and who made heroic efforts to overcome barriers and refusals, must not be left voiceless in our democracy.
        
        
          Voting Rights and the New Majorities
          By Ancheta, AngeloAngelo Ancheta
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 pp. 17-18
          
          The passage of the 1965 Voting Rights Act helped reshape the American electorate and led to dramatic increases in the number of elected officials of color, particularly in the South. The year 1965 also marked a major shift in American immigration policy: removing discriminatory national origin quotas from the law, and spurring significant growth in the number of immigrants from Asia and Latin America-a trend that continues today.
          Because of voting rights protections, legislatures are more integrated than they were thirty years ago, and they are a better representation of the populations they were elected to serve. But shifting demographics, fueled largely by immigration, reveal that constituencies are changing as well. Los Angeles, for example, now has a population in which no single racial or ethnic group, including whites, commands a numerical majority. 
          The trends that are most prominent in California are occurring in areas throughout the country, and they raise challenging questions: How should political representation reflect the changing demographics? How should immigrant groups be incorporated into the political process? What will be the impact of population shifts on the next round of reapportionment and redistricting? Are there risks to minority incumbents? What are the possibilities for coalition building among minority groups? What are the dangers of intergroup competition? And how does the law, including the Voting Rights Act, deal with all of these changes?
          Cities and counties all over the U.S. are seeing the growth of immigrant populations which are developing into significant voting blocs. For example, according to U.S. Census Bureau estimates for the year 1999, less than one quarter of Florida's Miami-Dade County is non-Hispanic white, while blacks are 20 percent of the population, Asians and Pacific Islanders are 2 percent, and Latinos are 57 percent. Similarly, only 33 percent of Los Angeles County is non-Hispanic White, while African Americans are 11 percent of the population, Asian and Pacific Islanders are 13 percent, and Latinos are 44 percent. Cook County in Illinois is 50 percent non-white; Harris County in Texas is 52 percent non-white; and Georgia's DeKalb County is 56 percent non-white. 
          At the same time, we are seeing decreases in the relative sizes of many African-American populations. In California, for example, the African-American population is now smaller than either the state's Asian American or Latino population. The number of black elected officials has grown since the 1960s, but populations within many of the districts that were once predominantly black are now increasingly Latino and Asian. Elected officials are much more likely to be representing a broad array of constituents, composed of several racial and ethnic groups. 
          It is difficult to generalize about when and how minority groups vote together-or separately. Polls of racially-charged ballot initiatives such as California's Proposition 209 have shown solid opposition from minority groups, and registration and voting patterns show very high levels of support for Democratic candidates among black voters, with strong majorities among many Latino and Asian American populations. But there can be conflicts as well. In Miami, for example, tensions between blacks and Latinos often lead to polarized voting.
          Although it does not deal directly with issues such as minority coalitions and potential competition among groups, the Voting Rights Act does provide a basic set of protections to minority voters. The Act has always prohibited discrimination based on race, and since 1975 it has offered protection to language minority groups, including Latinos, Asian Americans, and Native Americans. Section 203 of the Act specifically requires language assistance, such as bilingual ballots, in areas with significant immigrant populations.
          But there is also uncertainty in the law. Under the guidelines set
out in the leading case of Thornburg v. Gingles, plaintiffs can challenge discriminatory electoral systems such as at-large elections because they dilute minority voting strength. Among the requirements are evidence of racially polarized voting and the existence of a large and compact racial minority population that could form a majority within an electoral district. 
          One issue raised in a multiple minority setting is whether minority groups can be combined as a coalition to form a majority within a district. The courts have divided on this issue, and the U.S. Supreme Court has yet to address it directly.
          The limitations imposed on race-conscious redistricting by the
U.S. Supreme Court's Shaw v. Reno and Miller v. Johnson line of cases also complicate the
picture. Still, race-neutral criteria that have been endorsed by the
Court, such as "maintaining communities of interest," are part of the
law in many states, and can provide an avenue for protecting multiple
minority interests. Minority populations that share common characteristics such as socioeconomic status or local business and transportation interests could be combined as a community of interest within a district's lines.
          There are no easy solutions to the problems of potential competition between minority groups or to the challenges that minority incumbents may face through the changing demographics and politics of their constituencies. The advancement of common interests may offer the best hope for minority communities and the development of positive race relations. Simple line drawing along ethnic lines may result in short term gains for minority communities who have lacked representation in the past, but it may also lead to long term divisions between groups.
          Coalition building is never easy, but it may provide the best hope for minority empowerment in an increasingly multi-ethnic America.	
          
            Angelo Ancheta is the Director of Legal and Advocacy Programs for  the Civil Rights Project at Harvard University. From 1994 to 1998, he was the executive director of the San Francisco-based Asian Law Caucus, which is the nation's oldest civil rights legal organization focusing on the Asian-American population.
          
        
        
          Why Don't Youth Vote? Young People Respond
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 pp. 18-19
          
          The following comments were excerpted from the Center for Voting and Democracy's Spring 2000 youth essay contest which asked college and high school students to respond to the question, Why Don't Youth Vote? The writers quoted, mostly college students, suggested changes to the electoral system that might increase political participation among young people and explained their reasons for participating in or abstaining from our political and electoral systems.
          "Jim C. Fung, born 1979, college student, Berkeley, California
          Youth are disillusioned with politics for many of the same reasons that our parents are. If lobbyists and campaign contributors did not have more access to public officials than do regular citizens, if economic democracy in the workplace existed alongside what some would call the "illusion" of political democracy, if elected officials acted more on "bread and butter" economic issues, such as the increasing concentration of wealth and the lack of health insurance for many Americans, than on expanding the prison population and on the military-then most people of all ages would consider their votes much more meaningful.
          Given the reality that youth tend to get most excited about issues rather than politicians, alternative electoral systems such as proportional representation, IRV, cumulative voting, and easier third-party ballot access, would only succeed in stimulating us if the third parties involved were ideologically oriented or issues-based parties rather than crass vote-maximizers. The issues of these parties would also need to be relevant to daily life-rather than visions of pie-in-the-sky utopianism. Many of the third parties in America today already fit this bill, addressing issues like the environment, workers' rights, and healthcare. In addition, judging from the example of European democracies using PR, the presence of such a system tends to encourage ideological or issues-based parties. Thus, an alternative electoral system should be seriously considered.
          Amanda Ponzar, born 1978, college student, Lansdowne, Pennsylvania
          When it comes down to it, I care. I watch all the presidential and vice-presidential debates, listen to the State of the Union, read the paper, and frequently publish letters to the editor about my concerns. Just like me, many young people around this country care desperately about their lives, goals, and future. We need someone to listen, support our issues, and prove to us that America wants to hear from young people.
          Stephanie Simmons, born 1980, college student, Wellesley, Massachusetts
          I'm a politically active twenty-year-old college student, and I've
never voted in an election--state, local, or national. It seems
strange now that I think about it. I've been interested in politics
for as long as I can remember, trying to talk my parents into voting
for Dukakis in 1988 and holding a sign for Bill Clinton in 1992 and
1996. I eagerly looked forward to the time when I would be able to
participate in the selection of my representatives in the government. Why have I never voted in an election? Because the voting system is so antiquated and inefficient. Voting is for me, as it is for most young people, something between a hassle and an impossibility. If you clear the barriers, more people, and especially young people, will vote.
          Jennifer Lang, born 1981, college student, The 
Colony, Texas
          You challenge us to become more politically involved, to propose changes in the electoral process that will persuade us to flex our political clout. I challenge you to give us intelligent reasons why we would want to. Why would anyone, young or old, want to become more politically involved? Government by and for the people depends on the size of the people's bank accounts. Issues are skipped like rocks across a pond. How many more Columbine High School tragedies have to happen before stricter gun laws are enforced on the streets, not in the local sports stores? How many more teenage pregnancies and abortions have to occur before sexual education becomes more than a few chapters in a ninth-grade health book?
          Melissa M. Flicek, born 1979, college student, St. Paul, Minnesota
          Generally, young people do not participate in the electoral process. Being a young person myself, I understand both the importance of being an active citizen of the United States, and the overwhelming, "it doesn't affect me" syndrome. Many young people don't make it a point to vote because political issues usually involve taxes, social security, and welfare reform. These issues, however important, do not relate directly to young people today. It is true these issues will have an effect on us in the future, but right now that seems very far away. Candidates for political office also seem to be rich, smooth-talkers whose loyalties lie more with their political parties than the people whom they represent. It would be nice if everyday citizens had a better chance to run for office, not just the extremely wealthy businessmen, lawyers, and military leaders.
          Rozalina Grubina, born 1982, high school student, Brooklyn, New York
          My grandparents lived in Latvia most of their lives, and so did my parents. Here, I can become a citizen, despite my nationality and religion. I can vote and be a respected member of society. I consider political involvement not only a privilege of all those fortunate enough to take part in it, but also the duty of my generation. It is only through voting and caring about who our leaders are that we can prevent another holocaust or race riot. Only through voting can we preclude what is now happening in Latvia and Austria from taking place in my new homeland. It is our obligation to build a country of tolerance, not hate, and of peace, not violence.
          I believe that my generation must be educated on the importance of politics and the changes that they, themselves, can induce simply by participation. It is not up to the select few to run our country; it is up to us. We can make our voices heard, and we can make a difference. Thus, if young adults realize that they could influence the course of history, voting participation would skyrocket.
          Getting Youth Back to the Polls
          According to the National Association of Secretaries of State
(NASS) survey, fewer than 20 percent of young people, ages eighteen to
twenty-five, participating in the 1998 midterm election. Youth are far
and away leading the national trend towards non-voting-and the South
is leading the country in numbers of youth who do not vote. In
response to that trend, the Fair Representation Program at the
Southern Regional Council with Clark Atlanta University's Southern
Center for Studies in Public Policy is currently engaged in a
comprehensive evaluation of youth political participation and
nonparticipation in the South. Called the Youth Empowerment Project
(YEP), the study will first document the non-voting trend among youth
in the South and then develop pilot youth leadership development
programs to nurture and grow youth political engagement. For more
information about YEP, email the Fair Representation Program at:
fairrep@southerncouncil.org. Call 404-522-8764, or visit
www.southerncouncil.org.
        
        
          Fair Policies through Effective Redistricting
          By Sayer, MikeMike Sayer
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 p. 20
          
          In 1992, a three-judge federal court in Mississippi approved a
legislative redistricting plan that, in the court's words, created the
"maximum number of electable black districts." As it approved the
plan, the court denounced its creation in response to the demands of
an organized black effort. The black population (37 percent of the
state's total) was represented by the Mississippi Redistricting
Coalition.  The court made it clear that it accepted the plan only because the Coalition, comprised of statewide
and local redistricting organizing groups and members of the
Legislative Black Caucus, had convinced the legislature and both
political parties that this was the only way to settle the case.
          ter the plan was approved, Mississippi black voters turned out in record numbers in 1992 and doubled the number of black legislators from twenty-one to forty-two, a total of 24 percent of the state's 174 legislators.
          Black voters also elected 30 percent of the state's county supervisors. The control of public policy and the expenditure of public funds by county supervisors is considered second only to that of the state legislature. The record black voter turnout was the result of the involvement of the black population in workshops and meetings to learn how redistricting works, in the work to draw the redistricting plans, in the efforts to push for the adoption of fair plans at public hearings and in legislative committee meetings, in the education of the public, the news media, and individual legislators as to what constitutes a fair redistricting plan, and in pushing for fair plans at the county and municipal levels.
          In the 1995 regular legislative election, African Americans retained all of the forty-two seats they won in 1992 and added three more, to increase the size of the black caucus to forty-five, 26 percent of the legislative body. The black caucus held the balance of power on appropriations bills and other legislation, whenever it was unified.
          Prior to the 1992 special election, the only success the Legislative Black Caucus achieved through unity around a public policy issue was a holiday honoring Martin Luther King, Jr. But in 1995 the caucus led the state to ratify the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution to abolish slavery. Although seemingly a symbolic victory, in Mississippi symbolism is also substance.
          Beginning in 1995, the Caucus, pushed and supported by grassroots
community organizations, consistently defeated efforts by a coalition of Republicans and conservative Democrats to reverse the increase in black representation. It blocked moves to eliminate partisan political primaries, to create non-partisan primaries for all political offices, and to permit voters to vote in partisan political primaries regardless of  party affliation. It also stopped efforts to reduce the size of the state legislature and the county boards of supervisors, a move that would have forced new redistricting and possibly undone the success in the 1991-1992 process.
          The presence of this strong minority representation has had a great impact on public policy. In 1997, the state legislature, for the first time, injected $650 million over five years into public education. In 2000, the state legislature, under pressure from the grassroots Mississippi Education Working Group  adopted provisions in the education accountability plan that requires parents and students to be actively involved in the formation, adoption, and implementation.
          The involvement of  grassroots black activists and groups in redistricting was the key to enabling the black population to elect accountable representatives in sufficient numbers to have an effect upon the formation of public policy at the state, county, and local levels. 
        
        
          The Power of Grassroots Organizing
          By Sayer, MikeMike Sayer
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 p. 21
          
          When people work together, they build their capacity to make things happen or not happen. They build power. The capacity to impact public policy is increased when people and grassroots organizations work to establish redistricting policies and plans that are responsive to their needs and interests.
          Effective grassroots organizations utilize four elements of community organizing:
          Investigation: Get the information needed to develop good redistricting plans and to understand the goals of the public officials who are also drawing plans.
          Education: Share information with a cross-section of stakeholders within the designated community to develop an understanding of the importance of redistricting and how best to participate in the redistricting work.
          Negotiation: Build a broad base of support within the community in order to negotiate from strength with public officials on how the redistricting plans ought to be drawn.
          Demonstration: Bring large numbers of people to public meetings, hearings, and negotiations to demonstrate unity.
          In the past, for the most part, small groups of public officials,
attorneys, and demographers have met by themselves to draw the plans
at the state, county, and local levels. However, communities have the
right to participate in several major ways during the process of
drawing plans:
See, get copies of, and make an independent evaluation of the merits of plans drawn by public officials.Attend all public meetings at which redistricting plans are being discussed, deliberated, or voted upon.Submit plans to the appropriate public bodies (such as the state legislature, county supervisors or commissioners, or city councilors), which have a duty to give full consideration on the same basis as plans drawn by representatives of the public body.Bring complaints to the attention of the Voting Section of the U.S. Department of Justice concerning any wrongdoing or unfairness in the procedures used by public bodies to draw plans.Make comments (evaluations as to the fairness of the
plans) to the Voting Section and negotiate with the Voting Section,
and the public bodies, concerning the merits of all the plans
submitted.Bring suit in federal or state court to prevent the adoption of
the plans on the grounds that they violate the 1965 Voting Rights Act
or the Constitution of the United States.
          Drawing redistricting plans does not require being an attorney,
demographer, or engineer.  Anyone can draw plans, with some training,
technical assistance, and experience.
          Redistricting plans are not primarily math and geometry
exercises. Rather, redistricting is usually result or outcome driven. That is, people who draw plans start out with the goal that the district lines should, to the extent possible, ensure that voters have a reasonable opportunity to elect representatives who will be accountable and responsive to their needs and interests.
          Other values or goals must be taken into account in drawing the plans. But, the redistricting process is sufficiently flexible to permit plans to serve several goals. It is extremely important for grassroots groups to participate effectively to protect and ensure that their interests are reflected in the plans adopted.
          Grassroots communities need to build strength through unity and unity through organization in order to make their collective voice heard. They should insist on the right to provide input and feedback to those who are drawing the plans, whether they are working for the public officials or are engaged in drawing alternative plans. 
          Grassroots and community groups need to identify people who can develop the tools and skills of redistricting. Community people bring local expertise to the table. They know where people actually live; what the issues are that bring people together or divide them in terms of race, class, education, and other considerations; where common interests lie; which groups will be willing to work together to support candidates on particular issues and which will not; which groups of people actually vote and which do not; at which locations people are willing to go to vote and which locations are intimidating to people and will discourage voting; and which political parties people support and where they live.
          
            Mike Sayer is program director of Southern Echo, a grassroots organization in Jackson, Mississippi.
          
        
        
          Winning Fair Representation with 
Alternative Voting Systems
          By Richie, RobRob Richie
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 pp. 22-24
          
          Experts suggest that some 95 percent of black representation in the next decade will be won or lost in the upcoming redistricting. Without substantial numbers of black voters in districts, very few black candidates will win; the U.S. Senate is the most notorious example of the negative impact of racial block voting-with its lack of black or Latino members a direct consequence of no state having a black or Latino majority.
          Dependence on redistricting to provide representation to black people and other communities of color is based on three factors: white voters' general preference for white candidates; the fact that people of color are in the minority in most areas; and the general use in the United States of "winner-take-all" methods of voting in which a 50.1 percent majority in a given constituency wins all representation in its area.
          Policy makers have few short-term means to end racism, but through redistricting they have the power to turn blacks into majorities in certain electoral districts. They also have the power to address the third barrier to fair representation: winner-take-all elections. Systems that provide more complete representation of the electorate can allow more racial minorities to elect candidates. In such "proportional" systems, like-minded groupings of voters can pool their votes from across a constituency to elect candidates in accordance with their voting strength. A 50.1 percent electoral majority remains well-positioned to win the majority of seats, but it cannot shut out a substantial political minority. With proportional systems, many voters gain new power to elect the representation for which they currently are deprived due to their minority status in their area. As American society grows increasingly diverse and communities of interest increasingly develop along non-geographic lines, proportional voting systems are drawing even more attention. Freeing more voters to define their representation with their votes has fundamental appeal.
          It also works. When Cincinnati used a proportional system to elect its nine-member city council from 1925 to 1955, a cohesive grouping of voters comprising 10 percent of the electorate could elect a seat. At least one black candidate consistently was elected despite blacks making up well under 20 percent of the population, and both major parties pursued the black vote in efforts to control the council. Today in Peoria, Illinois, where blacks are a fifth of the population, black candidates have won one of five citywide seats since a proportional plan was adopted before the 1991 elections.
          The most dramatic recent example of the impact of proportional
voting comes from Texas. In May 2000, the Amarillo Independent School
District for the first time used a proportional system called
cumulative voting to elect seats to its school board. Blacks and
Latinos in Amarillo together comprise nearly a quarter of the city's
population, but no black or Latino candidate had won a seat on the
school board in decades. Instituted to settle a voting rights lawsuit
involving  the Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund
(MALDEF), the League of United Latin American Citizens (LULAC),  and
the NAACP, cumulative voting had an immediate impact. Both a black
candidate and a Latino candidate won seats with strong support in
their respective communities, voter turnout increased four times over
the most recent school board election, and all parties in the voting rights settlement expressed satisfaction with the new system.
          Cumulative voting and limited voting also have been used in nearly two dozen Alabama localities for a decade in the wake of a sweeping decision in a voting rights case. Analyses of these Alabama elections demonstrate that they have boosted turnout and increased black representation as much as likely would have occurred with single-member districts.
          Cumulative voting was first introduced to many Americans in 1993 during the controversy over cumulative voting advocate Lani Guinier's nomination to head the civil rights division of the Department of Justice. That a generally conservative city like Amarillo would settle a voting rights case with cumulative voting is only one example of how proportional systems-specifically, cumulative voting, choice voting, and limited voting, which are based on voting for candidates rather than party-based systems as used in South Africa and most European nations-have evolved to be credible alternatives for empowerment.
          In 1995, Texas Governor George W. Bush signed legislation to allow school districts to adopt cumulative voting and limited voting, and more than fifty Texas jurisdictions have settled voting rights cases with cumulative voting.
          Other recent examples of how proportional systems are gaining
attention include:
In 1999 North Carolina Congressman Melvin Watt introduced the States' Choice of Voting Systems Act (HR 1173) to remove a 1967 requirement that states use single-member districts for U.S. House elections. Those testifying in favor of the bill at a hearing included the Department of Justice and Republican Congressman Tom Campbell.In 1998, Judge David Coar ordered Chicago Heights, Illinois, to adopt cumulative voting to assist black and Latino voters in elections to the city council and park board. Cumulative voting was used for more than a century to elect the state's House of Representatives, where black legislators had early and significant electoral successes; among those backing its return include Senate minority leader Emil Jones,  former governor Jim Edgar,  and U.S. Representative Jesse Jackson, Jr. As of 2000, the Department of Justice (DOJ) has ultimately
pre-cleared proportional plans in states covered by Section 5 of the
Voting Rights Act in every jurisdiction seeking to institute one. In
1999, the DOJ backed Judge Coar's order of cumulative voting in
Chicago Heights and denied pre-clearance to New York City's plan to
replace choice voting for local school board elections; choice voting
had elected a significantly higher percentage of racial minorities to
school boards than have been elected in the city's other legislative
bodies.A National Black Caucus of State Legislators task force in 1998
found strong interest among black legislators in seeing how
proportional systems might assist negotiations in redistricting. The
National Conference of Black Political Scientists endorsed
proportional systems in 1999, while the Southern Center for Studies in
Public Policy at Clark-Atlanta University is pursuing ambitious
educational outreach about proportional systems to black elected
officials and historically black colleges and universities. National
and state affiliates of US Public Interest Research Group (PIRG),
Common Cause,  National Organization for Women (NOW), and the League
of Women Voters have adopted positions in favor of proportional
representation. In 2000 the League voted to pursue a national study of
voting systems-its first national study in a decade.
          The goal of proportional systems is simple: providing means to allow fair and realistic opportunities for citizens to elect individuals of their own choosing. While no cure-all, they are a practical, tested approach to winning fair representation.
          
            Rob Richie is executive director of the Center for Voting and Democracy. For more information about the Center and proportional voting systems, visit www.fairvote.org.
          
        
        
          Changing Census, Changing America
          By Still, EdwardEdward Still
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 pp. 24-26
          
          Every census is different from the last, but there are some big changes in store with Census 2000. Beginning in early March 2001, the Bureau will publish census data for each state to use in redistricting. What new things can we expect from this census?  To begin with, we will have access to census data more easily via computer. The Census Bureau will be posting census data on its website, www.census.gov and a separate site for the American Factfinder, www.factfinder.census.gov. More importantly, the data will be different from past censuses. I want to discuss two changes: the racial data and the sampling controversy.
          
            Reporting One or More Races
          
          For the first time, Census 2000 allowed respondents to identify themselves as a member of more than one race. The census asked, "What is this person's race? Mark one or more races to indicate what this person considers himself/herself to be." The races which the Census Bureau will report are: white; black, African American, or Negro; American Indian or Alaska Native; Asian; Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander; and, "Some other race." (In the 1990 Census, the Asian and Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander groups were combined.)
          Because the respondents were allowed to choose more than one race, there  are fifty-seven possible combinations of racial groupings-ranging from people who mark two races (ten possible combinations) to people who claim all six  racial categories.
          All of this stems from a 1997 decision of the Office of Management
and Budget to amend Directive 15 which tells all federal statistical
agencies--not just the Census Bureau--how to gather information on the
race of Americans. Unfortunately, the OMB made the decision to allow
multiple checkoffs to the racial question without figuring out how any
agency would use or report the data on the small number of people who will actually mark two or more races.  (In both a federal health survey in the mid-1990s and the 1998 Census Dress Rehearsal in 3 areas, participants were given the chance to mark multiple races; less than 2 percent marked more than one.)
          Since the adoption of Directive 15, the Census Bureau, OMB, and other federal agencies which gather or use racial population statistics have struggled with how to report the racial statistics and how the agencies enforcing civil rights laws would ask employers, schools, etc. to gather and report race statistics on their employees, students, voters, etc. to the federal government.
          The idea of sixty-three racial categories instead of five worried many.  For instance, at meetings of the Redistricting Task Force of the National Conference of State Legislators, the staff from various states complained that they would have to reprogram their computers to accommodate the larger number of categories, and worried that the data would become meaningless if there were many "cells" (racial combinations) with zero.
          In 1998 the Census Bureau proposed to report racial groups as a range of populations-the so-called "broadband method." For instance, consider a population in which 65 percent reported themselves as white, 33 percent as black, and 2 percent as black and white. The broadband method would have reported that the white population was 65 to 67 percent and the black population was 33 to 35 percent. The Voting Rights Project of the Lawyers' Committee was concerned that this level of imprecision would play havoc with its efforts to draw redistricting plans. An ad hoc group within the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights expressed its concern to the U.S. Justice Department's Voting Section, which was then supporting the broadband method. The Census Bureau relented and announced that it would report all sixty-three categories in the redistricting data it will send to the states in March of 2001.
          In December 1999, we learned that various agencies were coming to a consensus around an "aggregation" method. Aggregation would combine the sixty-three categories into a smaller number, but no one would be moved from a single-race or multi-race category he or she had chosen. Allocation, on the other hand, would result in people in multi-racial categories being reassigned to single-race groups on the basis of a rule-not necessarily what the person would have chosen if told to of choose only one race. In effect, the census would have asked one question, but modified the answers to fit another (unasked) question.
          After more comments by the Leadership Conference, the Administration announced the decision to go with both allocation and aggregation. (For a copy of OMB Bulletin 
00-02, go to the OMB website at this address: www.whitehouse.gov/omb/bulletins/b00-01.html.) While the Census Bureau will publish data for all sixty-three categories, states, localities, school boards, and employers will be required to recombine the data into ten or more groups whenever they have to report any racial data about their particular populations. For instance, a school board reporting on the racial breakdown of its school population and teaching staff will aggregate the racial data into the smaller number of categories. The school board would report on the following racial groups:
Five single race groups;Four most common bi-racial groups: American Indian-White, Asian-White, Black-White, American Indian-Black;Any other group larger than 1 percent in the particular area;Balance of all other multi-racial groups.
          The minimum number of categories would be ten, but could be more if there are one or more multi-racial groups with 1 percent or more in the area for which the report is prepared.
          However, the U.S. government would analyze data for civil rights monitoring and enforcement using an allocation method in which the five single-race categories would be left as they are; multi-racial groups which have some white ancestry (e.g., white-Asian) would be allocated to the minority race and multi-racial groups who are minority-minority would be treated in several ways depending on the context and enforcement need. If the question is how all minority groups are being treated, the analyst will probably run multiple analyses with successive allocations of multi-racial groups to their respective single-race groups. For instance, an analysis of educational opportunities will necessarily have to look at the treatment of a variety of racial groups. If the federal government is responding to a discrimination complaint from, say, an Asian, it would probably reallocate all Asian multi-racial groups as Asian for purposes of its analysis. In this way, the analyst could determine whether there is a bias against "pure" Asians as well as "mixed-race" Asians.
          How much impact will all of this have? Nationally, probably not much. Fewer than 2 percent of all Americans have marked multiple racial boxes in past surveys that allowed such responses.  And, of course, the numbers will vary from place to place. In the 1998 Dress Rehearsal of Census 2000, Sacramento County, California, had 5.4 percent multi-racial respondents while the eleven counties around Columbia, South Carolina, had 0.8 percent.
          For several reasons, we can expect the numbers of persons checking
multiple racial boxes to increase in the future. First, with increased
social acceptance of interra-cial marriages, there will be more children with parents of different races. I expect that these children will be the most likely group to define themselves as bi-racial. The number of mixed race marriages has been growing, but the overwhelming number of marriages are still same-race.
          Second, there could be a trend of blacks to claim multiple racial heritages although there is a strong countervailing argument in the African-American community against this. Some African-American leaders have argued in private meetings that African Americans should claim only one racial group. Their argument is that nearly all African Americans have some mixed racial heritage, and yet discrimination occurs against them because of their African ancestry without any benefit being accrued from their European or American Indian ancestry.
          
            Census Sampling Controversy
          
          In January 1999, the Supreme Court decided appeals in two suits which had been filed by the U.S. House of Representatives and by a group of private plaintiffs. These suits had been filed to prevent the Census Bureau from using statistical sampling as part of Census 2000.
          The Supreme Court decision only blocked sampling for the count to be used for the determination of the number of House members to be selected from each state. In the far more important area of redistricting congressional and legislative districts within each state--that is actually drawing the lines for the districts--the Supreme Court has held that the law requires the Census Bureau to use sampling and make that corrected data available to the states and localities for use in drawing their own redistricting plans.
          Everyone in the United States has an interest in being equally represented in Congress, in their state legislatures, and in their local governments. Those districts can only be drawn equally and accurately if the census data is accurate.
          In a 1998 report to Congress, the Bureau of the Census explained its reasons for using sampling. Among the lessons it had learned from the 1990 Census was that some groups were counted less effectively  than others ("undercounted"), including children, renters (particularly in rural areas), and racial and ethnic minorities. The undercount rate for African Americans was six times greater than that for non-Hispanic whites.  The undercount rate for Hispanics was seven times greater, and the rate for American Indians more than seventeen times greater than that for non-Hispanic whites.  This greater undercount rate is called "the differential undercount."
          The Bureau reported that the methods it had employed in previous censuses could not sufficiently remedy the undercount, and especially the differential undercount of minorities, that had led to a decrease in accuracy between the 1980 and 1990 censuses.  To correct this differential undercount and achieve an overall more accurate count, the Bureau adopted statistical sampling.
          A differential undercount adversely affects the voting rights of minorities in specific ways at the district level.   If there is a differential undercount of minorities relative to whites, then blacks, Latinos, and other minorities are in more danger than whites of being placed in districts that are unconstitutionally malapportioned.
          Also, if there is a differential undercount of blacks or Hispanics relative to whites, creation of majority-minority districts where necessary to comply with Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act will become more difficult.
          For these reasons, the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under the Law and other civil rights organizations are working to insure that accurate census numbers are used in each state's redistricting.
          Several states (Colorado, Kansas, Arizona, Alaska, and Virginia) have passed legislation forbidding the use of sampled census data in 2001 redistricting. Since Arizona, Alaska, and Virginia are covered by Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, they must obtain preclearance from either the Justice Department or the U.S. District Court in Washington D.C. before they utilize any new election standard, practice, or procedure. 
          Virginia filed suit in the District Court for the District of Columbia in April for preclearance of its anti-sampling law. The Lawyers' Committee, representing the Virginia State Conference of the NAACP and other voters, moved to intervene in the suit. Virginia quickly moved for a summary judgment (a finding that there are no material facts in dispute and the law supports its position). At this writing, we are awaiting a decision by the three-judge panel on the motion.
          While Census 2000 will probably be more accurate than the 1990
Census, it will also be marked by more controversy. There will be
fights over whether to use adjusted figures for redistricting. There
will be fights over the proper interpretation of the racial
statistics. As usual, more data means more interpretations-with
everyone wanting to interpret the data for their own purposes.
          
            Edward Still is co-director of  Voting Rights Project at the Lawyer's Committee for Civil Rights Under  Law in Washington, D.C.
          
        
        
          SRC Launches Nation's First Online Redistricting Service
          By Lee, AngelaAngela Lee
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 pp. 27-28
          
          In the past, one of the chief obstacles used to exclude minorities from participation in the redistricting process has been the obstruction from easy access to technical redistricting tools and skills. Without an independent capacity to determine how majority-minority districts can be built, minority populations cannot confidentially know how many seats they have been denied, how many seats they might seek, and where those seats can be created. Members of minorities simply cannot achieve fair representation through full enforcement of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 without unobstructed access to redistricting technology and the skill to use it. Online redistricting, a groundbreaking new  service by the Southern Regional Council (SRC), makes the biggest strides towards bridging the gap created to disfranchise minority voters. 
          The new technology, which seeks to help people become more involved in the drawing of their districts, virtually eliminates the technical gap that has kept many community groups and individuals from participating. The SRC has simplified the redistricting process so that groups with novice computer skills and a relatively modern Internet-capable computer can build their own plans easily and professionally. Functioning as an Internet-based service, the SRC's online redistricting utilizes user-friendly net-conferencing software and clear steps to walk clients through the process of creating and revising redistricting plans from inception to final printing and presentation. 
          One of the first localities to use the service was the Dublin-Laurens County Concerned Citizens Group in Dublin, Georgia. The city council and city board of education for Dublin received an ultimatum from a local citizens group in March 2000--redraw electoral districts for the city based on recent census figures.
          The city's population is 46 percent black. The new districts proposed by the city council not only diluted minority voting strength of both district I and II, but, as the Department of Justice noted in its preclearance review, "the proposed plan may make it more difficult for black voters to elect candidates of choice" because of the way the populations were distributed.
          The Dublin-Laurens County Concerned Citizens Group, an ad hoc group of minority community activists and leaders in Dublin, wanted to offer an alternative plan to the city council that would prevent the dilution of minority representation in the city council's plan so they contacted the SRC. SRC staff, including Program Director Winnett Hagens and Senior Program Officer Mekonnen Gessesse, set up an Internet conference with the group and led them through the process of drawing their own alternative district maps. Sandra Scott, a leading organizer of the Dublin-Laurens Concerned Citizens Group, talks about the process and how the staff made learning the online technology easy:
          "Once we downloaded the net conferencing software, SRC faxed what we needed to do, step-by-step, and there was no problem starting it on the computer. I think it took about thirty minutes of seeing how it all works to really understand, but as I watched it was easy to catch on. I had imagined how hard it's going to be, but it really wasn't. Once you finished, you could see it right there. It was truly amazing!" 
          The fact that the Dublin-Laurens County Concerned Citizens' plan was ignored by the city council, is what prompted the Department of Justice to look more closely at the city council's plan and the impact it would have on minority representation. 
          Broward County Citizens for Single Member Districts and the Ft. Lauderdale NAACP in Broward County, Florida, have also made use of SRC's online redistricting services. In March of 2000, Broward County voters passed a referendum to increase the county commission from seven members to nine and to elect those members along single-member district lines rather than through at-large voting. This change opened the door for an increase in minority representation on the commission which contained no minority representatives (even though blacks comprise 18.5 percent of the county population and Hispanics comprise 11 to 12 percent). In fact, only one African American and no Hispanics had been elected to the county commission during the past one hundred years. 
          With the move to elect members in single member districts, the only
question that remained was how many majority-minority districts should
be drawn. The Broward County Citizens for Single Member Districts and
the Ft. Lauderdale NAACP contacted SRC for help in drawing maps they
could propose to the commission. Together, they constructed a
districting plan that would allow the African Americans and Hispanics
in Broward County to achieve the fair representation they had
previously been denied. There were two majority-minority districts
where blacks comprised 52 percent and 58 percent of the population and a third district where minorities, mainly Hispanics, comprised close to 50 percent of the population.
          Attorney Sidney Calloway, who worked with the NAACP and the SRC on the online drawing for Broward County, Florida, describes the Internet-based conference:
          "When we got down to it, we had people situated in two or three offices at any given time. SRC staff were in Atlanta, and collectively in different places we worked on the maps. That was a new experience that helped the process. The SRC provided their expertise, but they're not from Broward County so there were things we could bring to the table in sitting down and drawing the maps that they could not." 
          After all the parties involved in the net conference agreed on their new plan of representation, the SRC handled the formal printing of the map on it's large format plotter, providing a colorful, professional-looking, poster-sized map displaying the NAACP's own plan to the last detail. Sidney Calloway explains how much it meant to have a refined finished product that allowed for input from many places:
          "The results we got were excellent. We wanted to draw our own maps rather than have others to give us maps to look over. We were very excited to be able to click and pull the boundaries of the maps ourselves because that's something that doesn't happen a lot. The result of the SRC's help was that when we went to the county commission and presented these maps in the name of the NAACP, they took us very seriously. If the online service was not available, we would have been relegated to having someone else do the work in Atlanta and send us maps without us really being able to look at them and make changes. The online aspect made all the difference in the world."
          In addition to helping clients draw their own redistricting plans, the SRC makes its redistricting staff experts available to testify at public hearings in support of the community-based plans they help create. This additional expert-backing is what Roosevelt Walters, president of the Ft. Lauderdale branch of the NAACP, says set the SRC's online service apart from similar redistricting tools. He explained:
          "Mr. Hagen's word carried a lot of weight when we presented our map to the county. I could have stood up there all day and said what I felt was right, but it helped to have an outside expert with redistricting knowledge there to give support. With the SRC staff at the meeting, we felt comfortable in front of the county's experts, even when they asked us difficult technical questions about the map we created. Since we had our experts there, we were prepared to answer any of their questions. We couldn't have done any of this without the SRC's help."
          So, what does it all mean? "Using online redistricting," says Hagens, "community-based groups will, for the first time, be able to easily draw and revise representational districts which defend their interests as they define those interests. Online redistricting aids in reversing the roles of political elites and ordinary voters in the redistricting process. Online redistricting helps to move influence over where it belongs--in the hands of the people." 	
          
            Angela Lee is a graduate of the University of Virginia who currently volunteers her writing services to a number of local organizations in the Atlanta area.
          
        
        
          Redistricting in the Computer Age:
A Review of Maptitude for Redistricting
          By Gessesse, MekonnenMekonnen Gessesse
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 p. 29
          
          Gone are the days when paper, map markers, and desk calculators were used to draw redistricting plans. By the 1990s, personal computer or PC-based mapping became widespread. Geographic Information System (GIS) technology has combined hardware, software, and data to analyze and display spatial information on a computer screen that is easy to understand and manipulate. The PC-based GIS programs were introduced when the encoded geographic data known as the TIGER (Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing) system was introduced on CD-ROM disks providing easy access via DOS and Windows.
          GIS is used to analyze the location and shape of geographic features, create buffers around a feature, define areas of influence, and create districts or territories by combining smaller areas together.
          There are many GIS programs available, but few can handle
redistricting. Of these, ARCInfo, Arch View GIS, and GIS Plus are the most important. Many state legislative offices and community organizations, including the Southern Regional Council, have extensively used GIS Plus, a program developed by Caliper Corporation.  As computer technology improved, GIS Plus was updated to a more advanced program called Maptitude for Redistricting. Maptitude easily translates the Census Bureau Geographic file (TIGER/Line file) into a manageable format.  Its function, to create maps showing the distribution of population by race, is very impressive, as is its ability to create districts by aggregating smaller geographic layers such as blocks and precincts thereby producing different reports of newly-created districts.
          Once a map is created from the TIGER/Line file, it can be saved as a working file and modified using Windows-based pull-down menus and tool bars. It's easy to change  line width and colors, or the color of any map feature. It is also possible to display more than one geographic layer on the same map. For example, blocks can be shown  overlaid by streets and voting tabulation districts (VTD's). 
          Maptitude's capacity to query and display data on maps is one of its strongest features. Thematic maps can be  easily created. For example, black population percentages can be displayed by varying colors of blocks. The address-matching tool helps locate point locations such as addresses of incumbents, or any other features whose street and zip code addresses are available.
          There are several phases of  redistricting mapmaking: calculating the ideal population, aggregating polygons to build a district, automatically computing values to reveal the district's characteristics; and  finally, producing maps and reports. Maptitude's GIS program has a module with its own toolboxes for districting and redistricting functions that lets the user create a plan using any level of base geography with a designated control field (e.g. total population), a target value (ideal population of a district), and summary fields. A redistricting plan is displayed as a color theme map with summary information in a table. As blocks or VTDs are added to a district, both the thematic map display and data table are updated. The base features (e.g. blocks) are merged into a new district layer from which the user can compute measures of compactness and check for completeness and contiguity.
          Maptitude for Redistricting easily accesses database and spreadsheet files. It also imports the following formats of geographic and non-geographic files: 
          Geographic: TIGER/Line File; ARC/Info Ungenerate and Export (E00) files; Arch View Shape files; MapInfo Interchange format (MIF); and, Strategic Mapping (BNA) files and a few others.
          Non-geographic:  Numeric (DBF, Excel, and Lotus); Graphic files (BMP and Tiff).
          Maptitude has a layout window where you can place one or more maps on a single document combined with data tables, charts and diagrams for printing. This feature is a plus for this program since it helps to move and resize objects for the purpose of presentation.
          Maptitude offers a host of general GIS functions, including: data manipulation; map creation and modification; spatial queries; and advanced data operations such as producing reports, adding new fields or data, and importing or exporting various data formats. The software also features  an array of redistricting features, including: geographic aggregation; calculation of ideal population; creation of district tables; testing for compactness, contiguity, and unassigned geographic elements;  capacity to save plans in various formats; and, automatic computation of data values.
          Maptitude for Redistricting includes a redistricting data CD, one year of maintenance (software upgrades and data updates), and ninety days of technical support. Call Caliper at 617-527-4700 for more information and prices.	
          
            Mekonnen Gessesse is a senior program officer in the Fair Representation Programs at the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          In Memoriam: Hosea Williams 1926 - 2000
          By Torian, SarahSarah Torian
          Vol. 22, No. 4, 2000 p. 35
          
          On November 16, 2000, one week to the day before the thirtieth annual Feed the Hungry Thanksgiving dinner that would serve more than 40,000 homeless and low-income Atlantans, lifelong civil rights activist Hosea Williams succumbed to his battle with cancer.
          As Andrew Young has said, "The story Hosea tells of the origin of his interest in the movement is typical and remarkable." Born in the small South Georgia town of Attapulgus in 1926 to a blind mother who died in childbirth, Hosea Williams was raised by his grandparents. He left Attapulgus to join the Army during World War II.  As a soldier in the 41st Infantry, he came very close to losing his life twice.  He believed God had saved him for some purpose that he did not yet know.
          On crutches, he started back to Attapulgus by bus. The bus stopped along the way at a segregated bus station where there was no waiting room for black travelers. Williams took a drink from the only water fountain there. A policeman who saw him attacked him for breaking Georgia's segregation laws. It was then that he realized what the Lord had saved him to do-fight racism and segregation.
          He began his work in this mission after earning a degree in chemistry at Morris Brown College in Atlanta, getting a job in Savannah as the first African-American chemist South of Washington, D.C. for the Department of Agriculture. In Savannah, he joined the NAACP and became a leader in the expanding protest action against segregation. In the fall of 1963, Martin Luther King, Jr. invited him to join the SCLC and organize and coordinate voter registration campaigns on an expanded Southwide scale. As Chief Community Organizer for SCLC, Williams was active in the Freedom Summer campaigns of 1964 and, with John Lewis, he led the Selma-to-Montgomery March on "Bloody Sunday," March 7, 1965. 
          Of Hosea Williams, John Lewis has said, "He had a strong personality. He was a guy who wanted to be out there, who was impatient with meetings and discussions, who tired quickly of analysis. He was the one who would throw up his hands and say people were just talking something to death. What are we going to do?"
          Martin Luther King, Jr. said of Williams, "You need some folks like Hosea, who are crazy enough to take on anything and anybody and not count the cost." Williams was with King on the night he was assassinated in Memphis.
          In 1974, Williams was elected to the Georgia General Assembly and was later elected to the Atlanta City Council. 
          	In 1988, when the few black families who lived in Forsyth County, Georgia,  complained of discrimination and intimidation Williams led a small protest march into the almost all-white county whose white residents had run all black residents from the county in the 1910s.   The march led to a violent confrontation with the Ku Klux Klan in which Williams was hit in the head with a brick. The following week, twenty-five thousand protesters from around the nation returned with Williams in a defiant show that such blatant racism would not be accepted in Georgia. 
          	This October, while Williams was confined to his hospital bed, a civil rights reunion was held in his honor in Atlanta. Friends and colleagues who marched and worked with Williams over the years united for a weekend of symposiums, rallies, and ceremonies designed to continue his legacy of voter registration and education at SCLC by mobilizing voters for the upcoming November elections. Jesse Jackson, Dick Gregory, Andrew Young, and Kweisi Mfume were among the many national leaders who attended the reunion at the Martin Luther King, Jr. National Historic Site and Ebenezer Baptist Church in Williams' honor. Georgia Representative Tyrone Brooks, who first met Williams at the age of fifteen at a 1962 civil rights workshop, served as one of the principal organizers of the event. Of Williams, Brooks said, "He led the most dangerous marches, he went to jail, he got beaten up, he got shot at. He was the guy always on the battleground."	
        
      
    
  
