
    
      
        
        Southern Changes. Volume 22, Number 3,
	    2000
        
          Captive Lives
          By Spears, EllenEllen Spears
          Vol. 22, No. 3 p. 3
          
          "For Americans who still believe in racial equality and
social justice," says writer Manning Marable, "we cannot
stand silent while millions of our fellow citizens are being
destroyed all around us." This special issue of Southern
Changes brings together advocates, scholars, and photographers hard at work to reverse the policies that make the
U.S. a world leader in incarcerating and executing its citizens, especially its citizens of color. Thanks to the contributing writers and to guest editor Constance Curry, author and human rights leader, or bringing these perspectives to the pages of Southern Changes at this critical moment.
          As rates of incarceration rise in the U.S. faster and higher than any other Western industrialized nation, the South stands in the lead. Louisiana and Texas are out in front, imprisoning more than one in 131 of their residents. "Texas Tough," an August 29 report from the justice Policy Institute, points out that Texas leads the nation in incarceration growth, adding that, during the U.S. prison boom
of the 1990s, Texas prisons accounted for nearly one-fifth:
of the prison population growth. Of all the fifty states,
Alabama and Florida deprive more prisoners of the right to vote, with nearly one-third of adult black males disfranchised. Texas and Virginia have executed more people than any other state. And, Southern-based corporations are driving the move to privatize, with nearly 70 percent of the inmates detained in private prisons held in the South.
          As the U.S. crosses the two million mark in numbers imprisoned, race remains the defining factor in nearly every measure. "[A]lthough 13 percent of drug users in the U.S. are black, blacks account for 74 percent of all those sentenced to prison for drug offenses," reported Scientific American last year. According to Justice Department figures released in mid-September, nearly three-fourths of the 183 defendants recommended by U.S. attorneys for a death sentence were members of minority groups.
           The electoral implications of the wholesale imprisonment of black men in the U.S. are becoming increasingly apparent, with one in seven adult black males having lost voting rights due to a felony conviction. Even inmates without felony convictions have great difficulty getting registered and find it hard to vote. Attempts by the NAACP to register jail inmates in Terrell County, Georgia, for the November 2000 elections have been barred by the county board of elections.
          British criminologists Leslie Wilkins and Ken Pease
(cited in the Scientific American report) show that high
incarceration rates are linked to income inequality and
argue that "high U.S. incarceration rates are unlikely to decline until there is greater equality of income." Certainly, the economic roots of the dramatic increase in the number of women in prison is evident, with 37 percent of women in state prisons reporting an income of less than $600 in the month prior to their arrest.
          Although property-based and most violent crime rates
have been dropping (rape is the notable exception). politicians'
exploitation of crime as a thinly veiled proxy for race remains a
long-standing election tradition. The nationalization of racially coded elections reached new heights in the Nixon era and again under Reagan and Bush, with "law and order" campaigns and the racially targeted "war on drugs." Building on the re-instatement of the death penalty in 1976, the rhetoric of the "war on drugs," and the construction of private prisons that began in the mid-1980s, the 1990s were a decade filled with "tough on crime" political themes. The tough talk was used to motivate voters through fear and nurture a "lock 'em up and throw away the key" mentality in contrast to implementing more effective rehabilitative programs and strategies.
          While political courage to buck the tide of repressive
action on crime and punishment remains in short supply, the past year has given a few encouraging signs. The American Bar Association's call for a moratorium on the death penalty adds a strong voice to the growing numbers of Americans seeking abolition. Republican Gov. George Ryan of Illinois declared a moratorium in his state and called for others to follow his lead, reflecting the growing public recognition that too many wrongly convicted people are in prison and on death row. Ohio Representative Ted Strickland's Public Safety Act, (HR 979) a proposal to prohibit placement of federal prisoners in private for-profit
correctional facilities, has 143 co-sponsors in Congress.
          The Southern Regional Council hopes this special issue of Southern Changes will provide support to prisoners and their advocates working to abolish the death penalty, to eliminate racial disparities in arrests and sentencing, to stop prison privatization, and to provide for alternative restitution. We offer this collection to be used by advocates who are, in Manning Marable's words, "facing the demon head on."
          
            Ellen Spears is associate director of the Southern Regional
Council. You may contact her by email
at. espears@southerncouncil.org
          
        
        
          Facing the Demon Head On: Institutional Racism and the Prison Industrial Complex
          By Marable, ManningManning Marable
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 4-7
          
          As long as black people have lived in America, they have experienced some version of institutional or structural racism. During slavery, African Americans were defined as private property or chattel, purchased and sold on auction blocks. In the period following Reconstruction until the early 1960s, African Americans, especially in the South, lived under the oppressive restrictions of Jim Crow segregation. In the northern states, blacks were generally permitted to vote and had access to most public accommodations, but were forced by racial covenants and restrictive laws to live in ghettoes.
          Under each successive racial formation, African Americans and their white allies formed political and social pro test movements, which ultimately transformed the nature of their society. In the antebellum South, there were uprisings and day-to-day resistance by enslaved African Americans, and in the northern states an abolitionist movement developed that contributed to the establishment of the Republican Party. Under Jim Crow, leaders such as Dr. Marlin Luther King, Jr., Fannie Lou Hamer, James Farmer, Ella Baker, and a broad coalition of civil rights organizations mounted a series of nonviolent, direct action campaigns that directly led to the desegregation of the South. In the northern states, African Americans employed a variety of strategies, from the labor union organizing of A. Philip Randolph and Bayard Rustin, to the mass political mobilization efforts that elected thousands of public officials, to achieve greater black representation at all levels of society. Progress was frequently slow, but the black freedom movement was generally successful in identifying the specific institutional barriers to American-American equality, and then ultimately finding the appropriate tactics to challenge then.
          In the past three decades, the structure and character of American institutional racism has changed dramatically. We can measure the advances of African Americans in many ways. The number of black elected officials, barely 100 in 1964, has climbed above 10,000; the black consumer market has grown from $70 billion in 1980 to over $350 billion today. There is an affluent and substantial black middle class, and the economic expansion of the l99Os greatly improved the quality of life even for millions of working-class and low-income households. The unemployment rate of African Americans has now fallen to about 7 percent which, according to sociologist William Julius Wilson, is "the lowest since the Bureau of Labor Statistics began compiling comparable data by race in 1972."
          However, this new prosperity for the black middle class obscures a very real crisis for millions of other African Americans. The unprecedented expansion of what a number of scholars increasingly describe as a "prison industrial complex" has created an oppressively new context for the articulation of racial politics. According to an August 2000 Justice Department report, the total population of the nation's jails and prisons exceeded two million at the end of 1999. The dynamic and seemingly unchecked growth of the U.S. prison population has many profound consequences-politically, economically and socially-for all people of color.
          Beginning in the 1960s and 1970s, for a variety of reasons, rates of violent crime, including murder, rape and robbery, increased dramatically, especially in urban areas. By the late 1970s, nearly one half of all Americans were afraid to walk within a mile of their homes at night, and 90 percent responded in surveys that the U.S. criminal justice system was not dealing harshly enough with criminals. Politicians like Richard Nixon, George Wallace, and Ronald Reagan began to campaign successfully on the theme of "Law and Order." The death penalty, which was briefly outlawed by the Supreme Court, was reinstated. Local, state, and federal expenditures for law enforcement rose sharply. Behind much of the anti-crime rhetoric was a not- too-subtle racial dimension, the projection of crude stereo types about the link between criminality and black people. Rarely did these politicians observe that minority and poor people, not the white middle class, were statistically much more likely to experience violent crimes of all kinds. The argument was made that law enforcement officers should be given much greater latitude in suppressing crime, that sentences should be lengthened and made mandatory, and that prisons should be designed not for the purpose of rehabilitation, but punishment.
          As a result there was a rapid expansion in the personnel of the
criminal justice system, as well as the construction of new
prisons. What occurred in New York State, for example, was typical of
what happened nationally. From 1817 to 1981, New York had opened
thirty-three state prisons. From 1982 to 1999, another thirty-eight
state prisons were constructed. The state's prison population at the
time of the Attica prison revolt in September1971 was about 12,500. By
1999, there were over 71,000 prisoners in New York State correctional facilities.
          In 1974, the number of Americans incarcerated in all state prisons stood at 187,500. By 1991, the number had reached 711,700. Nearly two-thirds of all state prisoners in 1991 had less than a high school education. One third of all prisoners were unemployed at the time of their nests. Incarceration rates by the end of the 1980s had soared to unprecedented rates, especially for black Americans.  As of December 1989 the total U.S. prison population, including federal institutions, exceeded one million for the first time in history, an incarceration rate of the general population of one out of every 250 citizens. For African Americans, the rate was over 700 per 100,000, or about seven times more than for whites. About one half of all prisoners were black. Twenty-three percent of all black males in their twenties were either in jail or prison, on parole, probation, or awaiting trial. The rate of incarceration of black Americans in 1989 had even surpassed that experienced by blacks who still lived under the apartheid regime of South Africa.
          By the early 1990s, rates for all types of violent crime began to plummet. But the laws, which sent offenders to prison, were made even more severe. Children were increasingly viewed as adults in courts, and subjected to harsher penalties. Laws like California's "three strikes and you're out" eliminated the possibility of parole for repeat offenders. The vast majority of these new prisoners were nonviolent offenders, and many were convicted of drug offenses that carried long prison terms. Nationwide, African Americans and Latinos comprised 24.3 percent of the population in 1999, but represented 63.6 percent of state and federal prisoners and 78.8 percent of state prisoners convicted of drug offenses. The pattern of racial bias in these statistics is confirmed by the research of the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, which found that while African Americans today constitute only 14 percent of all drug users nationally, they are 35 percent of all drug nests, 55 percent of all drug convictions, and 75 percent of all prison admissions for drug offenses. Currently, the racial proportions of those under some type of correctional supervision, including parole and probation, are one-in-fifteen for young white males, one-in-ten for young Latino males, and one-in- three for young African-American males. Statistically to day, more than eight out of every ten African-American males will be arrested at some point in their lifetime.
          The latest innovation in American corrections system is "special
housing units" (SHU), but which prisoners also generally refer to as
"The Box." SHUs are uniquely designed solitary confinement cells, in
which prisoners are locked down for twenty-three hours a day for
months or even years at a time. SHU cellblocks are electronically monitored, prefabricated structures of concrete and steel, about fourteen feet long and eight feet wide, amounting to 120 square feet of space. The two inmates who are confined in each cell, however, actually have only about sixty square feet of usable space, or thirty square feet per person. All meals are served to prisoners through a thin slot cut into the steel door. The toilet unit, sink, and shower are all located in the cell. Prisoners are permitted one hour "exercise time" each day in a small concrete balcony, stir-rounded by heavy security wire, directly connected with their SHU cells. Educational and rehabilitation programs for SHU prisoners are prohibited. Although Amnesty International and human rights groups condemned SHUs, claiming that such forms of imprisonment constitute the definition of torture under international law, many states are increasing the number of SHU facilities in their state prisons. As of 1998, California had constructed 2,942 SHU beds, followed by Mississippi (1,756), Arizona (1,728), Virginia (1,267), Texas (1,229), Louisiana (1,048) and Florida (1,000). Solitary confinement which historically had been defined even by corrections officials as an extreme disciplinary measure, is becoming increasingly the norm.
          The introduction of SHUs reflects a general mood in the country that the growing penal population is essentially beyond redemption. If convicted felons cease to be viewed as human beings, why should they be treated with any humanity? This punitive spirit was behind the Republican- controlled Congress and President Clinton's decision in 1995 to eliminate inmate eligibility for federal Pell Grant awards for higher education. As of 1994, 23,000 prisoners throughout the U.S., had received Pell Grants, averaging about $1,500 per award. The total amount of educational support granted prisoners, $35 million, represented only 0.6 percent of all Fell Grant funding nationally. Many studies have found that prisoners who participate in higher education programs and especially those who complete college degrees have significantly lower rates of recidivism. For all prison inmates, for example, recidivism aver ages between 50 to 70 percent Federal parolees have a recidivism rate of 40 percent Prisoners with a college education have recidivism rates of only 5 to 10 percent. Given the high success ratio of prisoners who complete advanced degree work and the relatively low cost of public investment, such educational programs should make sense. But following the federal governments lead, many states have also ended their tuition benefits programs for state prisoners.
          What are the economic costs for American society of the vast expansion of our prison-industrial complex? According to criminal justice researcher David Barlow at the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee, between 1980 and 2000, the combined expenditures of federal, state, and local governments on police have increased about 400 percent. Corrections expenditures for building new prisons, upgrading existing facilities, hiring more guards, and related costs, increased approximately 1000 percent. Although it currently costs about $70,000 to construct a typical prison cell, and about $25,000 annually, to supervise and maintain each prisoner, the U.S. is currently building 1,725 new prison beds per week.
          The driving ideological and cultural forces that rationalize and justify mass incarceration are the white American public's stereotypical perception about race and crime. As Andrew Hacker noted in 1995, "Quite clearly,'black crime' does not make people think about tax evasion or embezzling from brokerage firms. Rather, the offenses generally associated with blacks are those . . involving violence." A number of researchers have found that racial stereotypes of African Americans - as "violent," "aggressive," 'hostile," and "short-tempered" - greatly influence whites' judgments about crime. Generally, most whites are inclined to give black and Latino defendants more severe judgments of guilt and lengthier prison sentences than whites who commit identical crimes. Racial bias has been well established especially in capital cases, where killers of white victims are much more likely to receive the death penalty than those who murder African Americans.
          The greatest victims of these racialized processes of unequal justice, of course, are African-American and Latino young people. In April 2000, utilizing national and state data compiled by the FBI, the justice Department and six leading foundations issued a comprehensive study that documented vast racial disparities at every level of the juvenile justice process. African Americans under age eighteen comprise 15 percent of their national age group, yet they currently represent 26 percent of all those who are arrested. After entering the criminal justice system, white and black juveniles with the same records are treated in radically different ways. According to the Justice Department's study, among white youth offenders, 66 percent are referred to juvenile courts, while only 31 per cent of the African-American youth are taken there. Blacks comprise 44 percent of those detained in juvenile jails, 46 percent of all those tried in adult criminal courts, as well as 58 percent of all juveniles who are warehoused in adult prison. In practical terms, this means that young African Americans who are arrested and charged with a crime, are more than six times more likely to be assigned to prison than white youth offenders.
          For those young people who have never been to prison before,
African Americans are nine times more likely than whites to be
sentenced to juvenile prisons. For youths charged with drug offenses,
blacks are forty-eight times more likely than whites to be sentenced to juvenile prison. White youths charged with violent offenses are incarcerated on average for 193 days after trial; by contrast, A American youths are held 254 days, and Latino youths are incarcerated 305 days.
          The August 2000 report of the US Justice Department finds that 9.4 percent of black men ages twenty-five to twenty were in state and federal prisons in 1999, almost ten times the rate for white men in their late twenties. Among Hispanic males hi this same age group, over 3 percent were incarcerated.
          What seems clear is that a new leviathan of racial inequality has been constructed across our country. It lacks the brutal simplicity of the old Jim Crow system, with its omnipresent "white" and "colored" signs. Yet it is in many respects potentially far more devastating, because it presents itself to the world as a system that is truly color blind. The black freedom struggle of the 1960s was successful largely because it convinced a majority of white middle class Americans that the Jim Crow system was economically inefficient, and that politically it could not be sustained or justified. The movement utilized the power of creative disruption, making it impossible for the old system of white prejudice and power to function in the same old ways it had for decades. For Americans who still believe in racial equality and social justice, we cannot stand silent while millions of our fellow citizens are being destroyed all around us. The racialized prison industrial complex is the great moral and political challenge of our time.
          For several years, I have lectured in New York's famous Sing Sing
prison, as part of a master's degree program sponsored by the New York
Theological Seminary. During my last visit several months ago, I
noticed that correctional officials had erected a large yellow sign
over the door at the public entrance to the prison. The sign reads:
"walking through these doors pass some of the finest corrections
professionals in the world." I asked Reverend Bill Webber, the
director of the prisons educational program, and several prisoners
what they thought about the sign. Bill answered bluntly, "demonic."
One of the Master's students, a thirty-five-year-old Latino named
Tony, agreed with Bill's assessment, but added, "let us face the demon
head on." There are now over two million Americans who are
incarcerated. It is time to face the demon head on. 
          
            Manning Marable is professor of History and Political Science, and the
Founding Director of the Institute for Research in African-American
Studies at Columbia University. He is also editor of Souls: A
Critical Journal of Black Politics, Culture, and Society.
          
        
        
          The Death Penalty: Sober Second Thoughts about the Ultimate Weapon in the War on Crime
          By Bright, Stephen B.Stephen B. Bright
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 8-10, 20
          
          The United States is one of the few industrialized nations in the world that retains the death penalty. Today, four nations--China, Iran, the Congo, and the United States--account for 80 percent of the executions that occur in the world each year. Thirty-eight countries have abandoned the death penalty since 1985. Only four countries that did not have the death penalty in 1985 have adopted it since then and one of those, Nepal, has since abolished it.
          Only one other NATO country, Turkey, has the death
penalty. It has not carried out an execution since 1984 and
is expected to soon abandon capital punishment in order to join the Council of Europe, which does not allow its members to have capital punishment.
          The United States is one of a very few countries that executes people
who were children-under age eighteen-at the time of commission of
their crimes. The United States and Somalia are the only countries
that have not ratified the United Nations Convention of the Rights of
the Child, which prohibits the execution of children.
          Thirty years ago it appeared that the United States would, like much of the rest of the world, also
abandon capital punishment. The death penalty was seldom used in the 1960s, and the United States Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional in 1972 because it was arbitrarily imposed. However, after the Supreme Court's decision, a number of states passed new capital punishment statutes that were upheld by the Court in 1976.
           Today, 38 states, the federal government, and the military have laws authorizing the death penalty. More than 3,600 men, women, and children are waiting to be injected, electrocuted, gassed, shot, or hung. The number of executions carried out has steadily increased during the 1990s. Hundreds of people have been killed by the states since the Supreme Court's decision in 1976 allowing the resumption of capital punishment. More than 90 percent of those executions have taken place in the nation's "death
belt," the states of the old Confederacy.
          Capital punishment is one of the tragic legacies of the
slavery, racial oppression, and racial violence in American
history. It has also been the ultimate weapon in the "war on
crime," a war the United States has been fighting against its own citizens for more than thirty years. The proponents of this war have assured us that we are demonstrating our moral outrage, that we are showing that we are tough on crime, and that those we are killing are from another species; they are animals, predators--some children are even described as "superpredators." As in a war against another nation, the proponents describe the enemy as a faceless group so evil and so lacking in humanity, feelings, and worth that their elimination is justified.
          But, as in all wars, the casualties of the war on crime are
human. As in all wars, there are innocent victims. Eighty-seven people
condemned to die have been released in the last twenty years after
their innocence was clearly established. Others have had their death
sentences commuted to life imprisonment without the possibility of
parole because of doubts about their guilt, and some have been
executed despite questions of innocence. U.S. Representative Bill
McCollum of Florida has stated that the risk of executing the innocent
must be accepted if we are to have capital punishment. Those
responsible for America's system of justice have gone from the concept
that it is better that the guilty go free than that an innocent person
be convicted, to the notion that innocent people who may be executed
are acceptable casualties in the war on crime.
          The American Bar Association called for a moratorium on the death penalty in 1997 because of the poor quality of legal representation provided to the poor, racial discrimination in the infliction of the death penalty, and its imposition upon the mentally ill, the mentally retarded and against those who were children at the time of their crimes.
          George Ryan, the Republican governor of Illinois, declared a moratorium
on executions in his state after the exoneration of
thirteen people who had been condemned to die, one more then the
twelve who have been put to death since the death penalty was
reinstated there in 1977. Three were freed by efforts of journalism
classes at Northwestern University.
          Legislation has been introduced in both the U.S. House and Senate
providing for a moratorium on executions. A bipartisan group of
Senators and Representatives have introduced the Innocent Protection
Act in Congress to ensure DNA testing for the wrongfully convicted
and better counsel for those facing death.
          But the condemnation of innocent people to death is only the most
egregious and pounced example of failure of courts to deliver on
the promises of fairness, equality and justice. The courts are the
institutions least affected by the Civil Rights Movement. People of
color have been largely excluded as judges, jurors, prosecutors, and
lawyers. The decisions made in the courts reflect the racial biases
of the dominant group at every step of the process from police stops
to imposition of sentence.
          Poor people accused of crimes often receive only perfunctory
representation by court-appointed lawyers who are denied the
resources required to conduct necessary investigations and present a
defense. In Texas courts do not even require that defense counsels
remain awake during trial. The lawyer representing George McFarland,
who is now on death row, repeatedly fell asleep and snored during his
trial in Houston.
          Texas' highest criminal court--made up of judges chosen in
partisan elections, some of who ran on platforms supporting the death
penalty--upheld the death sentences in Mr. McFarland's trial and tow
others in which defense attorneys fell asleep. One of those
defendants, Carl Johnson, was executed in 1995.
          Some have suggested that the release of innocent 
people proves that the system is working. But a court
system which destroys innocent people by sending them to death row for years for crimes they did not commit is not working. A system whose most grievous mistakes are revealed not by prosecutors, police, judges, or lawyers, but by undergraduate journalism students is not working.
          In truth, the criminal justice system is not working at
any level. But death is unique in its enormity, severity,
degradation, finality, and violence. Because death is different, a moratorium is required before more dispatched to execution chambers in assembly-line fashion in Texas and, increasingly, in other states as well.
          The use of capital punishment speaks volumes about the kind of society we are and want to be. The Constitutional Court of South Africa found no place for capital punishment in the vision of a society which, in the words of one member of the Court, was moving from hate to "an appreciation of the need for understanding" and from vengeance to reconciliation. It is an example that the United States, with its long history of racial violence and oppression, may want to follow.
          
            Stephen B. Bright is the director of the Southern Center
for Human Rights in Atlanta and teaches courses on capital
punishment at the law schools at Yale, Harvard, and Emory
universities.
          
          
            Harris County, Texas: Welcome to "The Silver Needle Society"
            Texas leads the way among the states--to the
executioner's table. With 231 people executed since 1982-146 (63
percent) of those under the five years that Governor George W. Bush
has been in office Texas far and away leads the way. The annual number of executions in Texas continues to increase with thirty-three people executed to date this year (as of September 30, 2000). Virginia ranks a distant second, having executed seventy-six people since the reinstatement of the death penalty in 1976.
            With Governor George Bush's presidential campaign well underway, Texas and its penchant for the death penalty have received much press. Little notice, however, has been given to the Texas county that has been so significant in helping Texas earn its dubious reputation.
            Harris County, which includes Houston, has prosecuted 143 (31 percent)
of the 460 inmates currently on death row. Dallas County comes in a
distant second, having prosecuted forty-two (9.1 percent) of Texas'
death row inmates. During the twenty-one years of "leadership" by
District Attorney John "Johnny" B. Holmes, Jr., Harris County has
executed more people than any other state (sixty-three), excluding
Texas and Virginia. In celebration of that "accomplishment," Holmes
hangs a sign in his office's death penalty unit that reads, 'The Silver Needle Society" and includes a list of all
people killed by lethal injection by the county.
            A close inspection of the death row inmates from Harris County reveals the racial and economic disparities in the county's capital punishment system. In a county where African Americans make up 20 percent of the population, seventy-nine of the 146 (54 percent) death row inmates from Harris County are African American. An additional twenty-six inmates (17.8 percent) are Hispanic. More than one-half (seventy-four) did not complete high school or its equivalency. Only four of the 146 were employed in white collar jobs at the time of their arrest. Sixty of the 146 listed "laborer" as their occupation prior to arrest.
            There is a small possibility for change in Harris County this fall;
District Attorney Holmes will be retiring to be replaced by either
Democrat Jim Dougherty or Republican Chuck Rosenthal. Both support the
death penalty, but Dougherty, a Houston defense lawyer, supports
changing state law to allow life without parole as an alternative and
to prohibit the execution of the mentally ill or disabled. Rosenthal,
a career prosecutor, is a staunch defender of the current system and
has sent fourteen people to death row. Rice University political
scientist and pollster Bob Stein, quoted in the Houston Chronicle,
does not see the death penalty as being a significant factor in the
race though. "This is a Republican county in a death penalty state," he
said.
          
          
            The Death Penalty in Virginia
            Virginia is second only to Texas in the number of persons executed
since the reinstatement of the death penalty in 1976. In fact,
Virginia's execution rate, expressed as a proportion of the state's
population, exceeds that of Texas. Disturbed by those stark
statistics, the American Civil liberties Union (ACLU) of Virginia
conducted an indepth study of the circumstances of Virginia's
startling death penalty record. The study, entitled "Unequal, Unfair
and Irreversible: The Death Penalty in Virginia," and published in
April 2000, examined four key aspects of the administration of capital
punishment in Virginia--prosecutorial discretion in the charging of
capital crimes, quality of legal representation for the accused at trial, appellate review of trials resulting in the death penalty, and race. A copy of the full report is available at www.members.aol/acluva/death.doc. Some of the startling facts they uncovered are listed below.
            
              
                 Ninety-seven percent of those sentenced to death in Virginia have been too poor to afford their own lawyers and have been represented by court-appointed lawyers.
                The Virginia State Supreme Court has reversed fewer death sentences than any other state supreme court in the country and has never granted an evidentiary hearing or appointed an expert or an investigator to adeath penalty case. Between 1973 and1995,Virginia's supreme court found error in 8 percent of capital cases as compared to the national average of 40 percent. Texas reverses 28 percent of its cases.
                The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit,
which serves Virginia, grants new hearmgs to death row inmates in 9
percent of cases in its jurisdiction and only 4 percent of cases in
Virginia. This compares to a nationwide average of 39 percent among federal appeals courts.
                Since 1978, Virginia has meted out 131 death sentences. Of those sentences, the Supreme Court has reversed exactly eleven, almost all on direct appeal.
                 In 1998 and 1999, Virginia executed eight prisoners within five years of their sentencing dates. This is the time that is used primarily by higher courts to review death sentences for fairness. The nationaXaverage time between sentencing and execution in nine
years.
                 Eight of Virginia's 134 jurisdictions have exacted the death penalty for more than 10 percent of total
capital murders committed in that jurisdiction between 1978 and 1997. Three jurisdictions have exacted the death penalty for more than 30 percent of total capital murders committed in the jurisdiction. They are Prince William County (64 percent), the county that shut down its public schools for six years in the 1960s in order to avoid desegregation, Danville City (39 percent), the last capital of the Confederacy, and Bedford County (33 percent), in Southcentral Virginia.
                 Black offenders who rape and murder white victims in Virginia are more than four times' more likely to be sentenced to death than those who rape and murder black victims--70 percent compared to 15 percent.
                Trial lawyers who represented the men on Virginia's death row are six times more likely to be the subject of bar disciplinary proceedings than are other lawyers. In one of every ten trials resulting in a death sentence, the defendant was represented by a lawyer who would later lose his/her license.
                Virginia has no mechanism through which the state's courts can consider evidence of innocence that surfaces more than twenty-one days after a defendant's final sentencing in Circuit Court. In recent years, condemned prisoners have gone to their deaths despite inconsistent DNA evidence, witness recantations, and evidence that the crime for which they were condemned was committed by another person entirely.
                 The Virginia Supreme Court has never upheld an ineffective
assistance claim--a claim that the defendant did not receive fair
representation--in a death case. Only once has the Fourth Circuit Court
upheld an ineffective assistance claim in a Virginia capital case.
                Because of the Doctrine of Procedural Default,
any violation or error a defendant's lawyer does not identify in the first step of the appeals process is barred from consideration by any court. This undermines the idea that post-conviction review ensures that death sentences are the result of fair trials of appropriate quality.
                According to the FBI's Supplemetal Homicide Reports, between 1978
and 1997, 41 percent of victims of apparently capital crimes were
black. Yet of the 131 crimes for which a death sentence was imposed
during the same period, only 20 percent of the victims were black.
              
            
          
        
        
          Juvenile Justice "Hurts"
          By McDevitt, RickRick McDevitt
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 11-12
          
          Even though the rate of juvenile crime is down, there has been a lot of discussion about the need to expand the construction of juvenile prisons. Expansion is not the answer. In fact, the current system is not reforming children, it is actually hurting them.
          Last year, in the Georgia Department of Juvenile Justice, there were 4,600 inmate-on-inmate beatings and almost six-hundred staff-on-inmate beatings. Less than 10 percent of all juvenile crime is violent, yet large numbers of nonviolent offenders are in cells with murderers and rapists.
          According to Georgia crime statistics, white children are arrested twice as often as African Americans, yet more than 70 percent of kids in detention are black. Crimes committed by African-American youth are not more serious; in fact, 75 percent of the children in the Georgia juvenile justice system are there for nonviolent
offenses, like shoplifting, truancy, and trespassing.
          Meanwhile, the state is building more prisons to provide jobs for local residents, not rehabilitation for youth. Jailed youth are not being rehabilitated. They are being raped and abused; last year in Georgia, there were more than 175 reports of sexual assault in juvenile detention centers. They are attempting suicide; there were more than 180 reports of attempted suicide. They are suffering mentally. The Mental Health Association of Georgia reports that 55 percent of incarcerated children have clinical depression and 45 percent have been diagnosed as having attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and Georgia's youth prisons provide little or no clinical help. They are receiving inadequate education; of the thirty-two juvenile facilities in Georgia, only one has an accredited school. They are receiving little or no medical attention and insufficient rehabilitative services. And, with all this neglect, the Department of Juvenile justice reports that it costs $40,000 a year to lock up one child.
          
          In 1997, a U. S. Department of Justice investigation found that the state juvenile justice facilities were "grossly substandard," "egregious," and "unconstitutional." According to the report, Georgia's juvenile facilities lack enough space to separate younger, more vulnerable youths from older, potentially more predatory youth. In one incident reported in the investigation, a child held for violation of probation was housed with three youths accused of armed robbery and aggravated assault and was beaten and sexually assaulted without intervention from the staff.
          As a result of low staffing levels, a male staff member was able to sexually assault a fourteen-year old female resident after persuading the only other staff member on
the shift to take a nap.
          Sooner or later, incarcerated
juveniles return to their communities much worse for their experience. Almost nothing is spent on community-based alternatives, like drug addiction and prevention programs, intensive supervision, or restitution,the smart alternative to the current juvenile justice system programs which would get to children's lives sooner, rather than later. We know that in the medical profession, prevention and
early intervention are less expensive and more effective than catastrophic care. The same reasoning should be applied to juveniles who commit petty property crimes and other less serious offenses.
          Resources must be provided for after-school programs, intensive supervision and mentoring, drug prevention and treatment, and mental health counseling for confused or troubled youth. And parents must be given the tools they need to regain control over their confused adolescents.
          In June 2000, the Georgia Alliance for Children, backed by forty organizations kicked off a campaign to educate citizens on the atrocities that are occurring in the system. The grassroots movement is demanding that Governor Roy Barnes and the Georgia State Legislature
redirect the fifty million dollars used to operate youth "dungeons" and invest it in community-based intervention, prevention and aftercare programs that help solve problems before they become serious. These blatant disparities and statistics should draw Georgia lawmakers to their feet, demanding action. The neglect of juvenile justice that has led to facilities operating at 150 to 300 percent over capacity must stop.
          
            Rick McDevitt is president of the Georgia Alliance for
Children. For more information, please call the Georgia Alliance for
Children at 404-688-7327 or email at: alliance@bellsouth.net
          
          
            "And Justice for Some" Report
            "And Justice for Some," a report commissioned by the Building
Blocks for Youth initiative and released in April 2000, revealed that
youth of color experience more severe treatment than their white peers at every stage of the juvenile justice process. Following is an except from the summary of the report.
            This report shows that youth of color are overrepresented at each
point in the system and that this disadvantage accumulates as they
move through the system," says Michael Jones, co-author of the report
and Senior Researcher at NCCD. "Minority youth are much more likely to
be referred to juvenile court, be detained, face trial as adults and
go to jail than white youth who commit comparable crimes. This makes
kids of color much more likely to spend their formative years behind bars."
            Among the other key findings of the report: In
every offense category--person, property, drug, public order--a substantially greater percentage of African-American youth were detained than white youth. Minority youth are overrepresented in the detained populations in nearly all states. African-American youth are more likely to be formally charged in juvenile court than white youth, even when referred for the same offense. Minority youth were much more likely to be waived from juvenile court to adult criminal court than white youth, even when charged with the same offenses. This was true in every offense category. When white youth and minority youth were charged with the same offenses, African-American youth with no prior admissions were six times more likely to be incarcerated in public facilities than white youth with the same background. Latino youth were three times more likely than white youth to be incarcerated.
            Nationally, custody rates were five times greater for
African-American youth than for white youth. Custody rates for Latino
and Native American youth were two times the custody rate of white
youth. In 1997, 7,400 new admissions to adult prisons involved youth
under the age of eighteen. Three out of four of these youth were
minorities.
          
        
        
          The Care and Feeding of the Prison Industrial System
          By Napper, George, Jr.George Napper Jr.
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 13-15
          
          The multi-billion dollar prison-building enterprise in the United States is growing largely at the expense of the African-American population. The individual and social damage of this system reaches far beyond the enormous numbers and high percentages of African-American men and women presently in prisons to include vast numbers of former prisoners and their families.
          Perhaps more tragically, the damage of the prison-building frenzy affects tens of thousands of youngsters and their families who are caught up in the highly punitive, harsh, and disproportionately African-American juvenile justice system. Since the juvenile system has become a feeder for adult prisons, and so much a part of the ritual of growing up as an African American, we must give great attention to its many failures of practice.
          Another of the more sinister aspects of the current criminal justice system is the growing negative impact it has on the African-American population's political clout now and in the future. There are predictions that people of color may be in the majority of the U.S. population in the early years of the new millennium, and we must examine any phenomena that may mitigate against that eventual change, and its consequences. If there are increasing numbers of people of color who are disfranchised because of felony records, this will have very negative consequences for the concepts of democracy and political influences for African Americans, and other communities of color. Certainly, the ability of people of color to wield the political power necessary to bring change to the criminal justice
system and to the fetid conditions triggering its operations will be greatly impaired.
          I am not sure that there is a conscious effort by policy makers to create barriers to the population shift and its political implications, but barriers are in the making. There are growing numbers of activists and analysts who view the extraordinary expansion of the prison industrial complex as a conscious and deliberate method of providing cheap prison labor unencumbered by the issues of unionism, health benefits, and other rights. Images of a new form of slavery are often conjured up in this context.
          
            Incarceration and African-American Families
          
          The rate of imprisonment in the United States exceeds by far that of any industrial society. The prison
industry is among the fastest growing in our country. Investment houses and large law firms watch the performance of their prison-building stock. The imprisonment enterprise has significant implications for both the present and future political influence of non-white communities, for their family structures, and for the concept of "justice." If we continue to see high increases in the rate and numbers of African-American women being incarcerated, in addition to what is happening to African-American men, a crisis o family formation and support will be further exacerbated.
          A great number of incarcerated women have youngsters who are under eighteen, many of them less than six
years old. Often, grandparents and foster homes are taking
care of these children and youth. Many of them will grow up with the stigma that comes from being children of imprisoned parents. The stigma and the attendant marginalization affects their lives. We can anticipate increasing numbers of these youngsters becoming involved in drugs or violent activities. This, in turn, gives a generational dimension to the problem and provides politicians with more leverage to push for the building of more prisons and to be tougher on criminals. . , and the beat goes on. Unfortunately, being tough has not meant being effective!
          Given these circumstances, it is difficult to be optimistic about what will be happening fifteen or twenty years into the future of the African-American population that is most affected by criminal justice policy and practice. It is not a question of whether or not we have the
resources to do what needs to be done. It is a matter of political will. As long as the crime problem is largely defined as a problem of controlling African Americans and others of color, as long as criminality and African Americans are viewed as synonymous terms, the harder it will be for American policy makers to make the paradigm shifts necessary to cease over-relying on the criminal justice system to control crime in America. We cannot arrest ourselves out of our predicament. We cannot build enough prisons to solve the problems of social injustice, poverty, and lack of opportunity that form the conditions for much of today's criminality.
          It is impossible to believe that our approach to the
issues of incarceration and related concerns would not be different if the problem was white men, white women, and their youth suffering this outrageous fortune of disproportionately high incarceration rates.
          
            The Dilemma of African-American Political Leadership
          
          Thwarting the ability of the African-American "community" to mobilize its political energy to transform the criminal justice system is another factor that is also a product of the present arrangement the increasing social distance between groups within our population. There is already a reluctance on behalf of many African-American political leaders to be as outspoken as they need to be to
effectively address the prison industrial complex and its implications.
          Part of this reluctance can be explained by political leaders' being advocates of those who are the most likely to be victimized, i.e., their African-American constituents. Certainly, if anyone has a right to be more harsh, more punitive, it would be the members of the community who constitute, disproportionately, the crime victims. The relative failure to take a more progressive posture regarding the perpetrators is, in part, a reflection of the belief that those violating the law deserve what they gel Indeed, many victim advocates argue that more police are needed to make more arrests and to process more people through the system... and the quicker, the better.
          Also related to the disappointing behavior of political leadership is the fact that new prisons can be built in their electoral districts. This means business opportunities and jobs for constituents, family, and friends. Further, their numbers usually are not strong enough in the political chambers to push an agenda that is different from.that of the Party line. Finally, many believe that the current policies and practices are the correct ones.
          The greater point to be made here is that it would be
easier to move with a more progressive (read preventive,
proactive, and compassionate instead of reactive and punitive) agenda
if African-American leadership was more visible on this issue. Doing
so would ameliorate internal com-munity problems that have
a generational character. That is, it is important for the
African-American youth to know that the political leadership in their community cares greatly about them. Too often, youth in the African-American community feel that they are alone in their efforts to find meaning in life and to achieve a state of worthiness.
          In the larger political context, it is difficult to believe
that other politicians are going to care more for African-American youth than does its own leadership. Consequently and unfortunately, a less progressive political leadership feels that it is doing the right thing (at least something it believes it can get away with doing) because the African-American leadership seems to be okay with their policies and practices.
          The nuances and maneuverings that characterize the political arena
often mean that one has to compromise on certain issues to achieve
what is believed to be higher priorities. While it is clear that
controlling crime is a major concern with all politicians, what is
ultimately the best approach remains a difficult challenge among many
African-American political leaders. It is a monumental task to reduce
crime and to develop a criminal justice system that is fair, just, and
effective. It cannot be done by the African-American leadership
alone. Well meaning Americans of all persuasions are needed to challenge our government to embrace a more rational approach to these issues.
          
            Where Do We Go from Here?
          
          Without question, the criminal justice system of today
is destructive to the health and unity of the African-American population. When people come out of prison, without access to jobs, often alienated from their families, hardened by their experiences inside, they come back to their communities and, too often, continue in the process of victimizing others in the African-American community. They come out worse than they went in: more hostile, more angry, older, and less prepared, less able, and, sometimes, less interested in reintegrating as law-abiding citizens.
          I am not arguing that we can salvage every person
who comes to the attention of the criminal justice system. Nor am I suggesting that there are individuals who should not be locked up. I know that there are... and for a long, long time. I ran the Atlanta Police Department for twelve years and I have seen more than enough pain and hardship experienced by victims and their families to last a lifetime. However, I contend that we have a reactive, ineffectual criminal justice system with incarceration rates that are bringing havoc and ruin to communities of color, in general, and African-American communities in particular. In some states more money is being spent to build prisons than is being spent to educate our youth. These
are monies that can be part of a more proactive, preventive approach to crime instead of being spent to feed the prison industrial complex. Processing increasing numbers through the system and building more and more
prisons is not the answer.
          The public safety demands that violent criminals be locked up. I agree wholeheartedly! Yet, the prisons in this country are teeming with young African Americans who have committed nonviolent, drug-related crimes. Research demonstrates that these individuals can benefit from community-based and other intermediate programs and from greater resources for drug treatment counseling, and education without compromising the public safety. Indeed, there is reason to believe that there is greater likelihood of not returning to crime from these approaches than from the more harsh, punitive "lock-'em-up-and-throw-away-the-key" traditional approach driven by long term incarceration and mandatory sentences.
          Simply put, we have an opportunity to move in a more
productive direction. We can focus resources in a proactive preventive, early intervention mode. We can target the thousands of nonviolent drug prisoners in a more humane fashion. We can shift the focus from incarcerations of nonviolent offenders to a wide range of community-based intermediate sanctions and punishments. Finally, we can be more conscientious in our efforts to develop strategies and programs that minimize racial bias. Where efforts have taken place, there is evidence that public safety is not the only benefit The lives of individuals and their families are restored; the credibility and legitimacy of the criminal justice system are enhanced.
          More and more people are growing weary and angry
over the failed and destructive policies of the past that
continue to shape our overly punitive incarceration policies. The insatiable appetite of the prison industrial complex is consuming the dignity of communities of color and the humanity of the larger society.
          
            George Napper Jr. is a native of California and has an extensive
background in both criminology and sociology. With a Ph.D. in
criminology from the University of California at Berkeley, he came to
Atlanta in 1970 as a professor at Spelman College, Emory University,
and Morris Brown College. In 1978, he was appointed Atlanta's first
African-American Chief of Police by Mayor Maynard Jackson and in 1982,
he was appointed Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety for
the City of Atlanta by Mayor Andrew Young. In 1992, Governor Zell
Miller appointed Dr. Napper as the first Commissioner of the newly
created Department of Children and Youth Services (now called the
Department of Juvenile Justice). Napper is presently an Adjunct Professor of Criminal Justice at Clark Atlanta University.
          
        
        
          Cells for Sale
          By Kahn, SiSi Kahn
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2001 pp. 16-20
          
          Begin your journey through time in Durham, North Carolina, driving north on Interstate 85 towards Richmond, one-time capital of the Confederacy. Just before the Virginia border, turn east onto U.S. 158. Travel through Littleton, where members of the Lumbee-Tuscarora tribe routed the Ku Klux Klan in the 1950S. Pass through Roanoke Rapids, where in 1974 workers at the town's seven J.P. Stevens cotton mills voted to join the Textile Workers Union of America and started a historic six-year national campaign for a contract. Keep traveling through history until you cross into Hertford County and there, not far from where the Meherrin River flows into the Chowan, you'll come to the old Vann plantation.
          These days, it doesn't look like much, just some cotton fields backed by scrub forest. But in 1850, it was a major plantation with more than fifty slaves. In 1860, only 611 plantations in the entire state owned more than fifty slaves, making the Vanns one of the larger slaveholding families in North Carolina.
          But, if Corporate America has its way, the old Vann place will soon be back in business with a vengeance. Wackenhut Corrections, a multi-national corporation that builds and runs private prisons for profit, is planning to build a 1,320-bed prison here. They will operate it under a contract from the Federal Bureau of Prisons, which plans to ship the prison 1,200 inmates from the District of Columbia, almost all of them African Americans. So Wackenhut will be importing well over one thousand Black men from the District of Columbia and imprisoning them on the same plantation where African Americans, possibly including some of their own ancestors, were held as slaves 150 years ago.
          This is just one example of the ways in which the for-profit prison
industry is changing the nature of criminal justice in the United
States. The rise of for-profit private prisons raises critical issues
for democracy, as well as for the balance of public and private power in an open society.
          For-profit private prisons are a relatively recent development.  The current wave of privatization generally in the U.S. is less than twenty years old and is still heavily contested.  It's paralleled by the recent unprecedented rise in the prison population and in new prison construction.  And, of course, for-profit prison privatization is emerging as a major factor in this dynamic, as well as a major growth industry and social phenomenon. Between 1990 and 1999, the number of prisoners in for-profit private prisons in creased over 1500 percent, from less than 8,000 to over 123,000.
          This is partly a response to recent economic and political
conditions. States, counties, and cities are hard pressed financially
and politically by the "need" for increased prison "beds" and have
turned to for-profit private corporations to provide them. By contracting with for-profit private prison corporations, elected officials avoid the need to go to the voters with politically risky bond issues for new prison construction. They can also report the costs of these con tracts under operating expenses, thus appearing to cut costs and "government jobs."
          To for-profit private prison corporations, the issue is simple: the more prisoners, the more profit.  This partly accounts for their aggressiveness in trying to privatize as much as possible as quickly as they can.  In addition, they're obviously trying to grab as much territory as they can before resistance to for-profits prisons hardens.
          But the private prison corporations have another strategic reason for speed. If the present trend towards prison privatization continues, it will quickly reach a "tipping point" where private rather than public prisons are the norm. At this point, any possibility of restoring prisons to public confront even less hope than it does today. As difficult as it is for inmates and theft supporters, including progressive corrections officers, to change conditions when prisons are publicly held and operated, imagine how much harder that will be if the majority of prisons and detention facilities are in private corporate hands. If all prisons turn private, their parent corporations will have no more interest in reducing the shameful number of inmates in this country than Marriott does in holding down its number of hotel guests. Through campaign contributions made possible by in creased profits, they'll become an even more significant pressure than they are now towards imprisoning the maxi mum number of people for as long as possible. Profit rather than the public good becomes the measure of all things.
          The development and growth of for-profit private prisons has many negative consequences, including the current interstate commerce in prisoners by for-profit private prison corporations. This is one of the tragedies of prison privatization. Prisoners are incarcerated at great distances from their families, homes and communities, basically to suit the convenience of corporations. Many studies have shown that prisoners in these circumstances are significantly less likely to reintegrate themselves successfully on release and, of course, are therefore far more likely to be returned to prison.
          This "export-import" business has a particular impact on the South. The "exporting" states tend to be those with higher costs per day for prisoners. Exporting prisoners is not just about solving prison over-crowding but about saving money, including the capital costs of building new prisons. The "Importing" states tend to be those with lower costs per prisoner per day, often a reflection of their significantly lower labor costs as a result of lack of unionization among corrections officers and other prison employees. Not surprisingly, the importing states tend to be in the South, with its historic low labor costs and lack of unionization.
          It's possible to foresee a scenario where the South, already the site for so many of its own prisoners, becomes the holding area for many of the prisoners from the rest of the nation, the vast majority of whom will be African Americans and other people of color. The South already has a long and shameful history of incarceration and the racialized use of imprisonment as a tool of social control, including chain gangs and convict labor, which tend to make prison privatization more acceptable. According to recent statistics, almost 70 percent of all prisoners in private facilities are in the eleven states of the old Confederacy and over 95 percent of all private prison facilities and detention centers in the U.S. are owned or operated by Southern prison corporations.
          Another negative consequence is the growth of "speculation" or "spec" prisons. The for-profit private prison corporations are using speculation prisons as a way of side stepping current state legislative restrictions on the construction of private prisons for designated state use. Speculation prisons are particularly insidious, not just because they side step the intention of responsible state legislators to restrict and control prison privatization, but because they create pressure for more prisoners. From a management point of view, a prison is like a hotel or motel: you want to fill every bed, every night.  If you don't have enough guests, you do whatever you can to get them -- including supporting campaigns for mandatory and longer sentences. 
          For-profit private prisons have experienced incidents involving deaths, disturbances, physical, and sexual abuse of prisoners, than extent much higher than that in public prisons. To a large extent, such incidents are inherent to the operation of for-profit private prisons, due to their high employee turnover rates and consequent lack of experience among prison personnel. Experience at many prisons which have been established by private corporations in rural areas has shown a turnover rate considerably in excess of that found in public facilities. It is not uncommon for the local workforce to become depleted, with the consequent need to recruit prison personnel from farther and farther away. The long distances such personnel need to drive to work further increases the likelihood of high turn over rates.
          Prison privatization also privatizes decision making and
access. For example, for-profit private prisons can refuse to supply
the basic information about their operations that public prisons are
required to provide. Within the prison industry, such conditions,
ranging from privacy to secrecy, are obvious incentives to
corruption. It's difficult enough to control corruption in prisons under any circumstances. When you also impose the veil of secrecy and legal protection which is standard operating procedure in most major corporations, you are not only inviting additional corruption, you are also making sure it will be more difficult to root out.
          For-profit private prisons are also one of the forces driving the increased incarceration of young people of color. Whole inner-city communities are being robbed of their economic and social potential as young African- American and Latino men and, increasingly, women are arrested and incarcerated, a pattern which is also repeated in other communities of color. The statistics related to the African- American community are both well-known and discouraging:
 Of African-American men between age 20 and twenty-nine, one out of three is either in prison, on probation or on parole. There are more African-American men in prison than in college.
          It is common knowledge how devastating this development has been to
communities of color. Prison not only robs young people of their
youth, it too often bars them from future employment.  Should we then
be surprised when communities of color are left behind economically
and politically? Or when young people of color say that things today are worse than forty years ago, that the Civil Rights Movement accomplished nothing?
          One of the ironies of the growth in incarceration, however, is that it's created economic opportunity for some people of color. Increasing numbers of correctional officers are themselves people of color. Because public prisons tend to be organized, these employees enjoy reasonable wages and benefits, along with considerable job security.
          But all this changes when prisons are privatized. Some for-profit private prisons pay wages that are barely above the minimum wage, with few or no benefits other than those required bylaw. Turnover for employees in private prisons is astounding, ranging up to 100 percent a year. Working conditions are both difficult and dangerous.
          It is unfortunate that one of the few economic opportunities open to people of color in so many poor and rural communities is guarding other people of color. But as long as these are the few jobs that are available to them, they need to be good jobs, with decent salaries, good fringe benefits, job security, adequate training, and protection.
          To summarize the political situation and to cow dude, three parallel developments have been taking place over the past ten years:
 Demands by political leaders and, to some extent by the public, for more prisons, a product of our seeing incarceration as an easy answer to all social problems; Resistance by voters to increased taxes and/or new bond issues; and,The development and growth of the for-profit private prison industry.
          These three developments are much more related than any of us have realized. To put it simply: Politicians are building careers on being "tough on crime" (which translates to many white voters as "tough on people of color"). So they promise to build more and more prisons. But they also can't go to these same voters to approve prison construction bonds, which would involve higher taxes: these days, almost any politician who goes to the voters with a major bond issue is putting her/his career on the line. So they're between a rock and a hard place. They want to build prisons so they can build their careers, but they lack and can't get the capital to do so.
          Enter the for-profit private prison corporations, with their ability to capitalize prison construction themselves. No bonds, no referendums, no tax increases, no political risks. No wonder so many elected officials are willing to cut these deals.
          But if for-profit private prisons become publicly unacceptable,
politically risky, economically unfeasible, or even illegal, it will
also create a different dynamic for elected officials. Without an easy
way to build new prisons, to promote incarceration as the politically
acceptable be-all and end-all for social problems, they may need to
come to grips with the limits of the current criminal justice
system. In such a situation, rights, reform, rehabilitation, and
restorative justice again be come imaginable-but only in a public and
publicly- accountable system of justice, as is not only appropriate
but critical to a democratic society.
          
            Si Kahn is executive director of Grassroots Leadership and is
campaign director for the Public Justice and Safety Campaign based in
Charlotte, North Carolina.
          
          
            The Public Safety and Justice Campaign
            For-profit private prisons, jails, and detention centers have no place in a democratic society. Profiteering from the imprisonment of human beings compromises public safety and corrupts justice. In the spirit of democracy and accountability, we call for an end to all incarceration for profit.
            Statement of Principles Public Safety and Justice Campaign
            The Public Safety andJustice Campaign (PSJC) is a cooperative Southern and national campaign to stop for-profit private prisons. The campaign was founded by community labor, student, criminal justice, religious, civil rights, and prisoner advocacy organizations.
             Working together, the organizations cooperating in PSJC have adopted the following strategy:
Research: Sharing research
information and working cooperatively to meet research needs. Currently, this includes developing an early warning system on attempts to establish for-profit private prisons and tracking state legislation related to the issue.Community education: Training, speaking, and writing with the goal of moving critical constituencies to action, so that participants learn as they act.Coalition-building: Bringing a broad range of organizations into the campaign, particularly those directly influenced by for-profit private prisons.Public policy development: Working to
counter the lobbying efforts of for-profit private prison corporations by educating legislators on the harm done by for-profit prisons and the need for legislation at the local, state, and national level to end prison privatization.Crisis intervention: Providing organizing and
strategy assistance to communities threatened by
prison privatization, particularly those chosen as potential
for-profit private prison sites.Direct action: Creating opportunities for action,
so that people's potential power is publicly expressed and brought to
bear on decision-makers.
            Central staffing for the Public Safety and Justice Campaign is provided by Grassroots Leadership, based in Charlotte, North Carolina, which has done community, labor, and civil rights organizing in the South for over twenty years.
            Grassroots Leadership's executive director, Si
Kahn, serves as Campaign Director for PSJC. Other
participating organizations contribute research, legislative lobbying, public relations, legal resources and, above all, time and expertise.
            If you'd like to help the Public Safety and Justice Campaign stop for-profit private prisons, we invite you to do any or all of the following:
 Ask your organization to officially adopt the statement of principles and send a confirming letter PSJC at
the above address.Let PSJC know about any action you're taking to stop for-profit private prisons, including lessons learned that might be helpful to others.Share research with PSJC, including any advance information about where the prison privateers may be going next. Put PSJC in touch with others who are active on
the issue, including local leaders, lawyers, researchers.
legislators, writers, organizers, and anyone else who is fighting for justice on this issue. Receive our daily email bulletins by sending an
email to: ken@flpba.org.Visit the Public Safety and Justice Campaign
website at www.stopprivateprisons.org.
            For more information, please contact 
Si Kahn, Campaign Director
Public Safety and Justice Campaign P.O. Box 36006,
Charlotte, North Carolina 28236 704-376-9206 phone; 704-332-0445
fax email skahn00000@aol.com
          
          
            Old Vann Plantation
            
              I was hiding in the brush 
              By the Ohio River
              Sarah by my side
              The baby in my arms
              When the slavecatchers found us
              With our backs against the water
              Winter come late
              And the ice not formed
            
            
              And they sold me back South
              To the old Vann Plantation
              Two hundred miles
              From my home and kin
              To be buried in a grave
              With no marker on it
              Right on the spot
              Where the new prison stands
              Right on the spot
              Where the new prison stands
            
            
              I was walking the streets
              By the Anacostia River
              But no one was hiring
              A young Black man
              Wben the District police
              Picked me up for no reason
              Gave me 15 years
              For less than ten grams
            
            
              And they sent me down South
              To the old Vann Plantation
              Two hundred miles
              From my home and kin
              To be buried in a cell
              In a for-profit prison
              To make some men rich
              From the trouble I'm in
              To make some men rich
              From the trouble I'm in
            
            
              There were four million slaves
              From the African nation
              Now there's two million prisoners
              In the land of the free
              It might be right on this spot
              That my great-great-grandmother
              Had done to her
              What they're doing to me
            
            
              I can feel her spirit
              On the old Vann Plantation
              Beneath the towers
              And the razor wire
              All for the profit
              Of some prison corporation
              If you say that's not slavery
              You're a goddamn liar
              If you say that's not slavery
              You're a goddamn liar
            
            Copyright 2000 Joe Hill Music (ASCAP). All rights reserved.
          
        
        
          Prison Slavery
          By Rev. Davis, MurphyMurphy Davis
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 21-24
          
          Our friend Thony is locked up for a sentence of 481 years in an infamous Southern plantation-style prison. He spends his days with a swing blade cutting grass on the edge of ditches over the 20,000-acre prison. For his labor he is paid two cents per hour. One penny per hour is banked until his parole consideration (2070); the other is his to spend at the prison store.
          Mary Louise sews blue stripes down the pants legs of prison uniforms at the garment factory near the women's prison. For her eight hours a day she is paid nothing. She begs stamps from friends to write to her children.
          Charles stands, day after day, in front of a machine, watching it stamp out license plates. The work is monotonous, and he is paid nothing for it The prison tells him he is building "work skills." But since license plates are only made in prison industries, he is not being prepared for any work in the outside market.
          Frank sits on death row. Day in, day out, he is, for all
practical purposes, idle. Television, exercise, writing letters, and playing checkers pass the time. Frank, though young, strong, and energetic, is not allowed to work. He has spent the past ten years of his life unable to do anything of use to anyone.
          Thony, Mary Louise, Charles, and Frank, like more
than two million men, women, and children in the United
States, cannot control their own labor. They are slaves.
          Slavery is, of course, not a fashionable word in the early days of
the twenty-first century. We assume ourselves to be rid of it. But an
often-overlooked fact of U.S. political life and history is that the
Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution did not abolish slavery in
this country. It simply narrowed the practice. The amendment reads
"Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place subject to their jurisdiction" (emphasis mine). Prisoners are, by mandate of the United States Constitution, slaves.
           In the 1970s, the terminology of the prison system
started to change. We began to have "Correctional Institutions," -Diagnostic and Classification Centers," "Youth Development Centers," etc. Wardens became "Superintendents;" guards became "Correctional Officers;" prisoners became "inmates." Solitary confinement, or the "hole," became the "Adjustment Center?' The language of scientific penology attempts to mask harsh reality.
          Some of the tough talk of recent years has abandoned
the "new" penology and reverted to the chain gang approach. But whatever words we use for the system or its captives, prisoners are people from whom most rights of citizenship have been taken. They have no right to control where they are, with whom, or how they spend their time in forced labor or forced idleness. Whether we say they are given over to the prison system to be "corrected," "rehabilitated," or "incapacitated," the fact remains that they are in the system to accomplish one goal: punishment.
          Why? And for whom? Can we be satisfied to live with
the commonly held assumption that people are in prison solely because they have done bad things? If this assumption were true then why would there be such wide variation in incarceration rates around the world and even within the United States? The United States goes back and forth with Russia for the distinction of being the world's number one jailer. That is to say that the U.S. depends more than any ether government in the world-on caging people as a response to our problems. In recent decades, we have closed mental hospitals, addiction services, and community programs for the retarded and the disabled, not to mention support services for families, children, and the elderly. Prisons and jails have become the one-stop solution for all our problems. There are, in many states, more mentally ill people in county jails and state prisons than in hospitals. Most expressions of 'deviance" have been criminalized and the criminal control system is supposed to take care of it all.
          Prisons have not always been such major institutions
in the United States. Georgia's penal history is representative of most Southern states: The first state prison was
opened in Milledgeville (then the state capital) in 1817. The prison was based on the "Auburn plan" which assumed that hard work would simultaneously punish and reform. The average number of prisoners remained around two-hundred--all white. Black people, of course, were slaves and were dealt with inside the system of private ownership.
          This development in Georgia roughly coincided with the opening of state prisons in other states. Thomas Jefferson took from Italian philosopher Cesare Beccaria the notion of confined convict slavery and designed a prison for Virginia that opened to receive prisoners in 1800. Centuries earlier, governments had learned that the punishment of slavery could be used to the benefit of the state. Galley slavery of ancient Greece and Rome was used again in France and Spain during the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries.
          In the nineteenth century, slavery as punishment was tailored to the needs of the American system. The benefits of this form of punishment to general social control were frankly admitted. A prison report in 1820 stressed that convict submission was 'demanded not so much for the smooth functioning of the prison but for the sake of the convict himself, who shall learn to submit willingly to the fate of the lower classes."
          As the system of American prison slavery was honed, the controversy raged over the practice of chattel slavery. At the close of the Civil War, the controversy focused on the wording of the Constitutional Amendment to legally abolish slavery. Led by Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner, those who argued for the complete abolition of slavery in the United States lost their struggle. The Thirteenth Amendment as it was passed, and as it stands, forbids slavery "except as a punishment for crime." This was a major victory for the white political forces of the old Confederacy, bitter over the loss of their captive labor force. Rather than legally abolishing slavery, the amendment changed the system to permit the state, not private citizens, to be slave owners.
          After the Civil War, Southern planters thought themselves lost without their slaves. The one legal form of slavery still available to them was imprisonment Some
states passed "Black Codes." Georgia and other states passed vagrancy laws, and similar statutes and ordinances as a way to lock up black people who were seen not to be in their "proper" place.
          In 1868 Georgia established by law the convict lease
system modeled after the Massachusetts system begun
in 1798. Convicts could be leased to counties or county contractors for use on public works. In 1874 the Georgia law was altered to permit leasing convicts to private individuals and companies. By 1877, Georgia had 1.100 prisoners-994 (90 percent) of them were black.
          In 1878, former Confederate Colonel Robert Alston.
serving as state representative from DeKalb County, visited convict work camps all over the state. As head of the Committee on the Penitentiary he wrote a scathing report: "The lease system at best is a bad one, and seems to have been forced upon the State by an inability to provide for the great increase in the number of criminals growing out of the changed relations of labor. To turn the prisoners over to private parties, who have no interest in them except that which is prompted by avarice, is to subject them to treatment which is as various as the characters of those in charge and in many cases amount to nothing less than capital punishment with slow torture added." Alston encouraged leading citizens to withdraw from the companies leasing convicts. Before long, a man who
leased convicts murdered Colonel Alston.
          As difficult as it must have been in the harsh days of,
the post-Reconstruction era,, the black community found
various ways to protest the lease system. One of their
methods was an annual memorial service and "decoration of the grave" for Alston as the first white person to "condemn and denounce the workings of the abominable, blasphemous and vile penitentiary lease system, under which so many of our race are doomed to horror, agony, and pollution."
          In 1908 the Georgia Prison Commission reported that,
in the penitentiary and chain gangs combined, there were 4,290 Negro
males, 209 Negro women, 461 white males, and six white women. In that same year a committee report to the legislature on corruption and cruelty in the lease system led the legislature to abolish the lease. After that, chain gangs worked on public works rather than for private individuals and companies. But abuses continued. One infamous warden used to send black trustees with a pitchfork to make the hogs squeal so that the townsfolk would not hear the human screams as the warden beat a prisoner with hosepipe. Submission to the "fate of the lower classes" seems to have continued as an agenda in the prisons.
          In 1957, forty-one prisoners at the Buford Rock Quarry
broke their own legs with their sledgehammers to protest harsh working and living conditions. When the investigations promised by prison officials never took place, a second and then a third group of prisoners broke their own legs. As recently as 1979, a number of prisoners at the Wayne County "Correctional Institution" cut their own Achilles tendons in protest of harsh and demeaning working conditions.
          I will never forget my first visit to the Georgia State Prison at Reidsville in the spring of 1978. We drove onto the prison "reservation" and there, as far as I could see, were groups of men (mostly black) bent over working in the fields. Over them sat a uniformed white man on horseback with a rifle across his lap. I was utterly amazed; nothing in my formal education had prepared me to see this contemporary picture of slavery. Indeed, the privilege inherent in my formal education had contributed to my inability to see.
           I did not realize then that slavery still existed as a legal institution in the United States. Most American citizens probably do not But as the Committee to Abolish Prison Slavery has said: "In any form, slavery dehumanizes, cripples, and destroys anyone who willingly, or unwillingly, partakes in its practice." Prisons and prison slavery are crucial institutions in this country for controlling labor in the interest of the powerful few and to the benefit of all people of privilege.
          It is beyond dispute that imprisonment rates have always gone
straight up and down with rates of unemployment among the poor and
especially people of color. But this has changed. Today, unemployment
is at its lowest rate in recorded history, and crime rates have
dropped dramatically, but still the imprisonment rate has continued to grow. What now drives the criminal control system is it crime and punishment but the drive to feed the vast Prison Industrial Complex which has been created to seek growing profits from prison labor. Within this monstrous system, creating even more political and social obfuscation, the phenomenon of privatization of prisons has now made marketable commodities of even prisoners themselves. To feed corporate profits, our legislative bodies have steadily passed harsher laws and longer mandatory sentences while the courts have dutifully imposed the draconian laws and turned a blind eye to selective enforcement and prosecution. The portrayal of "crime" by the corporate media feeds the process. Since prisons on local, state, and federal levels have become multi-billion dollar industries, an increasing number of individuals and institutions are dependent on their continued existence.
          Prison slavery infects all of us, whether we make ourselves aware of its use or not. Prisons are off the beaten path for most people. Middle and upper class people have very little reason to know anything of prisons or prisoners except when it becomes a local issue. Just a few years ago, communities could be quickly whipped into a frenzy to keep a new prison from being built "in our neighborhood." But with the frequently decimated economic base of small towns and rural areas and the increased "marketing" of prisons as an economic boon to small communities, many of these counties and municipalities now hire professionals to lobby the legislature and Departments of Corrections, begging them to put the next new prison in their area.
          This marriage made in hell of racial polarization and
discrimination with corporate greed has formed the bottom line of the Prison Industrial Complex and its devastating consequences.
          The damage done to the human family by this unchecked pattern is inestimable. When a breadwinner is taken to prison her/his children often become wards of the state-by foster care or welfare. More often than not, prisoners are assigned to prisons far from family and community ties, so that relationships are usually at least damaged and sometimes completely broken. Because prisoners earn nothing, or nearly nothing; for their labor, there is no possibility of helping to support their own families or making reparations where appropriate. Millions of men and women and children are being "disappeared" from their communities, losing their families, their access to education and decent employment, and even the right to
          vote when they are released. The situation becomes more complex by the day as we allow the prison industrial complex to be woven into our social, political, and economic fabric.
          Pretending to be untouched by systems of degradation and dehumanization can only be a self-defeating
game. Perhaps we had to come to this point to begin to
face the futility and self-destructiveness of our corporate
behavior. Perhaps it took this level of abuse of the system to make us stop and see that our basic document-namely the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution-is wrong as long as it allows penal slavery to replace chattel slavery.
          It is time for a movement to take up the unfulfilled agenda of the nineteenth Century Abolitionists. The slaveholders who fought to maintain penal slavery in the Constitution understood that the criminal control system would be a lynchpin in the political economy of the post-Reconstruction South. It was later a basic underpinning of the Jim Crow system. In our day, the system of police, prisons, and courts are basic to any consideration of racial justice. We will not honestly confront race in our society until we take it on. Prison slavery must and will someday be abolished. Until then we will not even begin to take an honest look at how we might move toward fair labor practices, a living wage, and the ongoing task of dismantling the racism that infects our common life. It is the least we can do to be about the task of seeking human dignity and liberation for all of God's children.
          
            Rev. Murphy Davis is a partner at the Open Door Community, an Atlanta
community of Christians who minister with the homeless and
prisoners. Davis is coordinator of the Southern Prison Ministry.
          
        
        
          Criminalization of Women
          By Torian, SarahSarah Torian
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 24-25
          
          In 1994, Kemba Smith became a symbol of a national
trend in criminal justice. A twenty-three year old African
American woman from the suburbs of Richmond, Virginia,
she was sentenced to 24 years in prison for her involvement in a four million-dollar crack and powder cocaine drug operation led by her physically and verbally abusive boyfriend and his brother. She had pleaded guilty to conspiracy to drug trafficking, money laundering, and making false statements to federal agents. She had never used nor sold any drugs and had no direct knowledge of any sales. Kemba Smith is representative of a significant part of a national trend, the escalating number of women who are finding themselves behind bars for low-level involvement in drugs and other crimes.
          Between 1980 and 1997, the number of women
in state and federal prisons increased by 573 per
cent. Much of this increase is a result of the "war on drugs" and the mandatory minimum sentencing guidelines now imposed for drug offenses. "The impact of sentencing guidelines on women is astronomical," reports Michelle Jacobs, professor at Howard University Law School which hosted a three-day conference sponsored by the Lawyer's' Committee for Civil Rights Under 'the law that examined the increase in the criminalization of women.
'A woman may just be married to a man who deals drugs
and the woman has only a very basic low-level involvement. She may answer the phone and take messages, receive packages at the door, and yet, with drug laws the way they are now, she gets charged with conspiracy for the total amount of the drugs. Before, judges
could take into account prior convictions, families, the potential to rehabilitate. Now they can't." Drug offenses make up one-third, of women's convictions, a greater proportion than for men. Between 1990 and 1996, drug felony convictions among women in state courts jumped 37 percent to 59,027.
          Drugs are
not the only reason that women now comprise 16 percent of the nation's
correction population. According to a Bureau of Justice
Statistics (BJS) special report released in December of
1999, felony convictions of women in state courts increased by more than 20 percent for seven out of nine major crimes. (Only murder and robbery witnessed a drop in convictions.) Fraud was the crime for which there were the most convictions (33,902) in 1996, an increase of 55 percent from 1990. Larceny, the offense category with the most arrests, saw an increase in convictions of 39 percent, reaching a total of 28,786 in 1996.
          The South leads the nation in the imprisonment of women. In 1998, of female state prisoners, 44 percent were held by states in the South where the incarceration rate is the highest of any region. In the South, Texas leads the way in locking up women with 10,343 female prisoners and a rate of 102 per 100,000 residents.
          One of the most disturbing statistics revealed by the
BJS report was the racial breakdowns of female prisoners. White women make up a great majority of the women on probation (62 percent) where African-American women represent 27 percent and Hispanic women 10 percent. Looking at women in jails and prisons, however, the numbers change drastically. White women make up only 36 percent of women in local jails, 33 percent of women in
state prisons, and 29 percent of women in federal prisons. African-American women make up 44 percent of women in local jails, 48 percent in state prisons, and 35 percent in federal prisons. Hispanic women represent 15 percent of women in local jails, 15 percent in state prisons, and leap to 32 percent
of women in federal prisons.
           Tracy Snell, co-writer of the BJS report
on women offenders could not definitively explain these differences. "This is reflective of a number of things," she explained. "It depends on the types of offenses, the criminal history, if the offender was on probation or parole at the time or the offense and so forth. But we did not collect that kind of data for this study, so it is really tough to explain."
          The exponential increase in female imprisonment has a broad and devastating impact on the communities that the women leave. More than 233,600 minor children have mothers who are in jails or prisons and 1.3 million minor children have mothers under
supervision by the justice system, including parole and
probation. These children lose their mothers. "The impact on the
community [of the imprisonment of women] is multi-layered," argues Michelle Jacobs. "If a man is arrested, the woman usually continues to care for the family. If the
woman is arrested, there is rarely reciprocity. The children are usually shuttled off to foster homes or left with grandmothers who don't have the support they need."
          The Center for Children of Incarcerated Mothers reports that children whose mothers are imprisoned are five times more likely to go to prisons themselves. Grassroots orgnizations like Aid to Children of Imprisoned Mothers, Inc. (AIM) are working to support all three generations impacted by the imprisonment of mothers to turn this trend around. AIM in Atlanta is a member of this national network of community-based organizations that offers support to children, including an after-school program and transportation to visit mothers in nearby prisons; to mothers, including parenting skills and job readiness training: and to grandmothers and caregivers, including support and fellowship groups. "Our focus is intergenerational--across three generations," says Sandra Barnhill, executive director of AIM in Atlanta "AIM works intensively over a long period with all family members involved to allow for a complete investment in the entire family to begin to turn these trends around."
          But the imprisonment of women is indicative of a larger economic
injustice. The women who are being incarcerated are in much more dire
financial straits than their male counterparts, Nearly 30 percent of
women in state prisons reported receiving welfare assistance prior to
their arrest, compared to 8 percent of men in state
prisons. Thirty-seven percent of women in state prisons had incomes of
less than six hundred dollars prior to their arrest, compared to 27
percent of men. With so much emphasis on men we haven't really been
thinking about women and criminal justice." explains Jacobs. We don't
know the conditions of poverty and domestic violence that lead her to
an economic crime."
          
            Sarah Torian is editorial coordinator at the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          A Second Chance
          By Poole, DeborahDeborah Poole
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 p. 26
          
          In August 1998, I took the first step--in what I have
since concluded will be my life's work--indigent criminal
defense. I went to work as a staff attorney at Georgia
Justice Project. Clearly, the attraction was not the sexiness
of the work, nor was it the compensation, which is meager compared to
first year associates in most law firms. Rather I was lured by the
philosophy of the Georgia Justice Project:
"Changing Our Community One Person at a Time." Trite in its simplicity, this idea captures the essence of the Project: If we deal with clients holistically by considering how they arrived at their current circumstances, and if we address their problems rather than simply adjudicate their legal cases, they can break the cycle which keeps them in the criminal justice system.
          My first client was a young black woman named Skye.
Her mother died when she was nine. Her father turned to alcohol and drugs. At age fourteen, Skye began to use drugs. Her abuse of cocaine, speed, pot, and crack continued for ten years during which Skye gave birth to five children, with five different fathers.
          Skye came to us charged with armed robbery, a crime that carries a ten-year mandatory sentence. She had been up for two days straight doing drugs, and doing whatever it took to get the next hit After an episode where Skye sold her body for money to buy more
drugs, the "John" refused to pay. Skye, with a box cutter as a weapon, confronted him. Her money secured, Skye drove away, only to be quickly picked up and charged with armed robbery.
          It took nearly a year to resolve Skye's case, but when she came before the judge, the hours of work put in by Georgia Justice Project's social work team and addiction counselor paid off. Instead of being sentenced to prison, Skye was ordered to a residential treatment facility for her addiction, and to serve the remainder of her sentence on probation.
          That was two years ago. Skye completed her residential treatment program and is now united
with her five children.
          Last month, I received a letter from Skye. She is buying a three-bedroom home in South Carolina (She received permission from her probation officer to move out of state). She is healthy, happy, and has not used drugs in two years.
          Skye is an example of what Georgia justice Project is about--
supporting human potential, and helping individuals create second chances for themselves.
          
            Deborah Poole is a staff attorney at the Georgia Justice Project.
          
        
        
          Criminal Court as the New Voting Rights Arena
          By Mauer, MarcMarc Mauer
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 27-28
          
          When voters go to the polls for the November elections, nearly four million people will be forced to stay away. These are not necessarily uninterested voters, but rather people who currently serve or have previously served a felony sentence and are thereby disqualified from voting under state laws. The combined impact of these laws and the dramatic growth of the criminal justice system has led to a situation whereby thirty-five years after the passage of the Voting Rights Act, a record number of Americans in the modern era are now excluded from voting.
          The dramatic escalation in the number of people enmeshed in the criminal justice system since 1970 and the racial disparities that have marked that rise have led to the loss of voting rights for an estimated 13 percent of African-American males.
          The scope of disfranchisement laws today is quite
broad--forty-seven states disqualify prisoners from voting (only
Maine, Massachusetts, and Vermont permit inmates to vote),while
thirty-two states exclude persons on parole. Twenty-nine states
exclude offenders on probation from voting. Further, fifteen states
including Alabama, Florida, Kentucky, Mississippi, Tennessee, and Virginia--exclude ex-felons from voting, persons who have "paid their debt to society." In most of these states, ex-felons are disfranchised for life unless they can secure a pardon from the
governor, an action that is often logistically and financially difficult for many ex-offenders to achieve. In Virginia, for example, during a recent two-year period, 404 ex-felons regained their voting rights out of an estimated ex-felon population of more than 200,000.
          While disfranchisement laws are often described as a natural consequence of a felony conviction, in fact the United States stands at one extreme of industrialized nations in regard to these policies. No other democracy disfranchises convicted offenders for life and many nations, including Denmark, France, Israel, and Poland. permit prisoners to vote. Even when felons lose their voting rights for a period of time, it is often related to specific offenses or is imposed by a judge, as opposed to being legislatively mandated for all offenders.
          Policymakers who support disfranchisement offer several
justifications as a, rationale for the loss of voting rights. The first is that disfranchisement is a legitimate aspect of the punishment for committing a crime. A 1975 federal court ruling held that felons "have breached their social contract and, like an insane person, have raised doubts about their ability to vote responsibly. This argument confuses the goals of punishment, which may include the temporary deprivation of liberty, with the loss of fundamental rights. Persons convicted of a felony, for example, do not normally forfeit the right to own property, to marry or divorce, or to initiate a lawsuit. Further, while punishment is normally expected to be proportionate to the offense, disfranchisement is applied to murderers and burglars alike, with no judicial intervention.
          The 1974 Supreme Court case of Richardson v.
Ramirez raised the possibility of electoral fraud by felons as a reason for felony disfranchisement. While there might be some merit to this argument for those offenders convicted of bribery or fraud, it is difficult to see why the 99 percent of offenders not convicted of these offenses would be considered likely to engage in this type of crime.
          Proponents of these policies, like Roger Clegg of the Center for
Equal Opportunity, also raise the specter of criminals conspiring to
thwart the interests of law-abiding citizens through the ballot box. Clegg suggests that "those who have committed serious crimes may be presumed to lack this trustworthyness and loyalty." This might seem threatening at first blush, but is actually rather ludicrous.
          Suppose, for example, a group of car thieves wanted to lower the penalties for car theft. They would need to field candidates to run on this platform, get elected to a state legislature, and then convince a majority of legislators and a governor to enact such policies. This hardly seems like a threat to public safety or democracy.
          Perhaps a more likely challenge might emerge from persons convicted of drug offenses who believe that current sentencing laws are overly harsh. This, in fact, is a belief shared by a growing number of Americans. Should not the voices and experiences of those persons most affected by these policies be heard in this debate?
          Participation in the electoral process can actually play
a significant role in rehabilitation. Persons who feel they
have a connection and obligation to a community are less
likely to victimize their fellow citizens. The criminal justice system should foster such sense of responsibility, and the right to vote presents a strong means of doing so.
          Felony disfranchisement laws would be troublesome
at any time, but are particularly so today as a result of the dramatic increase in the punitive dimensions of the criminal justice system.
          In recent years, there have been some encouraging developments on
the felony voting issue. Legislators in at least seven states,
including Alabama, Florida, and Virginia, have introduced bills to
scale back or repeal some of the most egregious laws and there is
reason for cautious optimism for passage of such laws in several
states in the next year or two. In the 2000 legislative
session. Delaware lawmakers scaled back the state's lifetime ban on
voting for felons, and now restore voting rights five years after
completion of the sentence. At the federal level, Rep. John Conyers
(D-Michigan) has introduced HR 906, a bill that would permit
non-incarcerated felons and ex-felons to vote in federal elections
even if they are prohibited from voting in state elections. The
rationale for this is that under the current system, there is no uniformity in national elections--an ex-felon in West Virginia can vote for president, but not one in Virginia.
          At this country's founding, only adult white male property-holders
were permitted to vote. The majority of the population who could not
vote included women. African Americans, illiterates, poor people, and
felons. Today, all excluded groups except felons and ex-felons have
gained the right to vote, and we look back on these former exclusions
with a great deal of national embarrassment. As we begin the new
century, it is long past time to reconsider the meaning of democracy in a society striving for full inclusion.
          
            Marc Mauer is assistant director of The Sentencing Project and
author of Race to Incarcerate (The New Press).
          
        
        
          The Reef
          By Levasseur, Raymond LucRaymond Luc Levasseur
          Vol 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 29-30
          
          From 1989 to 1997, Ray Levasseur's essay and letters
were a regular feature on WORT-FM Community Radio in
Madison, Wisconsin. When asked if he had any thoughts for his audience in Madison, he sent in the following.
          I've been in prison for political offenses since 1984. I was tried and acquitted of sedition. As the government stated in its indictment, our "revolutionary anti-imperialist organization" sought to challenge its authority to kill with impunity in Central America. I was convicted of bombing military facilities in an effort to expose U.S. war crimes against the people of El Salvador, Nicaragua, and Guatemala. I was convicted of actions taken against American corporations whose power and products strengthened the racist apartheid system in South Africa.
          For this I'm supposed to suffer and die in prison. The trial judge
recommended that I never be paroled--that I remain in prison until
'expiration" of my forty-five-year sentence, if I don't expire of something else doing that kind of time.
          To punctuate their hatred of what they perceive to be
my political beliefs and associations, the government sent
me to their worst prison--the infamous Marion--in 1986. When the government built an even more high tech, mind numbing penitentiary called Administrative Maximum (ADX), at Florence, Colorado, I was sent there in 1995. As some of you know, I've written extensively about human rights violations, and the counterproductive, spirit-crushing nature of such prisons.
          On August 20, 1999, after many long years of isolation
and close confinement, where walls were never more than a few steps
away, I was transferred from ADX to the maximum security penitentiary
at Atlanta, Georgia. Built in 1905, Atlanta has held other political
prisoners including Eugene Debs (a socialist), Alexander Berkman (an anarchist),and Pedro Albizu Campos (Puerto Rican Nationalist). Federal prisons have always served as way stations for revolutionaries and dissidents--from "Wobblies" (Industrial Workers of the World) to draft resisters.
          Immediately upon my arrival here I was placed in
segregation--the hole. I was told by a representative of the
administration that because of my extensive history of radical
activism, and the many years I spent in their worst prisons, I would remain in the hole for months before serious consideration would be given to releasing me into the general prison population.
          Segregation conditions at Atlanta are among the worst
I've experienced. Every U.S. Supreme Court judge should
be required to sleep on a cell floor as I did, smell shit
backed up in the toilet, and leave the cell to walk in an
outside kennel cage three hours a week (if the guards are
up to giving you that much). Maybe then we'd see some humanity from the robed ones.
          I had to challenge what was becoming an increasingly
volatile situation. There is nothing prison administrators
fear more than solidarity among prisoners and a penetrating look at
theft operations from people outside the walls. Aware of this, friends
and supporters initiated a campaign to get me out of the hole. This
campaign was successful and I was released from segregation in
December 1999, albeit under restrictive conditions. I can see the moon
now, something I've gone years without being able to do. I'd still be
in the hole were it not for the efforts of so many caring and
committed people whose collective voice was only feet from the
U.S. penitentiary at Atlanta and the Bureau of Prisons in Washington,
D.C. It was a voice to behold. Lest we succumb to that ubiquitous
skepticism or the slippery slope of cynicism that too often mines the
field of political activism--the notion that writing a letter of
protest or support, or performing some other seemingly mundane task is
wasted effort--we just proved otherwise. Struggle brings results, and
all struggles begin with a first step and advance through commitment,
work, and sacrifice. And it's in this spirit that we can save our
brother Mumia Abu Jamal from the state's executioner and ultimately free all political prisoners.
          A single coral is infinitesimally small, but a coral reef is able to
alter the ocean's current Our little campaign to get me out of the
hole built a big enough reef to alter the prison administration's
designs on me. I am grateful to all who made this possible and thank
those of you in Madison who pitched in--including you who at various
times over the years sent me cards and letters, books and periodicals,
kind words and encouragement Some of you have remained active on
various fronts and I take heart when I see you do not stand idly by
when the system attempts to crush life with police power and dollar
signs. I also want to thank the folks at WORT radio--past and present--who've allowed issues like that of political prisoners to be aired, issues which would not have otherwise seen the light of day.
          Someone wrote to me recently, asking me whether I thought the
militancy of the anarchists/youth at the anti-WTO demonstrations in
Seattle was counterproductive. My response to that is a resounding
no. And it's not even a matter of whether I personally agree or disagree with the tactic of smashing windows that reflect corporate profits
over human needs. Destroying corporate property to make a political point has a long history among the oppressed. And it most certainly is not the major contradiction. The major contradiction is corporate power raping the earth, bankrolled by the sweat of underpaid and abused workers. It's not militancy that threatens to pull the plug on the American Left; but rather the lack of militancy and sustained activism. As the saying goes--think globally and act locally. Too often we fall to act on issues confronting us in our own communities--whether it be police brutality, jail and prison conditions, homelessness and affordable housing, labor activism and jobs, taking back the night, environmentalism, etc. Amidst tile current weakness of the Left, the rule of thumb should not so much be ideology and party line as time, place, and conditions. The duty of the activist is to be active. d rather see someone cross a police line than wallow in apathy.
          The last time I was in the city of Atlanta was in 1969. It was April--the first anniversary of Martin Luther King Jr.'s assassination. I was here with a contingent of the Southern Student Organizing Committee. We gathered at Ebenezer Baptist Church and marched to the state capital buildings, which were ringed by Georgia State Police. We were in Atlanta to honor Dr. King and press on for civil rights and oppose the Viet Nam War. Between the church and state capital we stopped outside the county jail for a solidarity demonstration with prisoners inside. Thirty years ago there was a different consciousness about the role of prisoners in the pursuit of basic civil and human rights. They were seen as a potential part of the solution--not as part of the problem that deserved to be ostracized and forgotten. Now there are two million prisoners in America--25 percent of the world's entire prison population. The wages they receive for their forced labor is on par with and often less than what Nike pays its Asian shoe and clothing workers. How do we continue to ignore exploitation on such a scale?
           Thirty years ago our battles were about human rights, and they're about human rights today. It's about daring to struggle for these rights. It's about acting on principle and sound strategies, rather than generating antagonistic divisions through over-inflated rhetoric. It's about Attica being all of us and Mumia being our brother. It's about a future for children that embraces peace, justice, and freedom. 
          
            Raymond Luc Levasseur is serving a forty-five-year sentence at the
Atlanta Federal Prison. His address there is., 10376/016, Atlanta, GA,
30315. A large collection of Roy's essays and letters can be found on
the internet at. http:// home.earthlink.net/~neoludd/. For more
information on political prisoners, visit the Internet at:
www.prisonactivist.org.
          
        
        
          Restorative Justice
          By Wray, HarmonHarmon Wray
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 31-32
          
          In recent years many faith-based and secular criminal justice
activists and scholars have developed a practical and theoretical perspective which offers both a critique of the prevailing criminal justice system and a paradigm of what an alternative system might look like. Usually called "restorative justice," this model has perhaps been most fully articulated by Howard Zehr in his seminal book Changing Lenses (Herald Press, 1995). Presently a number of religious organizations and some state corrections departments are tweaking and experimenting with restorative justice principles and methodologies. This is a promising development but at the same time it runs the risk of co-opting or watering down the radical vision of true restorative justice.
          The distinctiveness of the restorative justice approach can best be
understood by contrast with the criminal justice system in the
U.S. Our current system, based on the concept of retribution or
revenge, defines crime as primarily an offense against the laws of the state. The state, in turn, assumes the power to pick out a likely offender and
to process this person through an adversarial drama in which the major
actors are lawyers. Through either a plea-bargaining process or a trial in open court, played according to rules established by the state and enforced by the judge, the opposing attorneys fight it out in a sort of war game. Eventually the accused is declared either guilty or not guilty. If the person is found to be, or pleads, guilty, a sentence is imposed, which may amount to a symbolic slap on the wrist, a highly punitive prison term, ritual killing by the state, or something in between.
          The focus is on offender and his/her past behavior.
The real victim of the crime, if there is one, is treated as
marginal, as is the community--except insofar as they can be manipulated into lobbying for vengeance--and the offender is treated as passive. The process is geared toward fixing blame, not solving problems. The relationship between the victim and the offender is ignored. Both repentance and forgiveness are discouraged. Accountability is defined strictly as the offender taking his/her punishment, which--to call it by its real name--is the intentional infliction of pain on a human being by other human beings.
          The whole process encourages competitive and individualistic values, assumes a win-lose outcome, and ignores the social, economic, political, cultural, and moral context of the crime and of the appropriate response to it. It is based
on a commitment to retribution by the state against the offender, not
on the principle of restitution of the victim by the
offender. Opportunities for abuse of discretion and for corruption,
racism, sexism, and class discrimination--personal and institutional--abound.
          Rooted in older,
indigenous, tribal
traditions of community justice and in
biblical traditions of shalom (peace with justice). Jubilee economics, and the Sermon on the Mount, restorative justice refocuses our gaze and reshapes the questions and assumptions underlying the retributive criminal justice system. It seeks to deinstitutionalize abstract systems of jurisprudence and replace them with action by concrete, grassroots communities.
          Rather than continuing and escalating the cycle of violence and coercion by both individuals and institutions, restorative justice tries to stop it in its tracks. Rather than separating legal or criminal justice from the larger picture of distributive justice--that is, how wealth, power, and
status are apportioned out in the society-restorative justice looks at the whole social, historical, and political context to determine how the law ought to be most fairly applied. At its best, restorative justice methodology is alert for patterns and systemic issues affecting the community--which often function as root causes of crime--that might emerge in the course of doing restorative justice in particular cases.
          Restorative justice reverses the retributive justice system at almost
every point. Crime is understood primarily as the violation of one
person by another, or--by extension--as the violation of one person or
group by an institution or a system. The real victim, the offender,
and the local community are all seen as the principal stakeholders and
therefore are principally involved in deciding what it will take to
"make it right." Their relationships and feelings are closely attended
to. A future, problem-solving, healing orientation is
predominant. Accountability is understood as taking responsibility for
what one has done by repenting of it, trying
to make it right (typically through restitution by the offender to the victim), and not doing it again. Dialogue, not
an adversarial battle, is normative.
          The community takes responsibility for helping the offender and the victim "work it out" and holds the offender responsible for following through with whatever that entails. As the community seeks to support the victim, it also seeks to help the offender get what he/she needs and to integrate the offender further into the community, not cast him/her out of it.
          A restorative justice process considers the total context of the situation, not just the "crime" as an isolated
event. Just as it seeks to empower victims, it also seeks to empower offenders by fostering in them remorse over having violated others,rather than regret at having been caught, and internal self-discipline, instead of the passive bearing up under externally imposed punishment. It teaches victim, offender, and community new ways of dealing with conflict.
           A restorative approach to justice encourages values of mutuality and
 cooperation and makes possible win-win outcomes. Instead of the
 unrealistic "forgive and forget" model, or the vengeful "remember and
 punish" model, restorative justice offers a healing vision of
 "remember, restore, and reconcile" for all the principal, parties: victim, offender, and community.
          A justice system based on restoration would look very different from
our current system. Such a system would not be "warm and fuzzy,"
characterized by an 'I'm okay, you're okay" attitude. Nor would it be
"soft on crime." But it would be more just in responding to crime, more preventive in its long-term outcomes, and more effective in educating and empowering all parties to analyze and transform
the forces acting upon them.
          There would be a lot more offenders and victims struggling face-to-face
with each other in the presence of community mediators, over what one
has done to the other, and why, and what they now need to do about it,
with the support of the community. And a lot less under-the-table deal
making courtroom theatrics, and gamesmanship by lawyers and judges,
and "quick-fix" law-and-order rhetoric by politicians looking for easy
votes.
          We would have fewer courtrooms, and more neighborhood-based dispute mediation centers. Fewer cops, and more local volunteer mediators. Fewer guns and bullets, more talk. Drug education and treatment programs instead of a war on some of the people (i.e. young, poor, urban, African-American) who use drugs. No private, for-profit prisons, and better publicly operated prisons. No more prison building boom, but more community-based alternative programs. No death penalty, more victim restitution. Less crime, more dialogue. More victims' rights, but not the right to revenge, and not at the expense of defendants' rights. No more sentence enhancement hate crime legislation, but less hate.
          To be sure, not every criminal case lends itself to resolution by mediation, and the legal system needs to remain in place as back-up when mediation fails and to handle cases for which it is not appropriate (for example, most domestic violence cases and most rape and sexual abuse cases). The legal structure also must continue to play the critical role of monitoring the more informal, restorative efforts to do justice to insure the protection of the constitutional rights of all parties and guard against the specter of vigilante justice. But the focus of any justice system needs to be on the primary stakeholders themselves, not the professionals acting as their proxies.
          Piecemeal efforts at criminal justice reform have usually backfired and been easily co -opted. This could happen to restorative justice, too, but it is clear that only a theory and practice as bold and visionary as that offered by restorative justice has the potential to turn around the vicious, costly, unjust, and ineffective criminal justice system presently in place.
          
            Harmon Wray is executive director of Restorative Justice Ministries of the United Methodist Church and is based in Nashville, Tennessee.
          
        
        
          REVIEWS: 
          Death Sentences
          Reviewed by Rev. Stroupe, NibsNibs Stroupe
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 p. 34
          
          Katya Lezin. Finding Life on Death Row: Profiles of Six
Inmates, Boston: Northeastern University Press, 1999.
          I am opposed to the death penalty, but I understand
the primal desire for vengeance. If one of my loved ones were
murdered, I would want a shot at revenge. My impulse is nothing new in
human history--it is as old as blood feuds or Hammurabi's Code or Jesus' words in the Sermon on the Mount. Katya Lezin's compelling book speaks directly to this impulse and testifies strongly to the need for opposition to the death penalty.
          My opposition to the death penalty comes from moral,
political, legal, and religious reasons. The moral ground comes from
the dehumanization of those convicted-we must strip them of
their humanity in order to kill them. We as part of the state, become
the killers, and become what we seek to eliminate. The political
ground, as demonstrated so ably in this book, is that the overwhelming
majority of those sentenced to die are poor. The death penalty is not
a response to murder, it is a response to murder committed by poor
people. The legal reason is connected to the political, pointed out
bluntly in Lezin's book: the appalling lack of adequate legal
representation of those who are poor and are accused of murder. This
reason connects us to the consciousness that is most frightening--far
more people than we wish to admit who are convicted and sentenced to
death are innocent. The religious ground for me as a minister is simple but fundamental: God is the author of life, and the death penalty violates the Sixth Commandment.
          Katya Lezin touches on all of these in this enlightening
portrait of six people sentenced to die. It reminds us that they really are people, and how callous our process of convicting and sentencing them is. In doing this, the book does not sentimentalize them or their crimes. Lezin does not choose those who may be innocent, though it is unclear about one person. Innocence is not the issue here
state-imposed death is.
          Lezin puts the death penalty in its terrible context in
our nation's history. The book is well written but is difficult
reading because it is about the power of death: people who are
murdered and people who are executed. Yet, it is is also deeply inspirational reading in its portraits of people who
bring humanity in a destructive and dehumanizing world: the convicted people who turn out to be people after all; the attorneys who work ceaselessly to save their clients; volunteers and ministers who bring humanity and the possibility of life in the midst of death; family members who remain loyal even when their beloved is convicted of murder; prison staff who try to steer a course between the death machine and retaining their humanity.
          Lezin reminds us that the death penalty kills real
people. In such a situation, one would think that there would be a
meticulous legal process to guard the rights of the accused. What we
see is an appalling death machine that tramples on rights and that
would be comical if it weren't so serious and deadly: a defense
attorney who is drunk at the trial and held in contempt (and indeed,
the next day both attorney and client come from jail to the trial); a
defense attorney who calls no witnesses; a prosecuting attorney who
has a long record of racial discrimination in jury selection but is never reprimanded. Five of the six defendants in the book had court appointed attorneys who were either callous or incompetent. Four are saved because of the work of committed and competent attorneys, paralegals, and volunteers, all of whom are connected
to the Southern Center for Human Rights in Atlanta.
          A recent Columbia University study demonstrated that 67 percent of
death cases are overturned nationally, largely related to the issues
raised here. The Chicago Tribune study in June of the
131 executions during George W. Bush's tenure as governor of Texas
revealed a cynical disregard for justice, and Finding Life on
Death Row testifies to that same process in South Carolina,
Alabama, and Georgia. This book combines the theoretical struggles
over the death penalty with portraits of the humanity of those
convicted under it. It is compelling reading. It reminds us of our
humanity and the humanity of others, and it reminds us of the forces
of death that seek to crush that humanity. It is realistic, difficult, and hopeful, and it asks us to take our stands and to be witnesses for life.
          
            Rev. Nibs Stroupe is pastor at Oakhurst Presbyterian
Church in Decatur, Georgia. He is co-author of While We Run
This Race: Confronting the Power of Racism in the Southern
Church.
          
        
        
          Leasing Life
          Reviewed by Dunbar, TonyTony Dunbar
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 35-36
          
          Alex Lichtenstein, Twice the Work of Free Labor: The
Political Economy of Convict Labor in the New South, New
York City: Verso Press, 1997.
          The convict leasing system, widely used in the South after the
Civil War, is not one of the dark corners of the region's history but
is instead on the cutting edge, in its time, of southern political and
economic development. "Far from representing a lag in southern
modernity, convict labor was a central component in the region's
modernization." This is the thesis of Twice the Work of Free Labor, and the author deliberately avoids turning the book into an expos of the brutality and tortures
of chain gang existence. It was not sadism, but the post-war economy's appetite for cheap, reliable labor to power the "New South" that created convict leasing. Lichtenstein focuses on how the South's emerging capitalists, primarily in the railroad and coal industries of Georgia, Alabama, and Tennessee, used convict labor to launch their empires.
          The Thirteenth Amendment abolished slavery "except as a punishment for
crime." Emancipation generated, in the view of the propertied class, a
vast vagrant and criminal population, and incarceration mushroomed. In most Southern states, Reconstruction governments reacted to the cost of securing and feeding this overload of convicts by making their systems profitable. The Georgia State Penitentiary at
Milledgeville was initially leased in its entirety to Grant, Alexander & Company, the firm that oversaw the majority of Georgia's Reconstruction railroad development. In time, it made sense simply to lease the convicts to politically connected entrepreneurs for employ in remote coal mines or railway construction projects.
          The advantage in cost savings to cash-strapped governments was obvious. Renting a convict for $36 or $50 per
year to the Pratt Consolidated Coal Company was obviously more desirable than running a penal system with tax
dollars. The enthusiasm for the system, however, came
from the business leadership.
          The dramatic industrial development of the South in
the last half of the nineteenth century, the rebuilding of railroads destroyed by war and the laying of thousands of miles of new track, the related exploitation of coal resources and the sudden appearance of pig iron furnaces and coke ovens, the birth of Birmingham as the Pittsburgh of the South, could not have happened as it did, Lichtenstein argues, without convict labor. He details the history of company after company, the Chattahoochee Brick Company, Selma Rome and Dalton Railroad, the Atlanta and
Charlotte Air-Line, the Tennessee Coal and Iron Company, whose core operations in those first years were the
convict workforce.
          The sordid face of convict leasing is apparent in the book. Lichtenstein notes that over four-hundred convicts perished during the first twelve years of leasing in Georgia. It was also readily apparent to the people who participated in it. Observing that deaths on the railroads had steadily
mounted from 1870 until 1875, the chief "keeper" of the Georgia system admitted that, "casualties would have been fewer if the colored convicts were
"property, having a value to preserve."
But the utility of convict leasing overwhelmed these reservations. They were a cheap, reliable, and productive labor force. They acted as a check on free labor, in keeping down strikes.
Where leased convicts were employed as coal miners, the wages of free laborers were reduced by 10 to 20 percent When prices for coal or other commodities produced by prisoners and free workers fell, the prisoners could cheaply keep the core operations running and the free" workers could be laid off. The fact that the majority of leased convicts was African American reinforced the notion that blacks would only work productively in peonage.
          Convict leasing met its greatest resistance in East
Tennessee from the United Mine Workers and other coal miner organizations. During a thirteen-month period in 1891 and 1892, miners attacked five convict camps, burned one to the ground, and set the prisoners free. As the turn of the century approached, the impact of church and Progressive reformers also began to have an impact. In the mid-1890s Canadian customs barred the importation of pig-iron from twenty-three furnaces in Alabama and Tennessee because it was produced "under the taint of prison labor."A Georgia legislator argued to the Southern Sociological Congress in 1913, that while southerners through slavery had fulfilled their burden to care for the blacks,
relegating convicts to a leasing system was "the shirking of governmental duty." Ultimately, most progressive thinkers settled upon public road construction by chain gangs as the superior alternative to convict leasing. The leasing system was abolished in Tennessee and Mississippi in the 1890s, and was replaced by state-owned coal mines and the state-run Parchman penal farm, respectively. Georgia went to the chain gang in 1908. Florida and Alabama finally removed convicts from the turpentine and coal industries in the 1920s, sending the prisoners out to build roads.
          While Lichtenstein's book is certainly a valuable tool for historians of the "New South," and traces and contests various viewpoints of those historians, the writing is fluid enough to engage a broader readership. It makes the convincing, if un-flattering, case that convict leasing was not one of the bleak horrors of the region's past, but a foundation block of the South's current prosperity.
          
            Tony Dunbar is a lawyer in New Orleans. He is also treasurer of the
Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          The Unfinished March
          Reviewed by Vodicka, John ColeJohn Cole Vodicka
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 36-37
          
          William S. McFeely, Proximity to Death, New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 2000.
          During the past year the debate over capital punishment has intensified and it appears that many Americans
are beginning to seriously question whether the US
should continue to execute members of our society.
          In recent months we've been made aware of the alarming number of innocent people condemned to death; seen a study showing that two-thirds of all death sentences in the U.S. are reversed on appeal because of serious prejudicial trial errors; read about mentally ill and juvenile defendants who are exposed to execution; heard eyewitnesses tell us that condemned men and women have been literally tortured to death when the execution apparatus malfunctions; and have had confirmed that there still exists tremendous racial disparity in who the State determines can live and who must die.
          Even some of the most conservative, law-and-order voices among us seem troubled by the United States' rush to execute. Earlier this year the National Review published a front page article subtitled, A Conservative Case Against Capital Punishment" Columnists George Will and James Kilpatrick have called for a reexamination of our use of the death penalty. The conservative Christian Pat Robertson and other Christian Coalition leaders have intervened on behalf of condemned prisoners. And most dramatically, Illinois' Republican Gov. George Ryan imposed a moratorium on executions in his state after more than a dozen death row convicts were found to be innocent; Ryan has said he doubts there will be anyone executed in Illinois while he remains governor.
          All this hopeful news brings to mind what I thought
was an overly-optimistic comment a colleague of mine made twenty years ago when executions were being rapidly carded out and public sentiment favoring the death penalty was hovering around 90 percent "Support for capital punishment may be a mile wide," my friend said, "but it is only an inch deep."
          William S. McFeely's latest book, Proximity to Death,
an intimate chronicle of a Georgia-based law project's valiant and often successful efforts to save condemned prisoners in the South, ought to further aid in the death penalty abolitionists' goal to change the hearts and minds of those who still believe in the legitimacy of death as punishment.
          McFeely--a noted historian who was the Abraham
Baldwin Professor of the Humanities, emeritus, at the
University of Georgia, and is the Pulitzer Prize-winning
author of Grant, as well as Frederick Douglass and Sapelo's People--makes a convincing argument for the abolition of the death penalty mostly by telling stories about the work of the Southern Center for Human Rights, a small cadre of lawyers and investigators "living in one corner of the country to carry a large responsibility ...who are on the unfinished march toward racial justice."
          McFeely's own introduction to the
Southern Center's work came when he agreed to testify in the death penalty sentencing trial of Georgia prisoner Carzell Moore. Steve Bright, the Center's director and one of this country's most brilliant death penalty abolitionist lawyers, wanted McFeely to tell the jury about the racist origins of the Georgia state flag (which contains the old Confederate symbol and is displayed prominently in every Georgia courtroom) and to talk about the history of lynchings in Georgia. Carzell Moore is a black man and Bright always insists that juries and judges hear about the region's brutal racial history--"a century-long chain of killings of black men by white men", as
McFeely describes it--while connecting it to present-day Georgia, where robed members of the Ku Klux Klan still celebrate in front of the prison when executions occur, where black men are eleven times more likely to receive the death penalty than white men, and where, of Georgia's 59 district attorneys, all are white but one.
          Driving away from the Carzell Moore trial and traveling back to
Athens, Georgia, McFeely thinks aloud about what he's just witnessed:
"As a historian, I deal with events safely in the past. It is not simply that I've had a glimpse into the world of the courtroom; rather, I hear the old nineteenth-century issues of race and inhumanity that I've written about before reverberating from today's courtroom walls." McFeely comes to understand that the anti-death penalty effort in the South is not far apart from the antislavery movement 160 years ago.
           From this point on McFeely decides to spend more and more time with Steve Bright and his Southern Center cohorts, traveling throughout Georgia and Alabama, sitting in courtrooms, visiting the Center's condemned clients in prisons, talking with jurors who held some of these prisoners' lives in their hands during trial, meeting with and discussing the death penalty with defense lawyers, district attorneys, judges, newspaper editors, and others who are enmeshed in the capital punishment ritual, each in "proximity to death."
          We're introduced to nearly all who work out of the Southern Center's Atlanta office, who McFeely calls the "protectors of life, lawyers fighting to overturn the Biblical injunction of an eye for an eye." We sit in courtrooms or prison visitation rooms with McFeely and four of the prisoners the Center represents--Kenny Smith, Tony Amadeo, William Brooks, and Carzell Moore--and learn of these prisoners' humanity, their remorse for the horrible
crimes they committed, their longing to live, even if it is in prison, and make things right. ("My clients are more than the worst things they ever did in their lives," Bright tells McFeely.) We meet, all too briefly, some of the early heroes of Georgia's anti-death penalty movement before Steve Bright and the Southern Center for Human Rights appeared on the scene: Millard Farmer, Patsy Morris, Gary Parker, and George Kendall, are but a few.
          By the book's conclusion the reader cannot help but admire the courage, tenacity, and compassion of everyone connected to the Southern Center for Human Rights. Not only have we gotten to know them and those they are trying to save from execution, but we have also been
given story after story and reason upon reason to rid our country of the death penalty.
          "For a nation capable of better to allow its states to take one life as revenge for another life is to practice violence. not combat it," McFeely concludes. "The death penalty is the very antithesis of Civility. It represents a yielding to hatred in a world too full of hatred and killing."
          There have been nearly six-hundred executions carried out in the
U.S. since 1983; today nearly four-thousand men and women occupy death
row cells across the land. Yet McFeely--like my colleague who twenty
years ago estimated support for the death penalty was "only an inch
deep" is optimistic that one day capital punishment will be no more, thanks in large part to the people at the Southern Center for Human Rights, "who will not go away...this tiny band finally will not be beaten."
          William S. McFeely's Proximity to Death, is a powerful little book that both disturbs and inspires. It does indeed give the reader hope that capital punishment will one day be abandoned.
          
            John Cole Vodicka is head of the Prison and Jail Project in Americus,
Georgia.
          
        
        
          Writing for His Life
          Reviewed by Jordan, Joseph F.Joseph F. Jordan
          Vol. 22, No. 3, 2000 pp. 38-39
          
          Mumia Abu-Jamal, Noelle Hanrahan, ed. All Things
Censored. New York: Seven Stories Press, 2000.
          It is clear that the most articulate voice for prison
reform and abolition of the death penalty is that of a prisoner who happens to be on death row. Mumia Abu-Jamal's writing and commentary have become familiar in spite of official attempts to silence him and discredit his work. In this book, All Things Censored, he writes on some of the
themes and issues that he has previously discussed, but with this dispatch he offers a more deliberate, but no less compelling, set of essays.
          Mumia Abu-Jamal was accused, in 1981, and convicted in 1982 of the murder of Philadelphia police officer Daniel Faulkner. He was sentenced to death and, despite evidence that places all contentions of his guilt in doubt, he was scheduled for execution hi December of 1999. New evidence delayed the sentence and his appeals continue.
          Noelle Hanrahan, an investigative journalist who has previously produced radio commentaries for Mumia, edits this collection of essays, covering a ten-year period from about 1989-1999. She also wrote the Introduction, and
conducts an interview with Mumia in one of the closing chapters. The book follows the publication in 1994 of "Live From Death Row." has been translated into five languages and garnered praise from many who now believe in Abu-Jamal's innocence.
          With a foreword contributed by Alice Walker, the collection is separated into four sections: "Scenes:" "Perspectives:" "Essays on Justice:" and a "Conversation between Mumia and Node." There are also additional sections containing notes on the composition and recording of the essays and a useful section authored by Clark Kissinger entitled "The Case of Mumia Abu Jamal," that synthesizes the political context of Mumia's imprisonment allows us to see the case as a much broader example of state repression.
          Of course, the most effective witness and commentator is Mumia himself. It might have been expected that his years of incarceration would have dulled his political senses or muted his voice, but the opposite has occurred. He remains a skilled and incisive social critic and he has helped to make the politics of death a national issue with international notoriety.
          In one essay, "Meeting With a Killer." Mumia relates the story of another death row inmate, Hank Fahy, convicted of the rape slaying of a young girl. While in prison Fahy's own daughter was beaten, raped, and murdered. With his execution date fast approaching, and with little to live for, Fahy finds himself residing in the same prison and the same cellblock as the convicted murderer of his daughter. Fahy quickly understands this as a set-up--he
is expected by the authorities to 'do what is natural,' that is to kill the murderer of his daughter.
          But it is here that Mumia, in telling the story, reveals a greater
sense of his and the other inmate's humanity. He relates how Fahy
summoned the restraint to resist any act of revenge and instead,
offered his forgiveness. Mumia recognizes these moments of grace in a
place where moments worth remembering are few. Still, Mumia does not
allow the political aspects of Fahy's refusal to cooperate and fulfill
the system's expectations to be lost, and he succeeds in humanizing
individuals most of us have long written off as animals. Both Mumia
and Fahy know that Fahy has been set-up. In the words of Fahy, "I felt
good. I felt like the better man, 'cause the same system that plans to
kill me, that plans to kill him, and the same system that set us both
up, for me to kill him and for him to get killed, can't do what I did--forgive".
          This essay, along with others like "Mother Loss and Father Hunger," reveal the precious nature of simple memories when one's life is in the balance. The opus for his mother ends with no resolution, just a trailing off of thought, marked by ellipses, and we can imagine the depth of feeling when, he says, 'To see one's mother die while imprisoned, to see her lifeless form while held in shackles."
          These essays however, are a more important demonstration of Abu-Jamal's continuing passion for justice, not only in his own case, but for general
movements for justice and human rights around the world. In the sections 'Perspectives" and "Essays on Justice," he offers statements of solidarity with, and draws strength from Haitian communities seeking equal treatment as immigrants; and from Zapatista militants fighting for sovereignty and justice. The state and the various bureaucracies associated with the state and the criminal justice system have long recognized the danger of allowing Mumia to speak or write without strict and stringent controls.
          Read for example, in one of the longer essays, "An Uncivil Action," we follow him as he is tried for allegedly pursuing a profession (journalism) while imprisoned. In the hands of any other writer this episode might be as compelling and provocative, but, as an inmate Mumia tells the story with a much more conviction, focusing on the most minute, but still critical, pieces of testimony. As a critic of the justice system he is unrelenting and unforgiving, focusing on the duplicity and dishonesty of lawyers, prison officials, and judges.
          Mumia still fights, with an international following these days, for his own life as well as for the lives of others who have been placed on death row with little hope of relief. All
Things Censored is an important part of that fight. As a part of the larger progressive movement for reform of the justice system he is one of the most eloquent voices and one off the most intelligent minds we have. This book is an important addition to the body of work that challenges how we mete out justice and shows how our system of justice is hopelessly entwined with our systems of inequality and loss of moral and ethical certitude.
          In the opening words of the book Mumia offers a
moving afterthought: "By reading (or hearing) these very
words, you are participating in a conspiracy of resistance. I welcome you. For the spirit of resistance is, in essence, the spirit of love."
          
            Joseph F. Jordan is an administrator at the Auburn Avenue Research Library on African-American Culture and History in Atlanta, Georgia.
          
        
      
    
  