The Mockery of DemocracyBy Redwood, RenéRené
Redwood and Horn, BernieBernie HornVol. 23, No. 2, 2001 pp. 4-5As summer turn to autumn, so why should you care about hanging
chads and butterfly ballots? Why should you care whether or not rich
and poor precincts in the same county have identical voting
equipment? Does it really matter to most Americans that in Florida's
majority black voting precincts, the residents were four times more
likely to have their 2000 presidential election ballots disqualified
than voters in majority white precincts?Who care about provisional ballots for cases when there are
disputes over the registration rolls? Why do we need voting rights
posted at each polling place? Why should you be concerned that a firm
scrubbed the Florida voter list so clean that it took away the right
to vote from regular folks?We should all care about voting reform. One day when you have just
moved across town or to another state, your vote may also be in
jeopardy.Too many of yesterday's disfranchised are still disfranchised
today. Though election reform has been an important issue for
decades, it occupies a different status because of the 2000
election.We would like to believe that we can fix these new problems by
implementing solutions to enfranchise the same population that has
been historically disfranchised--the poor, new immigrants, the less
educated, seniors, people with disabilities, and racial and ethnic
minorities.Given the paucity of legislation passed during the 2001
legislative sessions, however, we have to wonder about our will to
right the wrongs of an elections that was an embarrassment to us all,
and a denial of democracy for too many. It has been estimated that
more than fifteen hundred election reform bills were introduced in
the states this year. That figure is misleading. Less than 3 percent
of those bills were designed to remedy the biggest mistakes of the
2000 election. As of early summer (May 2001), governors from fifteen
states signed into law thirty-two bills passed by their
legislatures.Last year people around the world watched as Florida provided a
textbook example of how not to run an
election. Sadly, the methods employed in Florida are commonplace
across the U.S. We have the same inaccurate voting machines in rural
and urban areas, from Atlanta to Chicago to Los Angeles. Even former
President Jimmy Carter, who oversees elections worldwide, could not
intervene on behalf of the American people. His official group can
only be involved in countries that have national voting standards,
the U.S does not, Haiti does.The National Commission on Federal Election Reform headed by
former presidents Jimmy Carter and Gerald Ford recently issued a
report calling for fixes to the election system that can be done in
the states without federal government intervention, reforms such as
uniform statewide standards for counting ballots, provisional voting,
and restoration of voting rights to ex-felons--to name a few. The
down side of this blue-ribbon panel's effort is that the report
merely offers recommendations with no authority to implement the
changes it calls for. The Commission report omits mandatory required
actions by the federal government even in federal elections; and opts
for a voluntary role by state and federal governments for correct the
deficiencies in the electoral system.At every step in the election process, states discriminated
against groups of voters, usually people of color. In some cases this
bias was intentional, in other cases it was the product of gross
negligence. In either case it is worth a brief recap to prevent that
déjà vu experience in 2002.The best-known obstacle to voters involves the various types of
voting machines used in different counties. Last year, Florida
counties used five different voting systems. Study after study has
found that the worst systems were used in counties with a high
percentage of minority voters.Election officials have known for years that punch card
ballots--the type used in most of Florida's urban areas--count the
vote inaccurately. In fact, the National Bureau of Standards
recommended abandoning their use because of the "hanging chad"
problem as early as 1988. In Miami-Dade County, where punch cards
were used, one in twelve ballots had no vote for President
counted.Brevard County, Florida, provided a good example of the unequal
quality of voting systems. When the county used punch cards in 1996,
2.6 percent of ballots for President were invalidated; after the
county changed to high-tech optical scan equipment in 2000, only 0.27
percent of Presidential ballots were invalidated.Even among the counties that used optical scan technology there
were differences in quality. The only majority black county in the
state, Gadsden County, used an unreliable type of optical scan
equipment. As a result, Gadsden had the largest percentage of
invalidated ballots in the state--one in eight voters had their
presidential ballots disqualified.Many states need to eliminate obsolete voting machines. But
repairing our nation's democratic infrastructure will require more
then just modernizing the ballot box. According to an assessment by
The National Association of Secretary of States, the dilemmas present
in the last election were not new and only three of the twenty-seven
problem areas were technology or equipment.Recount procedures--including those that the U.S. Supreme Court
allowed in Florida--were unevenly used and unfair. Some counties
never did the mandatory recount; instead of examining the ballots
many counties only rechecked the counters on their machines. Nassau
County (a Republican stronghold), on the other hand, did a real
recount and then certified the original tally instead of the
recounted numbers.At the behest of the Florida Secretary of State (Republican
Katherine Harris), many counties used an inaccurate database to
"scrub" the names of felons from the voter rolls. But hundreds or
thousands of innocent citizens were removed from the list of
registered voters in the process. And when they went to vote,
election officials turned them away. There was no process to contest
election officials, no way to file a "provisional" ballot.There was also no way for voters to know their rights at the
polling place. In many cases, when voters made a mistake on their
ballots and asked for a fresh one (which is their right), election
officials turned them down.After the election the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights held
hearings in Florida and found that people of color were turned away
from voting; evidence of intimidation was gathered throughout the
state.In short, the election made a mockery of democracy. Unfortunately,
the methods employed in Florida are commonplace across America. In
fact, more than two million Americans who went to the polls last
November did not have their Presidential ballots counted because of
faulty equipment, confusing ballots, and inaccurate registration
lists. Another 3.9 million Americans were denied the right to vote
because of a felony conviction. We have the same issues of fairness,
the same charges of voter intimidation.Both the Congress and state legislatures need to take action
immediately.Chadless elections. Old volting equipment has
got ot go. The punch card, invented in 1890, should be banned as
ballots. States should mandate the use of modern optical scan or
electronic voting systems. From now on, every vote must count.Uniform voting standards. rich and poor
counties must be treated alike when it comes to the quality of voitng
equipment and election procedures. States should require and finance
uniform voting standards across all juridictions.Uniform ballot designs. No more butterfly
ballots. States should require statewide election officials to review
and approve all baoolt designs to ensure clarity and uniformity.Guaranteed provisional ballots. No one should
be turned away from the polls because of a dispute over the
registration rolls. States should offer provisional ballots for
individuals who are not listed on the precinct's voter registration
list; these votes are kept in a way that eligibility to vote can be
checked and each legal ballot counted.Guaranteed replacement of spoiled ballots.
Voters make legitimate mistakes. States should ensure that any voter
who makes a mistake before casting a ballot is provided a replacement
ballot.Voters' Bill of Rights. Empower votes with
knowledge of their rights at the polls. States should post a Voters'
Bill of Rights at every polling place to explain the rights of
voters, including right to register, vote, obtain replacements for
spoiled ballots, use provisional ballots, and seek assistance.Stop wrongful voter purging. No registered
voter should be turned away because of sloppy list maintenance
procedures. States should place strict statewide controls on
manipulations of the voting rolls, and purging should be done through
procedures that are fully open for inspection by the public.End the patronage system of election
administration. No more special favors for one political
party. States should ensure that all state and local election boards
are either bipartisan or nonpartisan.Clear rules for recounts. Fair and precise
procedures. States should review and reform their procedures for vote
recounts.Additionally, we need to repair the cracks in our democracy by
making voter registration and voting easier; restoring voting rights
to felons who have served their time; overhauling the campaign finance
system; and training poll workers to ensure full knowledge of and
compliance with applicable laws and policies.Tomorrow's election is determined by today's action. Our failure
to act will allow history to repeat itself. The flawed election of
2000 is not just a lesson from the past but a challenge for the future
to assert the dignity of the people through the vote. We can choose
a new course.René Redwood is
Senior Fellow of the Democracy and Technology Program at the Center
for Policy Alternatives in Washington, D.C. Bernie Horn is Policy
Director at the Center for Policy Alternatives.