
    
      
        
        Southern Changes. Volume 23, Number 3-4, 2001
        
          Democracy at Home
          
            
              Johnson, Charles S., IIICharles S. Johnson, III
            
          
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4, 2001 p. 3
          
          Following the tragic
loss of thousands of lives in two of our most diverse cities, our
nation is struggling with feelings of suspicion, insecurity, and
fear. And many have responded by looking for scapegoats.  
          In Dallas, Texas, a Pakistani Muslim storeowner was recently shot and
killed.  An arrow was shot through the front window of a Muslim-owned
laundromat in Green Cove, Florida.  Four men in the Atlanta area
attempted to stab a Sudanese man, saying, "You killed our people in
New York.  We want to kill you tonight."
          But racial or
ethnically-based attacks such as we are currently experiencing are far
from new in the South. We have seen such times before.  One such time
was in the period immediately following the First World War, when
soldiers returned from saving the world for democracy only to be
confronted with an outrageous failure of democracy at home. In the Red
Summer of 1919, there were more than twenty-five race riots and
seventy-six lynchings in the United States. Two hundred African
Americans were killed in a single riot in Elaine, Arkansas.
          It
was against this background that an interracial group of Southerners
came together in 1919, determined to transform what we used to call
race relations. After working for more than two decades to end
lynchings and alleviate property, this group by the end of the Second
World War had embraced the strategy of pursuing equal opportunity
through research and action, and what emerged was the early Southern
Regional Council.
          The Council has always linked work for
racial fairness with the struggle for democratic rights. As we
continue to share our concern for the victims of the recent tragedies,
commend courageous relief workers, and express our convictions about
U.S. actions abroad, we must also continue working to strengthen
democracy at home. In light of the nation's sudden discovery last year
that our election system simply doesn't work in the way that we
thought it did, we must support the strongest possible election reform
legislation moving through Congress. Election fairness is a civil
right linked to national policy on every domestic and international
concern.
          We also cannot abandon our efforts to improve
race relations at home. It is critical to expand and intensify that
work, giving greater recognition to the increasing diversity of our
nation. In light of recent events, we must work to deter acts of hate
against innocent Arabs and Muslims as well as other immigrants. But
the recent grotesque Halloween activities on the part of fraternity
members at Auburn University and similar incidents at the University
of Louisville and the University of Mississippi remind us that we
cannot step back from efforts to heal longstanding racial divides and
end inequalities.  
          The U.N. World Conference Against
Racism held in Durban, South Africa may have dropped out of
consciousness since September 11th, but as long as inequalities
remain, we cannot sideline the struggle against racism.	
          Civil
liberties are fundamentally linked with civil rights. We should be
able to strengthen the government's ability to respond to terrorism
without denying the right to dissent. However, some of our national
leaders do not appear to share this belief. Under intense pressure to
respond to the horrific attacks, U. S. Attorney General John Ashcroft
and a number of members of Congress have taken a short-sighted view in
lifting protections for civil liberties, initiating changes that
directly affect immigrants and endanger the privacy rights of all
Americans. The "U.S.A. PATRIOT Act" (Uniting and Strengthening America
by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct
Terrorism), limits the role of the courts in checking law enforcement
authority, eases safeguards against the misuse of surveillance and
searches, permits incarceration of non-citizens on suspicion, allows
deportation and exclusion of non-citizens for beliefs and
associations, and interferes with the attorney-client
privilege. Unilateral executive orders which diminish the role of the
courts using military tribunals undermine democracy in the
process.
          Fear, suspicion, and distrust still live with us. The
kinds of recriminations that we've seen in the past months remind us
that, although we think we've come a long way since 1919, we still
have a long way to go. If we are to avoid another Red Summer, we may
wish to consider a little dose of interracial- and
interethnic-cooperation. Intergroup cooperation is the key to
broadening civic participation and preserving democratic rights.

          Justice, above all, is what we as a nation must
pursue. This has been recognized since the days that the Republic was
founded. Before the Constitution's signers wrote of domestic
tranquility, before they wrote of promoting the general welfare, and
even before they wrote of providing for the common defense, the
authors of the Preamble wrote of a goal to establish justice.

          The work of today's Southern Regional Council is in
the tradition of our nation's historic pursuit of justice. The new
realities which confront us as a result of recent events cannot and
will not deter us in our quest.	
          
            Charles S. Johnson, III, is president of
the Southern Regional Council and an attorney in the law firm of
Holland and Knight. 
          
        
        
          One Nation, Unquestionable: The News Media
	       Responds to September 11
          By Wehner, PatrickPatrick Wehner
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4, 2001 pp. 4-7
          
          Amid the pulse
of satellite uplinks, videophones, webcasts, and
tickertape displays,
the taglines manufactured by the news media in the wake of September
11 have become such permanent fixtures on our television and computer
screens that one almost expects to see their images burnt-in even
after the power is switched off. The unfolding storylines range from
"A Nation Challenged," the struggle against adversity reported daily
by both the print and online editions of The New
York Times, to "America Strikes Back," the big-budget Hollywood
revenge fantasy that, in an unprecedented display of cooperation, is
being heavily promoted by no fewer than three competing television
networks. A recent report on National Public Radio likened these
taglines to branded products, suggesting that in a competitive news
environment where the available facts are essentially the same, subtle
differences in style or image-say, "Attack on America" versus "Terror
Hits Home"-can provide an edge in promoting audience
loyalty.
          The comparison highlights some uncomfortable
truths. Much of the
official news has been the same, especially when
it comes to the military action in Afghanistan. The news editor
coordinating the post-September 11 coverage for the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Bert Roughton, Jr.,
recently told an audience of journalism students at Emory University
that despite the obstacles faced by correspondents filing from the war
zone, the "biggest problem we have with information is not there, it's
in Washington." The enduring lesson that Donald Rumsfeld and the Joint
Chiefs learned from the Gulf War was that while the press corps may
grumble, they will continue to cover military briefings that are
little more than public relations events largely out of a need to have
something to report each day. Comparing the major media outlets to
commercial brands also admits the distasteful reality that the news
business remains a business even in a time of crisis. While not all
differences in coverage are the result of calculated attempts to
improve market share, the marketing experts have successfully
convinced many news executives that ratings and circulation are all
about "selling a relationship."
          The problem with the brand
analogy is that the goal of differentiating a media "product" is
simply inconsistent with all the obvious repetition. Overworked
phrases like "The War on Terror" or "America's New War" accomplish
little in distinguishing one news organization from another when
everyone else is using them. So while the idea of branding the news
surely captures the spirit of our market-driven society, it must also
be said that sometimes a cliché is just a cliché even if it achieves
that status in record time. 
          Despite their apparent emptiness,
clichés have consequences. Swaggering taglines like "America Fights
Back," for example, seem to be encouraging viewers to put their feet
up, adjust the surround sound, and enjoy the special effects. But it
is the more innocuous slogans, the wildly popular "America Unites"
among them, that may have the most lasting effects. The sentiment is
undeniably heartfelt: stories of people drawing together in the
aftermath of the attacks bolster a belief that we as a nation will
survive the present crisis and perhaps locate new sources of communal
strength. There is also some factual, or at least statistical,
justification for this continual refrain. We have all heard the
polling figures-overwhelming support for a military response, high
approval ratings for a President whose election was bitterly contested
a year ago. Grief and confusion create a longing for certainty,
community, and institutions deserving of our trust, and journalists,
being human, share in those desires. Dan Rather's post-September 11
appearance on "The Late Show with David Letterman," provided one
dramatic example. The CBS news anchor's pledge to "line up" wherever
President Bush asked horrified many of his fellow journalists because
it revealed how close to a vanishing point objectivity was being
pushed.
          Ironically, in helping to harden collective longings
into
something-an accepted truth, an article of faith, a reassuring
cliché that is no longer open to discussion, the major media have
contributed to a climate where journalists are condemned for living up
to their professional principles. Unpopular with the public even
before September 11, reporters who have asked difficult questions
about the reasons behind the attacks or the wisdom of U.S. foreign
policy have encountered outrage on an entirely different
scale. Roughton, for example, acknowledged intense pressure from Journal-Constitution readers to be unconditionally
supportive of the war. Speaking of journalists' professional mandate
to uncover the truth, however embarrassing or inconvenient it may be
to those in power, he admitted, "I think right now, the American
public isn't very sympathetic to our cause." Nor have the charges of
treason and accusations about a lack of moral character been limited
to rank-and-file reporters. Talk-show personality Bill Maher,
bestselling novelist Barbara Kingsolver, and even media tycoon Ted
Turner have been met with a chorus of angry responses for having dared
to disrupt the consensus.
          Lost in the controversy surrounding
Turner's speech at the Woodrow
Wilson Center in Washington, D.C. on
October 10, 2001-in which he proposed, with no apparent sense of
personal irony, that U.S. leaders could be more "humble" in their
dealings with the rest of the world-was the CNN founder's pointed
criticism of both the broadcast and print media. Turner accused news
executives of having contributed to American audiences' lack of
knowledge about international affairs by closing many of their
overseas bureaus in the 1990s. "Americans are woefully uninformed at
the current time about international news in general, and I've always
said we were doing that at our peril," the Cox News Service quoted
Turner as saying. While the media billionaire has seldom allowed facts
to get in the way of his opinions, his observations about the decline
of international news parallel the findings of A number of surveys and
reports by media research institutes. Citing studies conducted by
Harvard, UC-San Diego, and a broad range of professional groups, media
critic David Shaw of the Los Angeles Times
estimates that newspaper and television coverage of international
events has declined by as much as 80 percent since the
mid-eighties. News organizations often claim to have cut back on their
foreign staff for budgetary reasons, but Shaw argues a far more
significant factor in the decline was that after the Soviet Union
dissolved, "most news executives decided that Americans weren't
interested in international news." Scandals, celebrity gossip, and
"soft" lifestyle features replaced coverage of overseas
events.
          Nathan McCall, an author, former Washington
Post reporter, and visiting professor
of journalism at Emory,
sees a historic parallel for recent events in
the Report of the National Advisory Commission on
Civil Disorders, issued in 1968 and more widely known as the
"Kerner Report." Among the Report's most
significant findings, notes McCall, was that "there was a lot of
racial hostility beneath the surface in the nation's African-American
communities, and the media was partly to blame for that bubbling up."
The Commission described at least two ways in which the media bore
some measure of responsibility for the violence occurring in
neighborhoods of Los Angeles, Newark, and other American cities during
the 1960s. "One, the media had compounded the frustrations in
African-American communities where people's grievances weren't being
heard. Two, it undermined the consciousness of the rest of the country
who didn't even recognize the problem or the injustices that were
occurring." In a similar fashion, reductions in the amount of
resources expended on the gathering and reporting of international
news have left many American audiences unaware of the deep resentments
that U.S. foreign policies have inspired. "Here we are forty years
later," says McCall, "and it's just that it's happening on an
international scale."
          As it happens, the media's response to
September 11 demonstrates more than one form of historical
amnesia. Part of the irony behind all the present assertions of unity
is that for the past three decades, media decision-makers have been
conducting business according to a decidedly opposite set of
principles. Since the 1970s, the prevailing wisdom among advertising
and media executives has been that American society is increasingly
fragmented into separate interest groups and lifestyle enclaves. The
magazines, cable channels, radio stations, and websites that have
thrived have been those able to deliver a detailed portrait of a niche
audience to their potential advertisers. Even newspapers, once the
medium promoted as offering "something for everyone," have focused
increasingly on upscale suburbanites with "zoned" editions edited for
specific neighborhoods and a greater emphasis on local news,
lifestyle, and personal finance. Those who work the business side of
newspaper publishing readily admit that these kinds of features help
attract advertisers with images of affluent readers. Whether the
media, in their sudden passion for our shared connections, will
reaffirm an obligation to serve all segments of American society by
making substantive changes in their coverage remains to be
seen. Already, the worst excesses of "America United" resemble the
idealized world that journalist Naomi Klein calls "Representation
Nation"-the ethnically-balanced visions of harmony that are featured
in Ralph Lauren and Tommy Hilfiger ads.
          Not coincidentally,
media institutions that have historically
expressed the double
consciousness of their audiences-as both American
citizens and
members of distinct and often oppressed social
groups-have proven to
be among the most willing to question the limits of unity. The
African-American press and ethnic newspapers have focused on local
angles to the September 11 events, have covered benefit events and
prayer services, and have attempted to alleviate the anxieties of
readers for whom English is a second language. But black newspapers
like the Atlanta Daily World and the Baltimore Afro-American have also featured a steady
procession of columnists reaffirming a commitment to civil liberties,
objecting to racial profiling practices, and questioning the wisdom of
U.S. foreign policy. In a commentary pub-
lished in the October 11 issue
of the Atlanta Daily World, for example,
columnist Hazel Trice Edney expressed concern that U.S. government
actions often seemed uncaring and arrogant to people in the developing
world, citing the U.S. walkout on the U. N. Conference Against Racism
in Durban, South Africa as one of the more recent instances. In the
Spanish-language press, syndicated columnist James E. Garcia reminded
his readers of the mass deportations of Mexican-American citizens
during the Great Depression of the 1930s, calling upon them to speak
out against acts of violence and discrimination directed at Arab
Americans. These examples demonstrate that while many people may feel
the need to draw together in a crisis, they are not willing to
overlook the ways in which America has failed to live up to its
promises, or to ignore the manner in which "unity" can become
exclusionary.
          Peace demonstrations, marches, and rallies
visibly complicate this theme, and press coverage of groups organizing
to oppose the war in Afghanistan has been accordingly sporadic. "In
the immediate aftermath of the attacks in D.C. and New York, there was
a kind of united front and a real frenzy that we saw in the media,"
says Lance Newman, a member of the steering committee for the Georgia
Coalition for Peace, an Atlanta-based activist group composed largely
of veterans of the street protests against institutions like the World
Trade Organization and the International Monetary Fund. When the media
have reported on the activities organized by local peace groups, the
tone of the coverage has been "fairly patronizing and sarcastic,"
Newman observes. The eagerness with which many news executives have
aligned their organizations with the cause of unity has made it
difficult for peace groups to have their messages heard. "I think
there's a lot of people out there who oppose the war but don't feel
confident enough to put themselves on the line right now because they
see what's going on," says Newman. "They see the crackdown on civil
liberties, they see the way dissent is treated in the media, and they
expect that's how they are liable to be treated."
          When dealing
with groups who oppose the war, the media seem to have
little
awareness of past mistakes. In late September, for example, more than
a dozen black churches in the Cascade Heights area of southwest
Atlanta organized a march for peace. Although other vigils and
demonstrations had been held in downtown Atlanta parks and at the King
Center, the march down Cascade Road was noteworthy for the number of
participants (eight hundred, by the Atlanta
Journal-Constitution's estimate), for the range of ages that was
represented, and for the fact that the marchers identified themselves
by faith rather than membership in an anti-war group. "We gather to
pray and speak a word of peace" read the statement issued by the march
organizers, "first to the hearts and minds of those most directly
affected by these horrific and haunting events, but also to the
nations of the world, who have begun to position themselves for
international conflict."
          All three of Atlanta's leading
television stations reported on the march, but only one emphasized the
congregants' clear message that one might pray for the country while
still opposing retaliatory violence. Of the other two, one focused
almost exclusively on the presence of famous leaders like the Reverend
Jesse Jackson and Georgia Governor Roy Barnes. (While the presence of
these leaders was a significant show of support for the marchers, the
fact that this station only highlighted Jackson and Barnes ignored the
important message of the march.) The final station's 45-second piece
featured a white man as the subject of its single on-screen interview,
the reporter apparently having concluded that the real story of the
march was the presence of people who admitted membership in a
socialist group. Such racism and red-baiting seemed straight out of an
era of Civil Defense drills and automotive tailfins, and the reporter
went on to emphasize the "controversial" nature of the
march. Overlooked was the more compelling reality that many of the
marchers were acting on their own definitions of citizenship and
solidarity, offering them as an alternative to President Bush's
"either you're with us or against us" rhetoric.
          Journalists
and their critics alike agree that a few positive signs have appeared
in the past weeks that seem to indicate that news organizations are
beginning to focus on missed opportunities. But if there is a growing
recognition of where news organizations might have failed their
audiences in the past, many of the ongoing problems have yet to be
addressed. When the events of September 11 have become more distant
history, predicts Professor McCall, "someone will have a big media
convention somewhere and the big mucketymucks will talk about what we
could have done better with what I call progressive
hindsight. Journalists-we're all very good at being progressive in
retrospect. The problem is, it's always hard to get changes made in
midstream, when they would make the most impact."	
          
            Patrick Wehner
is a postdoctoral fellow at the Center for Myth and Ritual in American
Life at Emory University and served as a special contributing editor
for this issue of Southern Changes.
          
        
        
          Hate in the News: Violence Against Arab Americans and Muslims
          
            Datcher, KelvinKelvin
	       Datcher, Southern Poverty Law Center
          
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4, 2001 pp. 8-9
          
          In the aftermath of the
terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on
September 11, another form of terrorism emerged. This terrorism was
homegrown, and most often, Americans were attacking Americans. Within
hours-and long before any suspects had been identified-reports of
harassment and violence against Arab Americans and Muslims began to
pour in. Within days, the harassment and violence had escalated to
murder.
          The areas that saw the most violence during this
"backlash" were Michigan, California and New York, not coincidentally
the three states with the largest Arab populations. 
          The
American South did not escape the senselessness, however. There were
scattered reports in most states, but Florida, which has the largest
Arab American population in the region with about 50,000, saw the most
numerous and startling incidents.
          Among those acts, an Orlando
disc jockey blamed "ragheads" for the attacks on air, arrows and
bullets were fired into mosques, and Islamic schools and businesses
were closed due to bomb threats. The man accused of the first murder
during this wave of violence also has southern roots. Frank Roque,
whose alleged Arizona rampage includes shooting and killing one Sikh
man and shooting at a Lebanese-American and into the home of a Syrian
family, is a native Alabamian.
          The South's legacy of racial
strife has been rekindled anew, and this time it is not limited to
black and white. Following are a list of attacks of violence against
Arab Americans and Muslims in Southern states, provided by the
Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC).
          -Kelvin
Datcher, Staff Writer, SPLC.
          Alabama
          A
Middle Eastern store clerk was beaten.
          An Indian medical
student's car was vandalized.
          Florida
          Someone attempted to run a Muslim woman in
Brooksville off the road.
          The pilot of a United Airlines
flight from Tampa to Cairo arbitrarily refused to allow an Egyptian
American to board.
          Police found a bullet embedded in the wall of
Hernando County's only mosque.
          An arrow was shot through the
front window and into a washing machine at a Muslim-owned laundromat
in Green Cove.
          The Islamic Center of Northeast Florida closed
its school for a week after a deluge of threatening phone calls. The
mosque is also paying for an off-duty police officer to conduct daily
patrols after someone drove a car onto the grounds and yelled curses
about Muslims and God.
          A Palestinian American in
St. Petersburg had his car vandalized with paint. A threatening note
was also left on the windshield.
          Three Jacksonville traffic
schools were closed after receiving bomb threats. The schools are
owned by Arab Americans.
          A family in Temple Terrace found
their garage door vandalized with the words "Muslims F***."
          Georgia
          Four men in the Atlanta area attempted to
stab a Sudanese man. They said, "You killed our people in New York. We
want to kill you tonight."
          Kentucky
          Two
Islamic meeting places were vandalized.
          A Lexington man posted
a sign in a neighborhood reading, "Arabs are Murderers." He refused to
remove the sign when his neighborhood association asked him. Two Arab
Americans live in the neighborhood.
          An Indian student was
attacked when he was mistaken for an Arab.
          Louisiana
          The Jefferson Parish public school
system in New Orleans closed down due to classmate taunts of Arab and
Muslim students.
          Tennessee
          Two Arab
American clinic workers received threatening phone calls. They were
told to "go home and get out of our country" and called "foreign
fags." Their daughter in Atlanta, Georgia, also received threatening
phone calls.
          Texas
          At least six bullets
shattered windows at the Islamic Center of Irving.
          
          In San
Antonio, a Delta Airlines pilot ejected an Arab businessman from his
first-class seat.
          A window at the Islamic Center of Carrollton
was broken by a slingshot-type device, according to police.
          A
San Antonio Iranian restaurant was vandalized.
          A professor of
Middle Eastern languages and cultures at the University of Texas was
spat on by a pedestrian.
          In Austin, an Arab American realtor
received anonymous telephone threats ordering him to "leave this
country or else!"
          At the University of Texas in Austin,
students wearing Islamic garb said their bags were searched by
university police before they were admitted to classrooms and they
were told to leave the student union because of "anti-Muslim
sentiment."
          In San Antonio, two Muslim girls were verbally
abused at their high school.
          A Pakistani Muslim storeowner in
Dallas was shot and killed. The FBI is investigating the shooting as a
bias-related crime. 
          Three bullets struck the Sahara Grocery
Market in San Antonio.
          A woman was sent home from work the day
after the attacks  following a meeting with her boss, who had singled
her out because of her Palestinian heritage. He stated he didn't know
if she would be celebrating the death of Americans in the
office.
          A Molotov cocktail was thrown against the side of the
Islamic Society of Denton, causing an estimated $2,500 in
damage.
          Virginia
          An Islamic bookstore
was vandalized in Old Town Alexandria.
          Two Virginia mosques
reported vandalism and threatening phone calls.
          A woman was
charged with threatening to bomb a mosque in Hampton.
          Washington, D.C.
          Rippy Singh was stopped by four
white men in a car who accused him of being a terrorist and who said
"we will bomb you."
          A Sikh was leaving work when he was
accosted by pedestrians who began to yell verbal expletives at
him. They threatened to "get" him and bomb him in retaliation for the
terrorist acts.
          At Dulles International Airport, a United
Airlines flight to London was delayed for four hours after a Saudi
pilot requested permission to fly in the cockpit jump seat, a courtesy
extended to pilots of all U.S. carriers before September 11. The
United pilot refused and returned to the gate where the Saudi pilot
and two other men were detained and questioned by the FBI and INS for
three hours before being released.
          The Islamic Center received
bomb threats, causing Massachusetts Avenue to be closed
off.
          Two women wearing traditional religious headdress where
spat upon as they rode a subway near the White House.
          
            Sources:
American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee (www.adc.org), the Council
on American-Islamic Relations (www.cair-net.org), the Asian Pacific
American Legal Center (www.apalc.org), police and wire reports. These
incidents and others from states beyond the South-as well as resources
for combating racial violence and discrimination-are posted on the
Southern Poverty Law Center's website:
www.tolerance.org.
          
        
        
          Race, Class, and Reconciliaton
          By Carter, Dan T.Dan T. Carter
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4, 2001 pp. 10-13
          
          People of color have had to deal directly
with issues of race for all of this nation's history; they couldn't
avoid it. For those defined as "white," and particularly those outside
the South, it's been a sometime thing: notably during the struggles
over slavery, war, and reconstruction in the mid-l9th century, and
during the civil rights revolution of the 1950s and the struggles that
followed.
          There has always come a time, however, when whites
tired of this subject. 
          For one of the inescapable themes of
the history of the nation and particularly the American South is the
effort of whites to maintain racial supremacy over their
darker-skinned brothers and sisters. First there was slavery, then the
struggle of white Southerners to maintain a separate nation built upon
that institution, then the use of terrorism by the Klan and other
vigilante groups to overthrow the legally constituted biracial
governments of the post-war South, followed by the disfranchisement of
black Southerners, the escalation of white on black terrorism through
daily acts of violence--the most heinous of which involved  the
lynching of thousands of black men (and women)--the creation of
segregation, a hellish institution designed to systematically degrade
black Southerners through the first sixty years of the 20th century
and exclude them from educational and economic opportunities within
the South. . . .
          No wonder we want to smooth over the rough
and crooked places of our past--to dismiss the deep historical events
of hundreds of years with an impatient: "Get over it: that was a long
time ago."
          Some of it was a long time ago. Today, I think the
majority of white Americans would agree with the proposition that a
society that accepts any form of hierarchy based upon so-called
"racial" considerations is inconsistent with our democratic
aspirations and incapable of achieving a meaningful reconciliation of
its citizens. Now this is a commonplace conviction; only a handful of
extremists would openly accept the notion that genetic differences
based upon race justify forms of discrimination. But I offer an
important corollary: if we truly believe that skin color is not a
determinant of intelligence, creativity or ability, we have an
obligation--a moral obligation--to do more than murmur pieties about
equal rights or equal opportunities. We must do everything in our
power to change a society in which it is obvious that deep racial
inequalities remain despite the progress of the last half
century. That is not easy and it requires more than conventional
rhetoric about equal opportunity; it requires uncomfortable choices
and no little sacrifice.
          And this at a time, when I suspect
most of us would agree that "sacrifice" is not exactly the prevailing
theme of our contemporary political culture. When lawmakers beholden
to corporate America face the choice between building classrooms to
replace trailers for our children or helping the super rich buy
another chalet in Switzerland, it's no contest. It is easier to fill
our political platforms with a rainbow of complexions, to join
enthusiastically once a year on Martin Luther King's birthday to utter
platitudes about equality. We insist that we're serious about the
problems of racial discrimination, but our actions--in contrast to our
words--treat the conundrums of race as though they were minor
annoyances; a vexatious hangover from an older era.  
          Yet the
reality is inescapable: as we begin the 21st century, far more people
of color than whites continue to live in the shadows of American life
while the racial dimensions of disparate treatment in income,
education, health services, and in our judiciary and penal system are
ignored. And the question which John Kennedy asked a quarter century
ago remains no less relevant today: As long as "Negro Americans remain
in the shadow of a full and free life," he asked six months before his
death, "who among us would be content to have the color of his skin
changed and stand in his place?"
          It's much easier to relegate
the uncomfortable shards of our past to a safe and comfortable
category we call "history."  Even the more recent past becomes the
victim of our desire to forget uncomfortable truths. The hustlers of
our popular culture have reshaped the complex history of the civil
rights era into a slick pre-packaged series of rhetorical slogans that
allow present injustices to live comfortably with historical memory
and the great voice of the civil rights movement, Martin Luther King
survives as a soothing icon to black and white, conservative and
liberal alike. California businessman Ward Connerly launched his
successful anti-affirmative action referendum on King's birthday with
the announcement that Martin Luther King would have approved since he
"personifies the quest for a color-blind society."
          Forgotten
is the Martin Luther  King who dismissed such arguments
in his Stride Toward Freedom. It was "obvious that if a
man is entered at the starting line in a race three-hundred years
after another man, the first man would have to perform some impossible
feat in order to catch up with his fellow runner." Forgotten is King's
denunciation of American foreign policy in Vietnam, or his call for a
"restructuring of the architecture of American society," a
restructuring in which there had to be a "radical redistribution of
economic and political power and wealth."   
          As Julian Bond
put it, we don't like to remember  "the critic of capitalism, or the
pacifist who declared all wars evil, or the man of God who argued"
that a nation that chose "guns over butter" would end up starving its
people and destroying its soul. The historical radicalism of King's
call to struggle has been stripped away, leaving only a soothing
pablum of feel-good sentiments.  
          There is actually a
justification for promoting this kind of cultural amnesia. Historian
Ernest Renan argued that every nation is a community both of shared
memory and of shared forgetting. Forgetting, wrote Renan, "is an
essential factor in the history of a nation." To the extent that we
may become caught up in an endless cycle of fruitless recrimination,
Renan may be right.
          But I prefer the ancient wisdom of the
Jewish tradition: only remembrance can bring redemption.
          This
does not mean that times have not changed, or that we should let our
remembrance of a bitter past blind us to the journey we have made and
the opportunities that lie ahead. Much has happened in the past half
century for the better as the harshest contours of American racism
have been worn away by the persistent struggles of the civil rights
movement. In Columbia, South Carolina, today, my next door neighbors
are an African-American couple who personify the American dream. He is
the personnel director for a major international corporation based in
Columbia; she a former assistant to the Governor of South Carolina. My
neighbor across the street is a successful young Chinese-American
attorney. My next door neighbor is a Lebanese-American cardiologist; a
woman working in a specialty almost exclusively male just two decades
ago. Three houses away is an African-American neighbor who has just
become the number two budget officer for the state. These
professionals are not simply tokens; they reflect the growing
opportunities that do exist for those individuals given the chance to
develop their abilities.  
          At the same time, the conflict
between good and evil enacted on the television screens of the 1950s
and 1960s seem far away. There are contemporary racial issues that
reflect newer versions of that age-old struggle, but often we deal not
with unambiguous moral decisions, but day-in, day-out struggles to
determine what is the best of a series of uncomfortable choices. How
should we judge "ability" and promise in a way that is fair? What
discriminatory results are the consequence of purposeful racism and
what reflect happenstance or simply the results of unquestioned
institutional patterns? Was I denied this job because of the color of
my skin? Or was the other candidate truly better qualified? Is it
possible to achieve a redress of past injustices by fathers and
mothers without penalizing sons and daughters? Each action, each word
must be weighed; it is surely one of the most bitter and exhausting
legacies of our past and our ongoing association of darker skin color
with notions of inferiority. 
          One way to help understand the
changing nature of our dilemmas is to recognize that racial ideas and
attitudes increasingly reflect assumptions about class. In my Southern
childhood the "single drop" theory of race was almost
unchallenged. Black was black. We all know the once fashionable
historical cliché about Brazilian race relations: that race was
important, but "money whitened." Well, that wasn't really true about
racial attitudes in Brazil, but there clearly was a difference between
American and Latin societies. 
          That too is changing. I don't
in any way mean to suggest that race has disappeared as a constant (if
often unconscious) measure of judgment by most white Americans. Still,
as the overt racism of an earlier generation declines, and a broader
African-American and Hispanic middle class emerges, the way is paved
for whites (and some African Americans) to see class, as opposed to
race, as a legitimate means of separating our society into winners and
losers. 
          The problem for me is that this amounts to a shift
from a hierarchical society built upon the foundation of racism, to
one resting on the notion that there are vast differences in human
beings that justify massive social and economic
inequality. Increasingly that is seen as progress. Not for
me. 
          Quite apart from the fact that I find it morally
repugnant, I don't
believe that true social reconciliation in our
democratic society is possible unless we arrest the growing economic
inequality between our citizens. Since 1979, overall income in the
United States has increased over 55 percent. But the greatest
increase, by far, has been for the wealthiest Americans. Over half the
growth in after-tax income has gone to the top one-half percent of America's taxpayers and the
results are what one would expect. 
          In 1977, the bottom 20
percent of the American people received a little less than 6 percent
of the nation's annual income, while the wealthiest 1 percent received
some 7 percent. Today that bottom 20 percent receives 4 percent of the
nation's annual income; the wealthiest 1 percent has seen its share
almost double, to 13 percent. And today, the wealthiest 1 percent of
Americans control more than 40 percent of the nation's wealth, a
maldistribution of wealth greater than at any time since the
1920s. 
          Now the argument, of course, is that a rising tide
lifts all boats. With everyone growing richer, why should we be
concerned if some groups are a little wealthier than others?

          Only that is not the case. In inflation corrected dollars,
the top 1 percent has seen its after-tax income increase 120 percent
in the last quarter century, the bottom 20 percent has actually
suffered a decline of 12 percent in after-tax income. Thirty million
Americans--more than half of them children--still live below the poverty
line; forty-two million Americans still have no health insurance. And
despite the last ten years of steady economic expansion--once you
exclude increased family income due to the growing number of dual wage
earners--it is only during the last two and a half years that childhood
poverty has begun to decline and the mid-50 percent of households in
America has seen a slight increase in income. So much for a rising
tide lifting all boats. 
          Now this shift in the distribution of
income and wealth stems from many sources: The internationalization of
trade, the opening of a global labor economy, the decline of trade
unions and the displacement of semi-skilled and skilled workers
through new technologies. But the evidence is inescapable that the
growing gap between rich and poor has been exacerbated by deliberate
government policies of the past two decades, particularly tax policy.

          Despite all the talk of "tax cuts" in the 1980s, the bottom
half of the population actually saw its taxes increase as escalating
social security, medicare and excise levies and increasingly
regressive state and local taxes offset the marginal declines in the
federal income tax rates. While the 50-to-90th percentile received a
very modest reduction in taxes, the nation's richest 1 percent of
Americans saw an annual decrease of 15 percent in federal income tax
liabilities in the decade of the 1980s.  
          These were policy
decisions, deliberately made, not the inevitable consequences of free
market forces beyond our control. The underlying philosophy seems to
be: If you make the lives of the poor, the working class and the
marginal middle class more precarious and give them less money, they
will be more productive and resourceful workers, returning benefits to
society as a whole. And then if you give the rich and the well to do
more money and make their already secure and prosperous lives even
more secure and more prosperous, they will be more productive and
resourceful in returning benefits to society as a whole. You think I
engage in polemical exaggeration? How else can one describe the
policies of the dominant national party whose main economic goals are
to freeze the miserably low minimum wage for the poor, give a massive
tax cut for the rich and allow them to pass on their vast wealth to
their sons and daughters.
          I realize that I am on far shakier
ground here. For the last thirty
years, conservative think tanks have
been pouring out an endless intellectual justification for this
proposition: that there is a natural hierarchy of class and
intelligence which functions equitably on the basis of social and
economic competition and any attempt to interfere with the unfettered
forces of the marketplace can only lead us backward on that archaic
and discredited path of socialism and social democracy. As Dinesh
D'Souza concludes in his recent book on The Virtue
of Prosperity, the "prime culprit in causing contemporary social
inequality [in America] seems to be merit."
          Really? In 1974,
the nation's corporate chief executive officers made, on average, 34
times as much as their workers. By 1996, it was 180 times that of
their workers. By the beginning of this century, it was nearly 200
times that of their employees. Are we to believe that the merit of
corporate leaders has increased sevenfold over that of the men and
women in their employ?
          I have a word for that kind of smug
justification for the status quo; it's not one that I prefer to use in
polite society.
          To be fair, most of us--conservative, centrist
and liberal alike--are uncomfortable with the fictional character
Gordon Gecko's unvarnished assertion that "greed is good." And so we
conceal the unpleasant realities of our current economic system with
slogans about promoting individual opportunity, or using education as
a means of redressing powerful imbalances of economic and educational
opportunities. At times I feel as though I'm watching the captain of
the Titanic solemnly hand out teaspoons to the passengers left on the
sinking decks, with the cheery instructions: "Start bailing, you'll be
fine." The truth is, those of us who are safe in our life rafts daily
check our retirement portfolios as our hearts increasingly vibrate in
harmony with the raucous Muzak of our contemporary culture: that
clanging bell that daily opens and closes the New York Stock
Exchange.
          So where can we begin.
          First, I would
suggest, by expanding our vision of reconciliation beyond the issue of
race, gender, ethnicity and sexual discrimination to include a demand
for broader economic and social justice.
          Looking back on the
last generation, we can see now that there has been a constant
struggle for personal freedom and autonomy. Remember in the 1960s and
1970s--all politics is personal? While the battles still rage, I would
argue that victory was won by social libertarians--Jerry Falwell and
John Ashcroft notwithstanding.  In the 1980s, there was a different
kind of struggle: a battle for unre-strained economic freedom.  To a
considerable degree, that struggle was won by conservatives. But
somehow in our headlong race for cultural and economic freedom, we
have lost touch with an earlier dream most recently embodied in the
call for what John Lewis describes as "the beloved community." Instead
we have come to accept as normal  a society divided into the
fabulously wealthy few, a comfortable upper middle class and half a
nation one short step away from economic disaster, struggling to
survive.
          I do not believe real social reconciliation is
possible based under
these conditions.  But recreating a sense of
what might be--what  should be--will not be
easy.
          A couple of brief suggestions:
          Today we live in
"America, Incorporated," in which rampant individualism operating
within the framework of the marketplace reigns with only a murmer of
protest. Well, let me enter my dissent. We are not autonomous. If we
look honestly at our own lives we see the truth of the old Irish
expression: that "we all drink from wells we never dug; we warm
ourselves by fires we never built." As a means of allocating resources
and creating wealth, corporate capitalism has a positive place in our
culture, but if we allow it to make our decisions, as a society we end
up in the same position of the cynic described by Oscar Wilde. We know
the price of everything and the value of nothing.
          I don't
underestimate how hard that may be, for words have been corrupted in
true Orwellian fashion. Some people, said the Puritan martyr Richard
Rumbold as he stood upon the scaffold, believe that "Providence had
sent a few men into the world, ready booted and spurred to ride, and
millions ready saddled and bridled to be ridden. I do not." But today
those who are booted and spurred no longer swagger and proclaim their
God given right to exploit those beneath them; now they speak with the
voice of humility and concern--everyone feels everyone's pain--and there
is much talk of offering a helping hand to those in
need.
          Well, I propose that we all become cantankerous
naysayers whose main duty is simply to remind all who will listen that
those of us who are comfortably settled atop the pyramid of our
unequal society, are always ready to talk about
"compassion."
          But there is another language that has come from
authentic social movements bent on changing our society by breaking
down the barriers that divide us: the struggle for economic justice in
the 1930s; the fight for racial justice in the anti-slavery and civil
rights movement. These authentic political movements have emerged when
least expected. As one of my favorite writers said, a keen sense of
irony has seldom led anyone to mount the barricades. Our task in the
future is to not to lead, but to be a part of that
struggle.
          What I do know is that, when that moment arrives,
the voices that bubble up from the grassroots will not use the
paternalistic language of "compassion": they will speak of something
far more fundamental--justice.	
          
            Dan T. Carter is Educational Foundation
Professor of History at the University of South Carolina.This article
is adapted from a speech Carter presented at the Reconciliation
Symposium held at Emory University on January 26,
2001. 
          
        
        
          Southerners in South Africa:
The World Conference Against Racism
          By Robinson, GwenGwen Robinson
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4, 2001 pp. 14-15
          
          On August 29th Rev. C.T. Vivian, the celebrated Atlanta civil rights activist, walked into the Non-Governmental Organization Forum (NGO) of the World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia, and Racial Intolerance in Durban, South Africa. Within minutes Rev. Vivian was surrounded by fellow activists, grassroots leaders and friends from around the South.  As he made his way to do an interview with South African Broadcasting, Rev. Vivian became the center of a group of friends from his generation of civil rights leaders in the U.S. South, admirers from younger generations in the U.S. and other countries, and reporters eager to hear his take on the U.N. Conference. While the United States government did not have a large, high-level (or, some would argue, positive) presence at the World Conference Against Racism (WCAR), Rev. Vivian and more than three hundred others from the U.S. South were there to make their voices heard.
          Southerners' experiences at the WCAR seem to fall into two categories: insiders and outsiders. For those people who were involved in the preparatory meetings that happened in the year before the conference, the World Conference was the culminating event in an ongoing process. There were major "prepcoms" (meetings to prepare the U.N. document on racism for the conference) in every region of the world. Southerners were represented at the meetings in Geneva, Switzerland; Santiago, Chile; and Quito, Ecuador among others. At the preparatory meetings the language for many issues was discussed, including whether the trans-Atlantic slave trade should be declared a crime, whether the treatment of dalits (the untouchables) in India should be included as racism, and whether Israel's actions towards the Palestinians should be included as the only nation specifically condemned for its actions.  
          "When we went to the prepcoms we spent most of our time lobbying for the language we wanted in the document and listening to the official governmental discussions.  Some of the work continued after the two or three-day meetings ended, so it was hard to keep up with all the decisions. You really had to pay attention," said Beni Ivey of the Center for Democratic Renewal in Atlanta, who is also on the U.S. NGO Steering Committee for the WCAR. Ray Winbush of the Race Relations Institute at Fisk University also participated in the prepcoms.  "We hit the ground running in Durban because we knew who we had to influence from the prepcoms. We met with the President of Senegal in Durban because he is the biggest opponent of declaring slavery a crime.  I would say that 80 percent of what we did was behind the scenes." While the debates over language may seem esoteric to most people, people involved with the process argue for its importance.  "Our struggles need to be enshrined in the document so that we can use it later in law," explained Elaine R. Jones of the NAACP Legal Fund. "You can't change anything without the force of law."   
          The behind-the-scenes nature of much of the negotiations left many
people who were not familiar with the process feeling lost.  For many
grassroots delegates at the Durban Conference, the large sessions and
official negotiations over language were too obscure to be meaningful.
But grassroots delegations had other reasons for attending.  "We went
to tell the story of the South and the history of oppression here"
said Leah Wise of the Southeast Regional Economic Justice Network in
Durham, North Carolina.  "When you say you're from the U.S. here most
people think that you are either privileged or that everything was
fixed with Dr. King. When our folks tell their stories about what it's
like to work in a processing plant or to work as a migrant farm
worker, the people here are amazed."  Wise's group included thirty
grassroots workers from Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina,
and Tennessee. This group went to Durban a week early to meet with
South African organizations working on economic justice. Environmental
justice groups also went to Durban early to do a toxic tour of the
city and to meet with organizations fighting toxic pollution and
racism. International Possibilities Unlimited, IPU, sponsored forty
grassroots environmental justice activists to attend the WCAR including representatives from Citizens for Environmental Justice in Savannah, Georgia. The People's Institute for Survival and Beyond conducted two training sessions in South Africa before the conference opened. The Atlanta-based Southern Education Foundation sponsored a group of Brazilians to attend the conference and distributed their comparative study, Beyond Racism. (See end of article for more information on the report.)
          Despite the differences in experiences, almost everyone agreed that the conference was as much an experience of racism and intolerance as an event to dismantle racism. One of the major drawbacks to the conference was the disorganization, due in large part to the role of the United States.  The U.S. committed $600,000 to the World Conference early on, but by June the U.S. was reported to have only paid $250,000. By comparison the U.N. Conference on Women received more than $6 million from the U.S. government for organization and implementation.  Beyond a lack of commitment, however, the Bush administration was actively engaged in blocking issues it did not want addressed. "It's not as if our government just said 'I'm taking my marbles and going home.' It's as if they took their marbles and then kicked everyone else's around the playground. They have been attending every international meeting after the Durban conference trying to derail the process" said Ray Winbush. The major points the U.S. objects to are specifically naming Israel as a racist state, and declaring the slave trade a crime. The government also continues to block any mention of reparations in the U.N. document. Since much of the final negotiations will happen at small, international meetings, the vigilance of U.S. non-profits that continue to follow what's happening is key.  
          Beyond the financial and political concerns, however, the conference illuminated, once again, what is needed to fight racism: shared power. The U.N. process is not structured to be participatory and that culture was very clear to the participants. The agenda of the NGO Forum was changed at the last minute. Hotel reservations and translation arrangements were continually bungled and overall, the conference felt confused. The large sessions had anywhere from two to five hundred participants and were set up as panel presentations with limited time for audience participation. Smaller workshops were scattered around the city, leaving many delegates exhausted trying to figure out where to go.  
          "We come back recognizing the significance of what we've done in the South," explains Leah Wise  "We have developed some strategies that other people haven't; the intensive relationship building and linking economic and racial oppression. Grassroots people in the South can use their experiences to help people around the world better understand how to fight oppression." Without changing the power dynamics that say only the experts, only the people with access to money and privilege should have any say, racism in all its forms cannot be dismantled.  
          The ongoing relationships that have the possibility to undermine
current power dynamics is the most hopeful outcome from the World
Conference Against Racism. The conference allowed civil rights,
economic justice, environmental justice, and women's groups from the
South and around the U.S. to meet groups from Mauritania who had
experienced modern day slavery, indigenous activists from Guatemala,
and human rights activists from China, among many, many others.  Some
of these connections have turned into ongoing relationships. "I would
say that we forged relationships of steel" said Beni Ivey.  "There are
African-American, Latino, Asian, and White leaders from across the
South who have participated in a major international event and who
have come back with a renewed commitment to forging a multi-racial
coalition in the South." Ben Okri, the Nigerian novelist, wrote that
dreams are most insurgent when they are suppressed.  The dream of what
the U.N. Conference Against Racism could have been was lost.  But the
idea of a world where racism is cracked or eroded just a little bit is
surely rebellious and alive.
          
            Gwen Robinson is a community organizer and writer living in Atlanta.
            The Southern Education Foundation recently released a report on the relations between persons of European and African descent in Brazil, South Africa, and the United States, all of which have larger populations of poor, uneducated black people. The report documents the costs and consequences of racism. It can be downloaded free of charge at www.beyondracism.org. 
          
        
        
          Race and Nation: Bridging Racial and Ethnic Communities
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4,
2001 p. 16
          
          The Southern Regional Council's (SRC) participation in the Race and Nation in the Global South collaborative, focusing on recent immigration to the American South, is one element in SRC's new initiative, Partnerships for Racial Unity. 
          As the SRC continues to work towards better understanding and collaboration between members of the white and African-American communities, the Partnerships Program allows the SRC to expand that work by learning from new immigrants as they arrive in and adapt to the South. The Partnerships program seeks to bridge racial and ethnic communities and foster multi-racial collaborations. 
          The Race and Nation project combines community-based research with popular education to investigate and influence the changing racial dynamics of the region. We hope better to understand both the experiences of new immigrants as they arrive in and adapt to the South and the attitudes of more long-term residents toward new immigrants. The overall goal of the project is to identify areas of potential collaboration as well as conflict among different groups, and to encourage multiracial efforts to address common needs.
          The Race and Nation project's goals are to analyze the changing racial-ethnic context of the South and, to use that knowledge to build the collective vision, personal relationships and organizational ties necessary for joint, long-range, inclusive, racial justice work at the local and regional levels. The analyses and strategies for effective bottom-up strategies for anti-racist work will then be widely disseminated through the region, increasing the capacity of local and regional organizations to work effectively in the changing racial-ethnic context of the South.
          With research partners at the Center for Research on Women (CROW) at the University of Memphis and the Highlander Center in New Market, Tennessee focusing on the state of Tennessee, the SRC is focused in the urban center of metropolitan Atlanta, Georgia.  Project Director Dwayne Patterson and Project Associate Blanca Rojas are meeting with local activists and conducting research in the Chamblee/Doraville area. Approximately fifty interviews are being carried out in this area of cultural co-existence that stretches along Buford Highway in DeKalb County, which has developed, over the past two decades, into a powerful economic generator with hundreds of small Asian and Latino businesses. Unlike the long-established immigrant communities of New York and Los Angeles where different ethnic groups tend to establish distinct neighborhoods, the Chamblee/Doraville area blends Asian and Latino businesses and people.
          One of every ten people in Metro Atlanta is Latino or Asian.  The 2000 Census showed a 300 percent increase in Georgia's Hispanic population, the third highest among Southern states. These changing demographics have made DeKalb County one of the most diverse in the nation, with African Americans comprising 55.3 percent of the population, whites 37 percent, and Hispanics and Asian Americans comprising 7.9 percent and 4.6 percent, respectively. Attracted by economic opportunity, increasing numbers of men, women, and children from Mexico and other Latin American as well as Asian countries are moving into the area. New immigrants are settling in homes and apartments, working in construction, the service industry, and many other professions, attending local schools, and buying groceries, clothes, and more in local stores.
          Based on the initial interviews, it is possible to identify four
general areas of special interest:
Access to education, including education rights for immigrant students and parent involvement programs;Political representation and civil rights, including census counts, redistricting issues, access to drivers licenses, and relations with the police and the Immigration and Naturalization Service;Employment and economic status, including work relations and perceived job competition; andCommunity/neighborhood relationships, problems and needs, including crime.
          Following is an excerpt from one of the interviews conducted by the SRC's Partnerships team.
        
        
          La nación y la raza: colaboración entre comunidades étnicas y raciales
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4,
2001 p. 17
          
          La participación del Southern Regional Council (SRC) en el
proyecto "La nacón y la raza: construir comunidades nuevas en el sur", dedicado al estudio de la inmigracón reciente en el sur de los Estados Unidos, forma parte de la nueva iniciativa"Partnerships for Racial Unity" (Colaboración para la Unidad Racial).
          A través del programa Partnerships, el
SRC ha podido ampliar el trabajo ya iniciado para promover una mayor
comprensión y colaboración entre los  miembros de las
comunidades anglosajona y afroamericana, aprendiendo acerca de los
nuevos inmigrantes mientras se establecen y se adaptan a la vida en
sur. El programa Partnerships busca reunir a diversas comunidades para promover la formación de colaboraciones multiraciales y multiétnicas.
          El proyecto "La nación y la raza" combina la investigación basada en la comunidad y la educación popular, con el objeto de comprender mejor e influir en la dinámica racial y étnica que está cambiando en la región. Esperamos poder llegar a comprender mejor dos tipos de situaciones: las experiencias de los inmigrantes recién llegados mientras se adaptan al sur y las actitudes que adoptan los residentes ya establecidos en relación a los nuevos inmigrantes. La meta del proyecto consiste en identificar las áreas en las que sería posible colaborar, así como las áreas de conflicto entre los diversos grupos, y promover esfuerzos multiraciales y multiétnicos para tratar de resolver las necesidades comunes.
          El proyecto "La nación y la raza" intenta además analizar el contexto racial-étnico que está cambiando en el sur y utilizar ese conocimiento para construir una visión colectiva, establecer relaciones personales, y crear lazos entre organizaciones-lo cuál resulta necesario para poder desarrollar un trabajo inclusivo de justicia racial y étnica al nivel local y regional. 
          En colaboracién con el Centro de Estudios de la Mujer (Center for Research on Women, CROW) de la universidad de Memphis y el Centro Highlander en New Market, Tennessee, que se dedican a estudiar la inmigración en Tennessee, el SRC trabaja en el area metropolitana de Atlanta, Georgia. El Director del proyecto, Dwayne Patterson y la asociada Blanca Rojas, se reúnen con activistas locales y conducen la investigación en el área de Chamblee/Doraville. Ya han realizado aproximadamente 50 entrevistas en ese área dónde coexisten diversas culturas, que se extiende a lo largo de la carretera de Buford, en el condado de DeKalb-el cuál se ha convertido en un centro económico de gran alcance, con centenares de pequeños negocios cuyos dueños son de origen asiático y latino. A diferencia de lo que ocurre en las comunidades inmigrantes establecidas desde hace mucho tiempo en Nueva York y Los Angeles, en dónde los diversos grupos étnicos han tendido a establecer barrios distintivos, en el área de Chamblee/Doraville las personas y los negocios cuyos dueños son de origen asiático o latino se mezclan en contigüidad.
          Una de cada diez personas en el área metropolitana de Atlanta se autoidentifica como latina o de origen asiático. El Censo del 2000 demostró que la población hispana de Georgia ha aumentado más del 300%. Entre los estados del sur, Georgia se convirtió en el tercero con mayor población hispana. Estos cambios demográficos han convertido al condado de DeKalb en uno de los más diversos de la nación, con 55,3% de población afroamericana, 37% de población de origen anglosajón, 7,9% de población de origen hispano y 4,6% de origen asiático. Debido a las oportunidades económicas, un número creciente de hombres, mujeres y niños de Méjico y de otro países latinoamericanos y asiáticos está estableciéndose en el área. Los immigrantes recientes residen en casas y apartamentos, y se emplean en la construcción, en puestos de servicio, y en muchas otras ocupaciones. Los niños asisten a las escuelas locales,y los adultos compran su comida, ropa, y otros productos en los almacenes locales.
          De acuerdo con el contenido de las primeras entrevistas, es posible
identificar cuatro temas de interés particular:
El acceso a la educación, incluso los derechos de los estudiantes inmigrantes y programas que involucren a los padres.La representación política y los derechos civiles de los inmigrantes, incluso la participación en el censo, temas de partición de los distritos, el acceso a licencias para conducir, y las relaciones con la policia y el INS.El empleo y el estatus económico de los inmigrantes, incluso las relaciones laborales y la percepción de competencia por los puestos de empleo.Las relaciones comunitarias y barriales, los problemas y las necesidades de la comunidad, incluso el crimen.
          
            El siguiente es  un extracto de uno de las entrevistas
conducidas por el equipo del programa Partnerships del SRC.
          
        
        
          Homero León
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4,
2001 pp. 18-19
          
          Homero Leon, an attorney with Georgia Legal Services, who was born in Cuba and immigrated to Miami with his family in 1960 at the age of four.
          My experiences growing up in Miami are varied because we arrived in early 1960 and were one of the first Cuban families to arrive in Miami. It was still pretty much an American town. I was just five years old and when I started school in the first grade, I couldn't speak English, not a word. It was a terrible experience but I remember it like it was yesterday, being in the classroom with all the English speakers. I'm sure I cried and I remember being scared. When I got to the second grade, the teachers took me aside and said they were going to fail me. They thought that I was a little slow, maybe a little retarded. So I failed the second grade. My problem was that I couldn't speak English-that was my "retardation." Now I am licensed to practice law in two states.
          The beginning was hard. My parents didn't speak English and although my father had a decent job in Cuba as a career military officer, he became a tomato picker in Homestead, Florida when we came here. My mother never learned English to this very day although she worked in the factories as a seamstress and has been in this country for about forty years. As more and more Cubans came and opened grocery stores, she would go to the grocery store where everyone spoke Spanish. Cubans opened banks and all kinds of businesses, so when she would go to a business, they spoke Spanish. She never had to learn English. Cubans own many television and radio stations, too!
          As the years went by, I learned English and for some reason I began to associate a lot with English-speaking folks. To this day, I never quite mastered how to read and write Spanish, always attending schools that taught English. I guess my parents wanted me to be successful so they figured if I became an Americano I would be more successful. I could "pass" by changing my name to Homer Leon. I became Homer Leon and I was a regular American kid.
          Life was easier being Homer Leon than being Homero León, it really was. People treat you different. When you meet Americans and you say your name is Homer Leon, they treat you differently than when you say your name is Homero León. You've got an instant connection with folks. They instantly connect with me as an American but if I say I am Homero León immediately most people see me differently-even people who like Latinos. The conversation changes-"Oh, how is it being Latino?" I think they put you in a box. You eat tacos and you like Ricky Martin. But if you are Homer Leon you are a regular American, you watch regular TV and you are regular, you are just folks and normalcy is good. As I got older and went to college I became Homero León again.
          The average Cuban in Miami is a right wing Republican and I'm a
leftist. I know some people who got beat up and killed-Cubans who were
left and center. You are an endangered species if you are a left wing
Cuban in Miami. So I was able to go underground as an American leftist-those Americanos are all lefty gringos. It is okay. It is tolerated with the Americano but it isn't tolerated it with the Chicanos. I rejected my culture, because my culture was so right-wing conservative, oppressive, sexist and all those "wonderful" qualities. In Miami around the Cubans I was Homer Leon but when I went to Tallahassee, a Cuban was a rare thing in 1976. I discovered my ethnic roots and felt more comfortable. It was cool to be a Homero León in Tallahassee. I didn't have to be a right-wing Cuban. I could just be a Cuban. I could be a left-wing Cuban and we were all lefties in college, so it was tolerable.
          I became a legal aid attorney and came to Atlanta, because I met an African-American woman-my ex-wife-who had lived here most of her life. We were in Orlando, Florida, but she considered Atlanta her home and was homesick. "The Civil Rights Movement never came to Orlando, Florida," she said. "They have no idea what African-American culture is in Orlando. I know there is some in Atlanta. I'm going back. Are you coming with me?" That was nine years ago.
          My wife at that time, moved me here to Atlanta and as far as
cultural and everything else we moved into an African-American neighborhood. This was a first in my life because I had always lived in either Latino neighborhoods or mixed neighborhoods. We were living in Union City at that time but working in Atlanta and we started going to a Black church. At every event my then-wife took me to, I was the only light-skinned person there. I guess my moving to Atlanta and living in the circles I was living, I pretty much thought Atlanta was an African-American town-with a Black mayor and everybody I saw was African American. It was an African-American world as far as I was concerned. And it was good.
          Eventually, I did begin to see more Latinos. I moved to Newnan and I started seeing construction sites where everybody building houses was Latino. That was about six years ago. I remember one night when my washing machine had broken down, I went to the little corner Laundromat, a few blocks down from me. About 65 percent of the people there were Latino, doing their laundry-all were new to Georgia. I was surprised, but there it was. Immigration had really spread out.
          A lot of the construction for the Olympics was done by Latinos. Economically, I guess these people were and are in great need of money and were able to make money, working very hard and building up Atlanta. I think a lot of African Americans developed resentment to these Latinos. I think that resentment was economically based. The White American resentment, I believe, is more prejudicial. They just don't like walking into a place, in "their" America, and hearing people speak a language they can't understand.
          I don't believe you should become an Americano if you are Latino. I believe it is better to keep your culture, keep your language, your literature, your music, your food, to keep that is important. African Americans, I believe the same thing-I love Afro-centric things. It's wonderful stuff, and we all need it. It is beautiful. I'm totally against assimilation. Multiculturalism is the best for all of us. Tolerance and diversity are wonderful and enrich all our lives.
          Racism in the South is almost like an honored tradition; at least in the North they seem more ashamed of it, but here they say, "It was my daddy's culture; it is our heritage." Tolerance is not a southern virtue. I see it all around me, and that makes it more difficult to celebrate the beauty of diversity.	
          
            This interview was conducted by Blanca Rojas on April 12, 2001.
          
        
        
          The Newest South:
A Lotta Cultures Goin' On
          By Tobar, HectorHector Tobar
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4,
2001 pp. 22-23
          
          Reprinted with permission from the May 13, 2001 edition of the Los Angeles Times.
          In the center of Memphis, a river port known for its turbulent history of conflict between blacks and whites, there is a place where the old ideas about race and the South don't make sense anymore.
          Drive east from the Mississippi along Union Avenue, just past the studio where a then-unknown Elvis Presley showed up one day to record a song, and you'll come to an in-between place known as Midtown. Here, there are no ethnic or racial majorities.
          "In Midtown, you have everyone and anyone living together," Claudio Perez-Leon, a Peruvian-born painter, said as he sipped a drink at a local cafe. "All the categories used to divide people are ignored here."
          In Memphis, as in other corners of the South, familiar neighborhoods are being remade, an inevitable consequence of the shifts documented in the 2000 Census. As the South grows-attracting migrants to both its large cities and its rural towns-it's starting to look a bit more like the East and West coasts.
          Census Tract 36 in Memphis offers one of the most dramatic expressions of this new, polyglot South: Its 3,016 residents are split into four roughly equal groups: 28 percent white, 27 percent black, 25 percent Asian and 17 percent Latino.
          What's happening in central Memphis is only the most advanced expression of a trend seen in Southern cities and towns as far afield as Bentonville, Ark., and Raleigh, N.C. All have seen a sharp increase in either their Latino or Asian populations or both. 
          In the 1990s, Tennessee's Latino population increased by 278 percent, while North Carolina's grew by 394 percent. In a handful of rural towns, Latinos have become the largest minority group, mostly because immigrants are taking low-wage jobs in chicken processing and other industries. Latinos make up about 40 percent of the population in Siler City, North Carolina, and Dalton, Georgia, the "Carpet Capital of the World."
          Elsewhere, Asians have become the largest minority in overwhelmingly white suburbs such as Cary, North Carolina (outside of Raleigh), and Germantown, Tennessee (east of Memphis), mirroring a pattern first seen twenty years ago in such Los Angeles suburbs as San Marino and Monterey Park.
          Earlier this year, Memphis Mayor Willie Herenton took note of the trend and formed an Office for Multicultural and Religious Affairs. Its mission is to ease the transition of Latinos, Asians, and other groups into the city's public life-and perhaps avoid the type of racial strife that Memphis became known for in the 1960s.
          Already, some observers of this city's social milieu see the potential for such conflict. Latinos, the city's fastest-growing minority, are increasingly filling low-wage jobs in construction and other industries.
          "There are some people who see the growth of the Latino community as a threat," said Jose Velasquez of the Latino-Memphis Connection, a social service agency. Some members of the city's black community "think we're going to take things from them without having to go through the same struggles."
          In the 1960s, blacks were alone at the bottom of the wage ladder in Memphis-it was a group of such men, sanitation workers, who marched with "I am a man" placards that became a civil rights icon. Their struggle brought the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr., to the city, where he was assassinated in 1968.
          Today, the motel where King was killed has been converted into a civil rights museum. This month, it's exhibiting "Americanos," a traveling photo documentary on Latino life in the United States.
          For the most part, Memphis' relationship with its Latino immigrants remains in the honeymoon phase. "We don't have the problems there are in other parts of the country," said Narquenta Sims, head of the mayor's multicultural office.
          Because many Latinos have just arrived in Memphis, she says, they haven't developed the resentments or expectations that can build up over time. "You don't have a lot of second- and third-generation Latinos here," she says. "Everything is brand new. Let's keep it brand new."
          In other corners of the South, there have been small but angry protests against the growing presence of Latino immigrants. Last year, former Ku Klux Klan leader David Duke joined one hundred people at an anti-immigrant rally in Siler City, North Carolina. They carried signs that read, "No way, Jose" and "The melting pot is boiling over."
          
          Hoping to prevent such scenes in Memphis, Sims and the mayor's office have worked hard to promote the city's growing diversity as an economic asset. They've also hosted a number of community meetings with the city's budding Latino and Asian leadership. More than 1,500 people came to one session that was held, like most gatherings of the mayor's commission, in Midtown.
          "The focus is to get everyone who is not white or African American together," Sims said. "We tell people, 'You may be Latino, you may be Asian, but we all have things in common.'"
          Indeed, there is a certain historical parallel at work in the latest round of migration to Memphis, a thread that joins the 19th century black sharecropper and 21st century Mexican field hand.
          In times past, people came to the "capital of the Mississippi Delta" from the surrounding plantations and down-and-out river towns, black and white men and women making new lives in an era marked by harsh segregation laws. A few brought their guitars and voices and made some of the first recordings of what came to be known as the blues.
          Now they come to Memphis from places as varied and distant as do the thousands of packages processed hourly at the FedEx Corporation's worldwide headquarters here.
          There are Vietnamese families from fishing towns on the Gulf of Mexico; Mexican veterans of the chicken plants in Arkansas and Alabama; the families of Somali refugees who have become a fixture in heartland cities from Minneapolis to Columbus, Ohio; and the entrepreneurs from the Indian subcontinent who have become dominant in the hotel business across the rural South.
          "It's not New York or L.A., and it's never going to be, because it's hot and humid and it's still the South," said Judy Peiser of the Memphis-based Center for Southern Folklore. "But it's a more cosmopolitan place than it used to be."
          Peiser has seen slow and subtle changes to the city's cultural landscape, most of which are not yet visible to many outsiders, who still think of culture in Memphis as "blues and barbecue." A few years back, Peiser became aware of a new Memphis musical tradition, the ranchera concert.
          "They have these mammoth dances. All these kids come in, young people working in construction," Peiser said. "They all have money in their pockets. It's an amazing scene. They take over entire warehouses."
          Memphis now boasts a Spanish-language radio station. When the popular Mexican band Tigres del Norte came into town, it charged $50 a ticket and still managed to fill a 1,000-seat theater. There are street gangs transplanted from neighborhoods in Chicago and California.
          But while Latinos make up a large portion of some neighborhoods, they are still just 3 percent of Memphis as a whole (city officials here say that Latinos were grossly undercounted and that the actual number may be twice the census figure). The idea of Latinos having an effect on political life here is still far in the future.
          "In Memphis, our community is still in diapers," said Juan Romo,
editor of the Spanish-language weekly La Voz Hispana. "A lot of people haven't made up their minds to stay here yet. They're happy to work hard and send money home."
          Memphis' growing Indian and Pakistani community is further along, however. In 1991, when Herenton campaigned to become the city's first black mayor, Indian activists here organized a fund-raiser. "It's always good to have a friend in City Hall," said Sudhir Agrawal, an accountant and native of New Delhi.
          Agrawal is also a volunteer treasurer of the India Cultural Center and Temple, whose one hundred members come to Memphis to worship every week from Hernando, Mississippi; Little Rock, Arkansas; and other places.
          "We are involved [in the community] to some extent but not as much into the politics of black and white," Agrawal said. "We just go about taking care of our business and moving on and expressing our opinions."
          Sims said it was the Indian and Pakistani community's support for Herenton that helped lay the groundwork for the creation of the Office of Multicultural and Religious Affairs.
          "The Hindus came out for him in a very strong and powerful way when no one else wanted to touch him," Sims said.
          When the office finally opened earlier this year, one of the first calls Sims made was to the Mexican consul in New Orleans. She proposed to the diplomat that Mexico establish a consulate here. It would be the city's first foreign delegation.
          After months of waiting, the city got a response, just the other day, in the form of a letter from Mexico City. Unfortunately, the text was in Spanish, and no one in Sims' office could understand it. So, she ran it through a computer translation program and managed to decipher the message: No consulate yet. But maybe soon.
        
        
          Latino Immigrants in Memphis:
Assessing the Economic Impact
          By Mendoza, MarcelaMarcela Mendoza, Ciscel,           David H.David H. Ciscel,
and Smith, Barbara EllenBarbara Ellen
Smith
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4,
2001 pp. 24-26
          
          Immigrants now play a critical part in the labor force across the country, and the same is increasingly true for Memphis. In 1999, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, Latinos made up 12 percent of the U.S. workforce. Whereas in the past Latino immigrants in the South tended to concentrate in agriculture, today they often work in the "new economy"-services, distribution and even construction. Although some have significant job skills and/or professional training, undocumented immigration status and/or limited English proficiency narrow the employment options of many Latinos to low-wage work.  
          Still, the social, economic, and demographic impact of the Latino population in Memphis is substantial.  Preliminary data from a study by The University of Memphis Center for Research on Women (CROW) highlights some important findings.
          Over the past decade, the Latino population has at least doubled in nine Southern states: Alabama, Arkansas, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia. Tight labor markets (at least until quite recently) have been magnets for Latino migration. According to a report by the Selig Center for Economic Growth, North Carolina, Georgia, and Tennessee are among the top ten emerging states, as ranked by the rate of growth of Hispanic buying power during 1990-2001.
          By far the most common reason why Latinos come to the U. S. is employment opportunity. Latino immigrants tend to be of prime working age, both younger and healthier than the general population. Although some come to unite with their families, the driving force behind their migration to and within the U. S. is the search for jobs. In this, new Latino immigrants have much in common with generations of Southerners who migrated from the rural to urban South, or from the South to the North in search of greater economic opportunity.
          Today the impact of Latinos as workers is being felt throughout the United States and their share of buying power is rising in every state. In 2000 the Census Bureau counted a total of 35.3 million Hispanics/Latinos in the U.S., which represents a 58 percent increase compared to 1990, 3 million more than the Bureau anticipated. Such high growth in the Latino population is driven both by immigration and by high birth rates among young Latino families. Given the buoyant labor market in the U.S., Latino immigrant workers have tended not to displace local workers, but rather to fuel economic growth in most regional economies. 
          
            Latino Immigration to Memphis
          
          In 1990, the largest number of Latinos in the state of Tennessee
was concentrated in the Nashville-Davidson metropolitan area. One in
three Latinos in the state lived there or in the counties bordering
this area. Three other metropolitan areas of Tennessee had also
received significant Latino immigration: Memphis, Clarksville, and
Chattanooga. Since then, there has been growth of the Latino
population in cities across the state. For example, according to the
Nashville Chamber of Commerce, the current population estimate in
Davidson County is 45,550 Hispanics-as compared with about 8,000 in
1990. (The 2000 Census counted 26,091 Hispanics in Davidson County.)
In addition, certain rural areas, such as the counties surrounding
Morristown in east Tennessee, have drawn an increasing population of Latinos. Even though their numbers may not be large, the presence of Latinos in such relatively sparsely populated rural areas is especially noticeable.
          The new Latino immigrants are younger, more skilled, and more highly educated than those who arrived in previous decades. More women and children have joined the immigration flow each year, suggesting that these new Latino families might become permanent settlers. In the early 1990s, almost 70 percent of Latinos in Tennessee were under the age of thirty-five (compared to one of two non-Latinos). Latinos initially found employment in agriculture, in the fast growing service and distribution sectors, and in the construction industry. In 1990, according to the U. S. Census Bureau estimate, 90 percent of all the Hispanics in Tennessee were U.S. citizens. Today, most are not citizens, and many have an undocumented immigration status. Because of their consequent desire for invisibility, population counts of Latinos-including those of the Census Bureau-are likely underestimates.
          In 1990, the U. S. Census Bureau counted 8,116 Hispanics-largely of Cuban, Puerto Rican, and Mexican descent-in the Memphis Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA). Many migrants of Mexican descent who settled in Memphis in those years arrived from the U. S. Southwest. In 2000, the census counted 27,520 Hispanics in the Memphis MSA, a 239 per cent increase over 1990. Others place the figure even higher. A study by The University of Memphis Regional Economic Development Center (REDC) estimates a current community of 53,628 individuals of Hispanic heritage in the Memphis MSA. 
          Frequently, the new immigrants settle in working-class neighborhoods, along with more established residents. Contrary to a commonly held belief that Latinos are seasonally mobile, these groups already constitute a stable, permanent population in these areas. The majority of recent Latino immigrants arrived in Memphis in the company of family and friends.
          Enrollment of Hispanic children in the public and private schools of Memphis and Shelby County is clearly on the rise. There was a total of 2,581 Hispanic students at the end of the academic year 1999-2000, up from 572 in 1992-1993. 
          Homeownership is a good measure of immigrants' assimilation to the urban context. Latino communities with Spanish-language newspapers and bilingual real estate agents, as is the case in Memphis, have social networks that provide a flow of information about housing opportunities. CROW's analysis of public records available through the local Tax Assessor's Office identified 1,584 Memphis homeowners with Spanish surnames.  Of these, we estimate that 828 homeowners-based on their Spanish first name and surname, and the location and value of their property-may be first-generation Latino immigrants. 
          
            The Impact of Latinos on the Memphis Economy
          
          Latino workers in the Memphis area have a total economic impact of $1,020,000,000 and 35,972 jobs. That impact is made up of the work they do in the Memphis economy and the jobs they create through their consumer expenditures in Memphis businesses. 
          Most Latinos came to the Memphis area since the mid-1990s in search of jobs in the vast and growing industries of trade, distribution, and construction. In general, these immigrants have found their job expectations fulfilled. Low unemployment rates in the region made it relatively easy to find employment even if they did not speak English. In addition, it appears that Latinos did not displace local workers. From 1995 to 1999, the number of jobs in the Memphis economy grew from 531,600 to 586,300.  While the number of jobs grew by 54,700, the number of workers in the labor force grew by only 35,100, so there were jobs available for new workers. 
          This analysis of the economic impact of Latino workers on the
Memphis regional economy uses traditional multipliers to estimate not only the work that Latinos do, but also the jobs that their consumer expenditures create. When a new Latino worker accepts a job in, e.g., the Memphis construction industry, he or she helps the regional economy grow both by earning an income and by spending a portion of that income on housing, food, and other locally purchased goods and services. These expenditures help create even more jobs. 
          The University of Memphis REDC projected a Memphis Hispanic population of 53,628 in 2000. Assuming a distribution of children, men, and women that is based on the U.S. Census Bureau's analysis of the national Hispanic population in 1999, there are currently 27,429 Latino workers in the Memphis economy. The gender breakdown for Latino workers in Memphis is 9,470 women and 17,959 men. 
          These 27,429 Latino workers hold jobs throughout the Memphis economy. However, they tend to be concentrated in three economic sectors: construction, distribution, and retail trade. While some workers in managerial and supervisory jobs may earn as much as $18.00 per hour, most Latinos in the Memphis economy are employed in semi-skilled jobs where wages vary between $7.00 and $10.00 per hour. Although most Latino workers earn less than $20,000 per year, they have one unusual characteristic for low-wage workers: they tend to have very high savings rates. We estimate that the typical Latino worker saves almost 30 percent of his/her income, sending over two-thirds of the savings back to a family in Mexico or another Latin American country. 
          Latino workers earned $570.8 million dollars in wages and salaries in the Memphis area in 2000. As noted above, most are employed as semi-skilled workers in the construction firms, warehouses and retail trade establishments of the Memphis economy. Often speaking only Spanish, these workers use temporary employment agencies or small firms with Spanish-speaking supervisors to gain employment. 
          Of the $570.8 million that they earned in 2000, we estimate that Latino workers paid at least $85.6 million in payroll/income taxes and sent $125.6 million home to their families in Mexico or other parts of Latin America. In addition, Latinos generated, through their consumer expenditures, approximately $12.3 million in local and state sales taxes. Perhaps most surprising, Latinos spent $359.6 million in the local economy. 
          The multiplier impact of these expenditures of $359.6 million by Memphis Latino workers is impressive. These expenditures result in another $664.0 million spent locally by workers and businesses that benefit from Latino workers in the Memphis economy. Consumer expenditures by the Latino community also result in the creation of 8,544 additional local jobs in Memphis. These local expenditures and additional workers increase the regional payroll by $570.8 million for Latino workers and $176.5 million for workers in the other 8,544 new jobs. 
          In sum, Latino immigrants play an increasingly important role in
the social life and regional economy of Memphis. They contribute a new
element of cultural diversity to the city's schools, churches, and
neighborhoods. In their search for economic opportunity, Latinos
recall prior generations of Southerners who migrated for similar
reasons. Just as earlier migrants fueled Memphis's growth as a major
distribution center, so too do contemporary Latino immigrants
contribute to regional economic development.	
          
            Marcela Mendoza is a senior researcher at the University of Memphis. David H. Ciscel is professor of economics at the University of Memphis. Barbara Ellen Smith is director of the University of Memphis Center for Research on Women. The research for this report, was supported by grants from the Ford, Rockefeller, and Charles Stewart Mott Foundations, in a collaboration with Southern Regional Council and the Highlander Research and Education Center. The full report can be ordered from CROW for $5 plus 8.25 percent Tennessee tax ($3 for bulk orders of five or more). All orders must be prepaid. Please make checks payable to The University of Memphis and remit to Center for Research on Women, 339 Clement Hall, Memphis, TN 38152. For more information, call: 901-678-2770 or email: crow@memphis.edu.
          
        
        
          Creative Collagorations: Latina and Black
  Women in Knoxville
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4, 2001
pp. 27-28
          
          In 1992, very few Latinos lived in Knoxville, a city of 173,890
nestled in the mountains of East Tennessee. Tne Latina women connected
with the University of Tennessee in Knoxville organized HOLA in order
to overcome the sense of isolation from Latino culture that they
felt. Today HOLA has abaout one hundered members and a strong history
of provideing a voice for the Latina community in East Tennessee where
Latinos now make up 1.6 percent of the Knoxville population,
according to the 2000 Census.
          Also in Knoxville, the Carpetbag Theatre has supported, for more
than thirty years, the professional development of young artists
while collaborating with other groups to create new performance works
addressing issues and aspirations of people silenced by racism,
classism, sexism, or ageism. It is one of the few tenured
African-American professional theatre companies in the South.
          These two community organizations are working together now,
sharing their individual histories, culture, and common strategies
for struggle, both with each other and in their broader
communities. "We are collectively coming to the realization of some
of the things the African-American communities and the Latino
communities share, and we're trying to explore the ways we connect
there," explains Linda Parris-Bailey, the executive and artistic
director of Carpetbag Theatre. With African Americans currently
comprising, according to the 2000 Census, 16.2 percent of the
Knoxville population and Tennessee's Latino population growth
expanding rapidly, a partnership between the two groups has the
potential to wield great influence.
          Witnessing the steady growth in Knoxville's Latino population, the
members of Carpetbag Theatre decided to begin structured outreach to
that community. At first, this involved identifying service provider
institutions that served the Latino community, but when Parris-Bailey
invited a Latino cultural arts group from California to come perform
and lead workshops, several members of HOLA also attended. When some
of the same Latina and African-American women who had met at those
performances saw each other again at workshops led by the Knoxville
Legal Services affiliate, those beginning relationsips were
reinforced. HOLA began inviting Carpetbag members to HOLA meetings and
Carpetbag Theatre invited HOLA members to be a partner in their
American Festival Project work. The dialogue had begun.
          For the past two years, HOLA has organized a Hispanic Festival,
showcasing Latina culture. The 2001 festival, held in October, was a
collaborative effort of HOLA and Carpetbag Theatre to reach across
and beyond traditional racial boundaries and included a film
festival, speaker presentations, and a Blessing of the Flags
ceremony. With guidance, assistance, and reehearsal space provided by
Carpetbag Theatre, HOLA also prepared a dramatic reading, telling the
stories of HOLA members' migration to East Tennessee. The members fo
Carpetbag Theatre worked to encourage a large African-American turnout
for the performance and the theatre was full for the performances.
          "The Latino community is in much the same situation that the
African-American community was during the 1950s and 1960s," says Loida
Velasquez, HOLA vice president for social action. "So Latinos have a
lot to learn form African Americans about how to struggle for
recognition and civil rights and teh importance of building cultural
ties in order to later build political understanding." Velasquez and
other HOLA members have begun planning leadership meet-ings where African-American community leaders can share what
theyhave learned about community organizing and creating change
through activism. HOLA members hope to build on the civil rights
tradition of the African-American community and to create a new sense
of power anong Knoxville's minority groups.
          with experiences working with large minority populations in other
cities, Parris-Bailey knows that tensions frequently emerge between
minority groups, particularly over issues like job competition. Her
hope for Knoxville is that, by nurturing these early relationships
across racial and ethnic lines, "we can counter the basic mythologies
about the other communities...and create come linkages before it gets
to the point that we can be manipulated."
          As HOLA members develop deeper relationships with African American
community leaders and as African American women continue to attend
HOLA meetings, discussions about race relations and racism have
begun. Race and ethnicity are directly addressed with HOLA
participation as attendees discuss issues of law enforcement and
minority business development. "This dialogue between Latinos and the
African American community is ongoing. It is happening at many
different levels and different settings throughout our communities
and will form a strong foundation of trust for later work together."
          The next step in HOLA and Carpetbag Theatre's work together will
be deciding how to continue sharing the dramatic reading
performances beyond its initial opening at the October festival,
particularly how it can be performed in the African-American
community to stimulate discussion. Members of the two groups are also
seeking to continue and deepen the relationship between the two
groups. "I think the people involved in the partnerships are listing
to each other," says Parris-Bailey. "We need to spread the
opportunities for listening out."
          
            Gwen Robinson, Jessie Bond,
and Sarah Torian contributed to the article. for more information
about Carpetbag Theater visit: www.korrnet.org/carpetbg/.
          
        
        
          Looking for a Living Wage
          Reviewed by Lang, Amy SchragerAmy Schrager Lang
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4,
2001 pp. 31-32, 34
          
          Barbara Ehrenreich, Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in America, New York: Metropolitan Books, 2001.
          In the summer of 1999, just as approximately four million women were about to be remanded to the workforce by welfare reform, Barbara Ehrenreich began an experiment. At the urging of her editor, she abandoned the "variety and drama" of her "real" life as a feminist author/journalist and set out to replicate the experience of an unskilled middle-aged female job-seeker in what appeared by all the customary measures to be an extremely favorable labor market. The object of this exercise was to try to "match income to expenses" on the wages commanded by the working poor. Or, to put it another way, to discover what mysterious economies, known only to the low-wage worker, made it possible to subsist on six or seven dollars an hour in late twentieth-century America; to see, in short, how the poor manage to live in poverty.
          I do not mean to be sardonic here. Ehrenreich, as almost every
review of Nickel and Dimed: On (Not) Getting By in
America has observed, has provided a useful, highly readable, and, unquestionably, if unfortunately, necessary account of the economic lives of the millions of people living in the United States for whom the next doctor's appointment, car battery, or pair of shoes threatens financial disaster. Nonetheless, as Ehrenreich herself has observed elsewhere, the "discovery" of the poor, or, in this case, the "discovery" that the poor are poor seems to require a new Columbus every few decades.
          	Placing herself squarely in the tradition of journalistic
muckrakers of the past, Ehrenreich supplies a guided tour of the
commonplace humiliations of job hunting in a booming economy's "lower
depths," from fictitious job ads to "personality" tests running
heavily to questions like "Are you an honest person?" to mandatory
drug-testing to the mystification, not to say misrepresentation, of
wages and hours by employers. Working first as a waitress and hotel
maid in Key West, then as a housecleaner and nursing home aide in
Portland, Maine, and finally as a sales clerk in a Minneapolis
Wal-Mart, Ehrenreich offers smart, funny, and appalling accounts of
the restaurant manager who sneeringly threatens his wait staff with
locker checks, the maid service that requires that floors be washed on hands and knees ("the old-fashioned" submissive way), the "unwanted intimacy" of cleaning the "three kinds of shit stains" from other people's toilets, the eight hours of training in the "Cult of Sam" required of Wal-Mart employees. Without sentimentality, she makes vivid the "world of pain," both physical and psychic, inhabited by workers whose hard labor like their existence goes unacknowledged and unrewarded.
          Not surprisingly, even with two jobs, Ehrenreich cannot make ends meet on what she earns. As it turns out, not only are there no hidden economies, but there are instead "special costs" to be borne by the poor. Many of these are associated with housing, what Ehrenreich comes to see as the "deal breaker" for the low-wage worker. On the other hand, the "deal," such as it is, is broken by the sheer dearth of affordable housing, particularly affordable housing within reasonable proximity to the service jobs held by most of the working poor-imagine the location of most service jobs in your town and the problem becomes immediately clear. On the other hand, driven to pay exorbitant rents for short-term, stop-gap housing in motels where it is, in turn, impossible to cook and therefore to save on the cost of food, not even Ehrenreich-free of children and childcare expenses, possessed of a credit card for emergencies and a Rent-a-Wreck to expedite her job search not to mention white skin, good health, and higher education-can accumulate the two month's rent needed for security on an apartment.
          Since food-the cost of which has diminished as a percentage of the
average family budget in the forty years since the formula establishing the official poverty level was put into place-not housing-the cost of which has dramatically increased-is used in calculating poverty, many of the women and men with whom Ehrenreich worked escaped the notice of those charged with monitoring poverty. This, despite the numbers of them who, to Ehrenreich's dismay, were sleeping in their cars, living four or more to a motel room or trailer, or camping in the living room of a friend or relation. According to the most recent calculations of the Economic Policy Institute, the "living wage," that is, the wage that will support both food and housing, though not much else, for a family composed of one adult and two children is $14 per hour. In 2000, 60 percent of American workers earned less.
          Given their exploitation, and given as well a shortage of low-wage
workers, Ehrenreich not unreasonably asks why her fellow store clerks, maids, or waiters take no action to improve their lot. In the course of Nickel and Dimed, she proffers a number of explanations, none of them entirely adequate: the damage to self-esteem she detects even in herself after a while-a something "loathsome and servile" that "infect[s]" her on the job; the high rates of turnover that defeat efforts to organize the low-wage workplace; the dread of being fired, given the unthinkable complications-new child care, new transportation arrangements, etc.-attendant on changing jobs; and, in some cases, the identification of workers with the values touted by corporate employers or individual bosses.
          But beyond all these, Ehrenreich hints at a broader and more disturbing explanation. Speaking of the economic behavior of low-wage workers, she suggests that "if low wage workers do not always behave in an economically rational way, that is, as free agents within a capitalist democracy, it is because they dwell in a place that is neither free nor in any way democratic." The place in which they do dwell is one in which the working poor, clothed in the stigmatizing uniforms of their menial trades, interrogated, tested, monitored, and policed, trade their civil rights-at the very least, their right to privacy and to free speech-for a not quite subsistence wage. That place is largely invisible from the gated community, the private school, the health club, or the upscale mall. Where once rich and poor shared public spaces and services, privatization has produced not merely an inequality but a parallel universe in which the poor, if they appear at all, hover on the far horizon. So distant and obscured are they, in fact, that it takes a well-funded explorer like Ehrenreich to make their plight visible at all.
          Nickel and Dimed is, as others have
observed, the latest in a long line of what might be called imposture
narratives: accounts of the experiences of a journalist who, for one
reason or another but usually in order to expose a social evil, assumes the part of a suffering "Other"-a worker, an African American, a Jew. There is much to be said in reference to this genre about white, middle class arrogance, about the expropriation of the experiences of others, about the possibilities for misinterpretation and the opacity of class. To her credit, Ehrenreich says a part of it herself. Yet in the post-September world in which postal workers, but not Congressional aides die of anthrax because no one bothered to test them, in which terrorism provides the occasion or anyway the excuse for massive layoffs, in which wealth and poverty may take on new and unthought of significance, the value of Ehrenreich's account of a "culture of extreme inequality" far outweighs its occasional lapses.	
          
            Amy Schrager Lang is associate professor in the Graduate Institute of Liberal Arts at Emory University.
          
        
        
          Transformed Through Activism
          By Nasstrom, Kathryn L.Kathryn L. Nasstrom
          Vol. 23, No. 3-4,
2001 pp. 33-34
          
          Constance Curry, Joan C. Browning, Dorothy Dawson Burlage, Penny Patch, Theresa Del Pozzo, Sue Thrasher, Elaine DeLott Baker, Emmie Schrader Adams, and Casey Hayden, Deep in Our Hearts: Nine White Women in the Freedom Movement (Athens and London: The University of Georgia Press, 2000).
          Deep in Our Hearts, which features essays by
nine white women who participated in the southern civil rights
movement in the 1960s, is a much needed book. The authors' recollections help redress the relative absence, in both personal accounts and scholarly treatments of the movement, of women of their race and generation. We have had, up to now, one significant memoir (Mary King's Freedom Song) and a very few scholarly works (Sara Evans's Personal Politics being the best known); these have had to carry a great deal of interpretive weight-more than such a small number of works can bear-in representing complex personal and social worlds.
          The genre to which Deep in Our Hearts belongs is memoir/autobiography, and the central issue is the compelling and eternally fascinating question of selfhood: who is this person and how did she come to be the person she is? The authors' collective answer is that they became anti-racist activists and they did so through the southern freedom movement and especially through the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) to which all were connected in some way, for some time. All were young at the time (in their late teens and twenties), and all were transformed in significant ways by the experience as they aligned themselves with a black-led movement. "That experience remains at the core of who I am," Penny Patch writes, and all the essays are narrative expositions on this theme.
          Deep in Our Hearts works well as a collection of essays because the pieces are sufficiently similar in general content and purpose to reside between the covers of one book, yet sufficiently different to make each piece worth taking up on its own merits. The rough template for the essays is that each addresses the author's growing up years, followed by her experiences in the movement, and closes with a reflection on the years since. There is familiar ground here, as a number of the essays touch on hotly debated issues in the history of the movement, such as the question of interracial sex, gender and leadership, and the demise of SNCC. There is also much that is new, such as Emmie Schrader Adams's experiences in Africa prior to her involvement in the Mississippi movement and Theresa Del Pozzo's subsequent involvement with the interracial jazz world. One of the volume's greatest contributions is the discussion that each contributor undertakes, although in varying degrees of detail and self-revelation, of the fragmenting of the student movement in the mid- to late-1960s and the impact of the shift from interracialism to black power. For some, the feelings of estrangement and loss were intense; for others, a personal history of activism that continued to evolve and prove meaningful, combined with a philosophical and political understanding of the significance of black power, eased the transition. The period from 1965 to 1970 is the least understood phase of the civil rights movement and is most typically viewed as a time of precipitous decline. These essays, as partial and particular as they are (and as all memoirs must be), offer clues to a more nuanced interpretation and serve as reminders that sweeping generalizations will not suffice.
          These are stories of coming of age in a transformative social
movement; they are also retrospective accounts, written from the
vantage point of middle age in late twentieth-century America. Because
the movement was such a life-defining experience, the task of the
ensuing decades has been one of coming to terms with the past. The vitality of these essays derives from how engaged the writers are in establishing the meaning of the movement in the present, both for themselves as individuals and for the social issues of our day. In much of this, the tone is confident and decided, reflecting beliefs formed in early lives of activism and maintained, even amplified, in subsequent years. On other matters, however, there is a tentative quality and even a certain fragility. Readers picking up the book are likely to expect the passages on the movement to be riveting-and many are. What is surprising is that the greater emotional weight and the most moving passages concern the descriptions of present-day lives and feelings about the movement today. Casey Hayden writes, "Even now when I give talks about the movement I weep, sometimes breaking down completely. My tears are for that loss and for the innocent girl I was." The sense that present lives are still unsettled by events four decades ago lends an air of unfinished business, sometimes painfully so, to these memoirs. The presence of the past in the present is the emotional center of these autobiographies, and the meaning of the freedom movement is not fixed but still in evolution. These essays speak at once to two times, the past of idealism and action and the present of memory and reconciliation.
          A collection of memoirs is an unusual undertaking in the genre of
autobiography, which more typically narrates an individual life
history. In their preface, the authors nod to the novelty of their
endeavor, but they might have told us more about why they decided to
work collectively and how that decision shaped the final work. What
did they hope to accomplish together that could not be done
singularly? To what extent did they prompt, shape, and edit each
others' memories and essays? How did they come to write a book that
reflects one segment of the movement (young, white, and female) when
the mixed-race, mixed-sex, and multi-generational world of the
movement was so significant to them? The question of how an
autobiographical work is crafted is always significant, but all the
more so here because the contributors participated in a mass movement
in which individual identity and action merged into a larger
collective consciousness and purpose. Moreover, decision-making within
SNCC was a constant source of discussion and typically a group
process. This may be a case where literary form reflects the
distinctive activist form of SNCC, and the volume can be read in part
as a search for an appropriate collective voice with which to remember
the movement and comment on its meaning in our own time.
          
            Kathryn L. Nasstrom is associate professor of history at the University of San Francisco and is author of Everybody's Grandmother and Nobody's Fool: Frances Freeborn Pauley and the Struggle for Social Justice (2000).
          
        
      
    
  
