
    
      
        
        Southern Changes. Volume 23, Number 1, 2001
        
          Voices and Choices: Workplace Justice and the Poultry Industry
          Edited bySullivan, Susan StevenotSusan Stevenot
Sullivan
          Vol. 23, No. 1, 2001 pp. 3-7
          
          In an unprecedented move this past November, the Roman Catholic bishops of the Southern United States released a pastoral statement on workplace justice issues. Voices and Choices studies the poultry industry to highlight the plight of "our brothers and sisters whose work exacts an intolerable personal and community cost." The project took two years and involved hundreds of people, from poultry processing workers and managers to labor and church officials.
          Representing the immigration and language issues affecting the poultry industry, Voices and Choices is published in English and Spanish in the same binding. Endorsed by forty-one bishops from Virginia to Texas, it uses scripture and Catholic social teaching to assess the real price of our heaped plates of fried chicken. It includes statistics as well as stories of the workers (with their names changed) whose lives shape the labor and occupational health issues.
          But Voices and Choices is not just about one contemporary industry:
          "While this letter will focus on the lack of 'voices and choices' for many of our brothers and sisters who work in the poultry industry, we do not mean to single out this one productive business as unique. We use the poultry industry as an example of other businesses, in agriculture and manufacturing, which share the same challenges, whether furniture is being made, produce picked, or livestock raised under contract."
          The personal stories that appear throughout the document are an unusual feature for such a church statement. Worker interviews give voice to those who have no "voice or choice" in their workplace: 
          Maria Moñtez prays the "Our Father" daily, but she says "Padre Nuestro." She prays in Spanish, the language of her birthplace. Now a senior citizen, she has lived in the United States for many years, the last five of them as a worker in the poultry processing industry. Senora Moñtez is friendly, but shy. When asked about her work, she says several times that she is glad to be employed, that she doesn't mind working hard. Later she mentions her pain and disability. Moñtez has numbness in her arms and hands from the motions she repeats hundreds of times during every work shift. The pain often keeps her awake at night and she treats her condition by rubbing her skin with alcohol. She has not seen a doctor because the company insurance has a deductible of several hundred dollars which her wages cannot cover. She has asked to be rotated to other tasks with different motions, but has been told she is too dependable in her job to risk a replacement. "A lot of people are also affected with asthma and pneumonia and eye problems," she says. "That's what I see the most. People have to leave the plant because of illness. People get fired if they get hurt." 
          Like most workers in poultry processing, Senora Moñtez stands for hours at her place on a production line. Chickens, impaled on hooks hanging from a chain which moves the carcasses around the processing area, pass in front of her at a speed which, in a large part, determines the profitability of the operation. The atmosphere is noisy and damp. The floor is wet and the chickens drip on everything and everyone. The moisture contains many chemicals and biological contaminants. Each room is colder than the last as the temperature of the chickens is cooled from "live" to "packed." Processing involves killing, gutting, cutting, sorting, weighing, and packaging at an urgent pace. One's task is performed hundreds, sometimes more than a thousand times, per shift, often with sharp blades.
          According to a 1996 study by the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL), the incidence of repetitive motion injuries, such as carpal tunnel syndrome, among poultry processing workers is five times the rate seen in manufacturing in general. According to OSHA, health and safety violations involving a substantial probability of death or serious injury increased more than 150 percent between 1997 and 1998 at one of the leading poultry processing companies. The physical effects of this type of employment can be devastating.
          Sara Brown's injuries are not physical. She speaks passionately of the favoritism and manipulation she has experienced from supervisors at her poultry job for the four years she has worked there. She speaks of inter-minority discrimination and prejudice. She is aware of bathroom breaks denied for an entire shift, of time off given to a chosen few, while her excused absences to be with her hospitalized husband are counted toward her possible firing. She, too, has children to support. She takes great risks in complaining to her supervisor, and knows of no avenue of appeal beyond the whims of those immediately in charge. She works hard, she says, is dependable, and deserves better treatment. "Who," she asks, "will hear me?"
          Now in her mid-forties, Beatrice Johnson has worked in poultry
processing for more than twenty-one years. Repetitive motion injuries disabled her, but company doctors told her that her condition was not job-related. Her family doctor disagrees. Ms. Johnson hoped for worker's compensation. Instead, she was put on sick leave at a fraction of her normal pay. When her sick leave runs out, she will probably be fired, like other workers she knows. She is still disabled, still in pain, still in need of a way to support herself.
          In 1997 the DOL found 60 percent of poultry companies surveyed to be in violation of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). More than 51 percent of the plants failed to pay workers for time spent on job-related tasks such as clean-up; more than 30 percent failed to pay for brief breaks during the day, such as restroom use; more than 54 percent deducted money from worker paychecks for protective gear for which the company is required to pay. Employees do not have a "voice" or a "choice" in such policies.
          While Voices and Choices--released November 15, 2000--uses the 1997 study, a newly released DOL report shows that 100 percent of the poultry processing plants surveyed in 2000 were in violation of the Fair Labor Standards Act. (See box on page 7.)
          The January, 2001 DOL study states that "investigations of fifty-one randomly-selected poultry processing plants located throughout the U.S. led to agency findings across-the-industry of non-compliance under the FLSA." 
          Violations cited by the DOL in the new report included: "employees not paid for all hours worked, including overtime hours, due to undercounting hours worked; employees underpaid due to impermissible deductions made from wages; overtime due plant employees as a result of improperly claimed exempt status; overtime not paid to some live-haul crew members (catchers, loaders, drivers); and record-keeping violations as recorded time was not accurate for in-plant or live-haul workers."
          The DOL study also gives details about the underpayment of
subcontracted or "temporary" workers--workers who are rarely, if ever,
paid the same wages for doing the same work as employees, but who may
represent a substantial number of the workers at the plant. "The
potential for minimum wage violations affecting workers employed via
temporary help firms in processing plants is significant since these
workers generally were paid only slightly more than the Federal
minimum wage. The lower rates paid to these temp agency workers leave
little room before practices of not paying for all hours actually
worked or making deductions from wages" (for items required to be provided to employees such as ear plugs, clothing, and equipment).
          Voices and Choices includes the viewpoint of poultry industry senior management as well, people who have voices and make choices about not only their work, but the work of others.
          John Stephens is a senior manager with a poultry company who articulates the industry's point of view. While he grapples with conflicting priorities and difficult decisions, he has the power to influence corporate policy and to make changes. He must watch the profitability of the operation. It is a competitive business and there are a lot of factors to consider. His single biggest problem, Stephens says emphatically, is employee turnover. As soon as people can find another job, they leave. As in the majority of processing plants, most employees are from minority groups. More and more he must rely on immigrants, many with questionable documentation.
          Surveys conducted by the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union (UFCW), show that poultry workers are mostly African American and female, though Latinos are the fastest growing segment of the workforce.
          "The poultry industry in the U.S. is not an employment of choice for people," Mr. Stephens says. "The work is very hard physically and repetitious," that is "part of the problem." He has future employees bused in from other areas, oversees company housing that shelters some of them and wonders how he will keep the line functioning with a full complement next week. He knows that training supervisors to treat employees well and training employees to rotate through several jobs to relieve or prevent repetitive motion injuries are keys to the future of the operation. He says he is working on implementing such improvements. "The higher the quality of supervision, the better the work environment. The quality of supervision is a key to turnover and absenteeism. We need to improve the way people are dealt with; the way we take care of their needs is most important."
          Processing is only one part of the poultry industry. Chicken catchers are another group who work an unhealthy, repetitive job for low pay and who face irregularities in their employment. A study of Delmarva chicken catchers shows that average daily compensation has declined since 1985. Additionally, over 60 percent of plants surveyed by the DOL in 1997 failed to pay overtime to chicken-catching crews for hours worked in excess of forty per week.
          
            Poultry Growers Question Contracts
          
          It may not be easy to view fluffy, white chicks as a social justice issue, but growing the chickens is another facet of the industry that provides controversy. Those who raise poultry often find themselves in unfair situations. The contract they sign with a poultry company is written to leave the major decisions in the hands of the company. The grower must spend large sums of money to build, and later update, the facilities where the birds will be raised. In the case of smaller growers, such investments usually call for a mortgage on the family farm. The antibiotics, feed, and other supplies, including the chicks themselves, come from the company. The company weighs the feed and the finished chickens. The company also decides what the grower will be paid per pound of bird, once expenses for supplies are deducted. Unhealthy chicks, illness in the flock, weather problems, waste disposal, and runoff problems are all risks for the grower, not the company. Current contracts are often written to specify arbitration as the only mode of redress, omitting the possibility of class action lawsuits which have been successful for some growers in the past.
          Roy and Mary Stein are growers with sixteen years experience. They say that most grower families must send someone to work at another job to generate adequate income for the family. Often the rate of return promised by the company falls short, particularly once the company begins to demand expensive changes or improvements in equipment as a condition of continuing the contract. If the contract is not renewed, the family farm may be foreclosed. Selling a farm without the promise of a similar contract for a potential buyer, is often impossible. 
          "The only thing you've got control of is signing the contract," says Roy Stein. "They can break it any time they want to. You can't, but they can."
          "This is contract labor," adds Mary Stein. "You are not a partner. A partner is supposed to have something to say about your business." The couple says growers are afraid to speak up, because "everything they own is mortgaged."
          According to the U. S. Securities and Exchange Commission, poultry companies gain about 16 percent on their investment, while poultry growers gain about 4 percent. Delmarva poultry growers surveyed in 1997 echoed the concerns of the Steins: 43 percent said they did not trust their company's feed delivery weights, 41 percent didn't trust the figures on their pay statements, and 57 percent believed the company would retaliate if they raise concerns. 
          Voices and Choices also tackles the immigration aspect of the poultry industry, noting that most people in the United States are themselves descendants of immigrants, who also arrived in search of a better life.
          Different in look, customs, and language, newcomers are often
discriminated against. Such people have faces and futures. One young
man sits quietly, his heavily muscled arms folded across his chest. A
friend coaxes him to speak, promising that his real name will not be used. Gradually, Julio Lopez relaxes, unfolds his arms and extends a huge, gentle hand. The hand is deformed with scar tissue; its shape distorted. He speaks reluctantly, through a translator, of a poultry-processing injury, which required more than seventy stitches to close. Weeks later, his use of the hand is still impaired. He is told by the medical people available to him that nothing more can be done and that he is not authorized to see a specialist. He has not been compensated for the injury. He is concerned that the disability is permanent, but he will not make a fuss for fear of losing his current job in the processing plant, the job that feeds his family back home. He is desperate to support them, so desperate that he crossed the border into this country illegally. What will happen if he is sent back? Like others who are undocumented, he says it is safer to be silent.
          While laws regarding immigration and immigrants are to be respected, what can be done to aid and protect this most vulnerable and exploitable group? Many of these immigrants are fleeing civil conflicts in Latin America in which the United States is a political player. Whatever their country of origin, most are without a voice as they attempt to support themselves and their families by whatever means is available, no matter what the conditions. Their understandable reluctance to seek help from government authorities becomes another factor in the circumstances which many such people must face.
          Although Voices and Choices builds upon statistical information throughout, the difficulty of obtaining statistics is overshadowed by the common experiences of workers in the industry facing challenges of earning a living wage, establishing worker rights and human dignity, and dealing with immigration. The stories told by workers are consistent and disturbing, often overwhelming.
          Voices and Choices also includes a lengthy treatment of the biblical roots of neighborliness. It cites more than one hundred years of Catholic social teaching concerning such topics as human rights and dignity, the organizing of workers, just wages, appropriate working conditions and solidarity. The bishops' document does not take a simplistic view of the global economic forces at work. Even so, it says, complexity is not an excuse for  lack of awareness or for inaction.
          Vertical integration, in which the same company owns and/or controls every step of production from the most basic components, such as feed grain, to the final product, such as boneless, skinless chicken breasts on the grocery store shelves, has become a dominant force in the economy. The ramifications are too numerous to treat here, but according to the National Catholic Rural Life Conference, "factory farming" affects prices, wages, natural resources, and the future of family farming, placing enormous power in the boardrooms of a few companies.
          The economic forces which shape the work of peoples' daily lives are intricate and interconnected, extending to matters of environment, use of hormone technology and genetic engineering, foreign policy, global monetary policy, and international imbalances of resources, debt, and wealth.
          Structural change and legal protections are essential tasks for government and business entities. "Still," argues Voices and Choices, "we may not abdicate our concern and responsibility for such matters to the anonymous group. The 'group' is made up of individuals. Structural change begins with the conversion of each heart." While the bishops' statement stops short of suggesting specific action, it strongly states that all voices in the workplace need to be heard and responsibilities and benefits shared.
          From 1987 to 1997, the value of poultry production has doubled; broiler industry operating profits exceeded one billion dollars in 1996. The USDA poultry processing "line speed" limit increased from seventy birds per minute in 1979 to ninety-one per minute by 1999 while average  real wages for poultry workers have declined from 1987 to 1997. Poultry work is both the lowest paying and largest employing segment of the entire meat industry.
          Having a voice can lead to having a choice about wages, working conditions, job safety, medical care, and other benefits. It is often difficult for workers to achieve this sharing of responsibility with owners and managers, which is why, for decades, the Catholic Church has supported the right of individuals to associate in groups organized to see that voices and choices become a reality.
          Because of the high turnover, vulnerable status, and isolation, poultry industry workers are not easy to organize. Once formed there are further obstacles.
          One poultry processing plant has had a union since 1996, yet today, there is still no contract to protect the workers. "This struggle has gone on for a long time," says organizer Juan Sanchez. "People are tired, but they want to be organized. It's the only way to get the company's attention when they are abused by supervisors or overburdened with work. They want to protect themselves."
          Voices and Choices ends with the following
exhortation and with the signatures of the forty-one bishops: "We love
and serve in our daily lives through encounters with others. How might
we be advocates for the needs of our brothers and sisters who lack
voices and choices? How might we "speak out for those who cannot
speak"? (Proverbs 31:8). Let us begin with our own hearts and our own
awareness as we journey together through the new millennium. Let us
seek to encounter the presence of the divine in every person, and
respond accordingly, for "just as you did it to one of the least of
these. . . you did it to me" (Matthew
25:40).
          
            
              
                Sullivan, S.S. Sullivan
              
            
            Vol. 23, No. 1, 2001 p. 7
            Will Bush's DOL Enforce Wage and Hour Laws?
             A statement of concern was presented to U.S. Department of Labor
administrators in six locations around the country, including
Atlanta, on May 24-25, 2001. The "open letter," organized by the
National Interfaith Committee for Worker Justice (NICWJ), asked the
new Secretary of Labor, Elaine Chao, to vigorously enforce Wage and
Hour laws designed to protect 250,000 poultry plant workers and to
hold poultry industry accountable for violations of labor law.
            Chao has met with representatives of the poultry industry and
received a letter from sixteen U.S. Senators reportedly asking her to
reduce enforcement and industry accountability. NICWJ was unable to
arrange a meeting with the secretary.
            In Atlanta, ten representatives of religious and labor groups,
spearheaded by the Georgia Poultry Justice alliance, met with Alfred
"Hap" Perry, Southeast Regional Administrator, and Joe Villarreal,
Southwest Regional Administrator, of the DOL Wage and Hour
Division. The group presented Perry and Villarreal with a copy of the
NICWJ letter, signed by 150 leaders of justice and religious
organizations, and with copies of Voices and Choices,
the poultry justice pastoral document form the Catholic Bishops of
the South.
            Perry cited a 2000 DOL study, released in January, 2001, stating
that all fifty-one of the poultry processing plants investigated were
in violation of Wage and Hour laws. A previous DOL study, in 1997,
showed only 40 percent of the plants to be in compliance.
            "I don't think the industry changed (between the 1997
investigation and the 2000 investigation)," Perry said. "I think we
did a better job with the 2000 study. The industry has been doing the
same things for twenty years." One of the "things" includes requiring
workers to "don and doff" required protective clothing without any
pay, resulting in about an hour of unpaid work per shift.
            Response by the DOL to such studies can include "doing nothing" or
filing lawsuits against the companies and/or assessing penalties
against the companies, Perry said. He prefers the education option,
when feasible, which makes employers and employees aware of labor
laws.
            Perry said his office is preparing a response to the poultry
industry's position. "I have a personal interest in this," he
said.
            He asked those presenting the NICWJ statement to help the DOL
connect with poultry workers, offering to make DOL representatives
available for educational presentations as often as weekly to workers
in the poultry industry.
            --S. Sullivan
          
          
            This essay was excerpted and adapted from Voices and Choices and edited by Susan Stevenot Sullivan, a member of the team that developed the pastoral statement. Sullivan is a writer, editor, and photographer based in the Atlanta area. Voices and Choices is available in printed form  from St. Anthony Messenger Press (1-800-488-0488) or on the web at: www.americancatholic.org/News/PoultryPastoral/default.asp.
          
        
        
          Voces y Opciones: Justicia en el Lugar de Trabajo en la
Industria  Avícola
          Edited by Sullivan, Susan StevenotSusan Stevenot Sullivan
          Vol. 23, No. 1, 2001 pp. 8-12, 26
          
          En una movida sin precedente, el Noviembre pasado, los Obispos Católicos Romanos del Sur de los Estados Unidos pusieron en circulación una declaración pastoral sobre temas injustas en el trabajo. Voces y Opciones estudio la industria avícola para exponer el dilema de "nuestros hermanos y hermanas cuyo trabajo exige un costo personal y comunitario inaceptable."  El proyecto se llevo a cabo durante dos años y involucro cientos de personas, desde trabajadores y gerentes de procesadoras avícolas a oficiales de labor y oficiales de la Iglesia. Representando los temas de inmigración y de lenguaje que afectan la industria avícola, Voces y Opciones es publicada en Ingles y en Español en el mismo libro. Respaldado por cuarenta y uno obispos desde Virginia hasta Texas, usa las escrituras y enseñanzas social Católicas para determinar el precio verdadero de nuestros platos amontonados con pollo frito. 
          Incluye estadísticas y historias de los trabajadores (con los nombres cambiados) cuyas vidas moldean los temas de ocupación y de la salud. Pero Voces y Opciones no es nada mas de una industria contemporada:
          "Aunque esta carta se centrara en la  falta de 'voz y opción' para muchos de nuestros hermanos y hermanas que trabajan en la industria avícola, esto no significa que señalemos este productivo mercado como caso único. Usamos la industria avícola como un ejemplo entre otros negocios, como agricultura y fabricación, los cuales comparten los mismos desafíos, ya sea fabricando muebles, cosechando verduras, o criando  ganado bajo contrato."
          Las historias personales que aparecen por todo el documento son una característica rara para tal documento.  Entrevistas con los trabajadores dan voz a los que no tienen "voz y opción" en su lugar de trabajo.
          María Montez reza diariamente el "Our Father," pero ella dice "Padre Nuestro." Reza en su lengua nativa; el Español. Es una señora de edad avanzada que ha estado en los Estados Unidos por muchos años, y desde hace cinco años trabaja en la industria avícola. La Señora Montez es amigable, pero tímida. Cuando le preguntamos sobre su trabajo, nos respondió repetidas veces que esta muy contenta de estar trabajando, y que no le importa trabajar duro. Luego menciona su dolor e incapacidad física. Sus brazos y sus manos están dormidos debido al movimiento repetitivo que realiza cientos de veces durante sus jornadas de trabajo. Con frecuencia el dolor la mantiene despierta por la noche y para aliviar su condición se frota alcohol sobre la piel. No ha consultado a un doctor porque el deducible del seguro de la compañía es de cientos de dólares, el cual no puede cubrir con su salario. Ha solicitado alternar su trabajo con otras labores de movimientos diferentes, pero sus supervisores le han manifestado que debido a que es muy responsable con su trabajo, no quieren arriesgarse a reemplazarla. "Mucha gente ha sido afectada por asma, pulmonía, y problemas de la vista," manifestó. "Eso es lo que más veo. La gente tiene que salir de la planta por enfermedad. Si la gente se hiere la despiden."
          Al igual que muchos trabajadores en las procesadoras avícolas, la Señora Montez se mantiene de pie en la línea de producción por largas horas. Los pollos, que cuelgan enganchados de una cadena que los mueve alrededor del área de procesamiento, pasan frente a ella a gran velocidad la cual determina en gran parte la ganancia de la operación. El ambiente de trabajo es ruidoso y húmedo. El piso se mantiene mojado y pollos salpican por donde quiera. La humedad contiene muchos contaminantes químicos y biológicos. Cada cuarto es mas frío que el anterior, ya que los pollos empiezan a ser enfriados desde que están "vivos" hasta que pasan a ser "empacados." El procesamiento consiste en sacrificar, eviscerar, cortar, ordenar, pesar, y empacar los pollos a paso rápido. Cada uno realiza su tarea cientos de veces y hasta mas de mil veces en un turno con cuchillas muy afiladas.
          De acuerdo al estudio efectuado por el Departamento de Trabajo (DOL) de los EEUU en 1996, las lesiones ocasionadas por movimientos repetitivos que incide entre los trabajadores de las procesadoras avícolas, como lo es el síndrome de "carpal tunnel," son cinco veces mas que en las manufacturadoras en general. Según OSHA, las violaciones de salud y seguridad que llevan la considerable probabilidad de muerte y lesiones graves, incrementaron mas de 150 por cien entre 1997 y 1998 en una de las principales compañías de procesamiento avícola. Los efectos físicos de este tipo de trabajo pueden ser devastadores.
          Las lesiones de Sara Brown no son físicas. Ella habla
ardientemente sobre el favoritismo y la manipulación que ha
experimentado de parte de sus supervisores durante sus cuatro
años de trabajo en la avícola. Ella habla de la
discriminación y prejuicio entre minorías. Durante el
turno de trabajo, no todos los trabajadores están autorizados
para hacer uso del baño, sino unos pocos que gozan el
favoritismo. Su ausencia del trabajo se debe a la
hospitalización de su esposo, y esto se suma a la posibilidad
de ser despedida. Además tiene niños que
mantener. Así también, sabe que toma un gran riesgo al
quejarse al supervisor, pero tampoco tiene otras vías donde apelar mas allá de los caprichos de sus superiores inmediatos. Ella dice que trabaja duramente, es responsable, y merece mejor trato. Y se pregunta, "¿Quien va a escucharme?"
          Beatrice Johnson es una mujer de cuarenta y tantos años que trabaja en la procesadora avícola desde hace mas de veinte uno años. Esta incapacitada debido a las lesiones de movimientos repetitivos y los doctores de la compañía le han dicho que su condición no esta relacionada con el trabajo que realiza. Él medico de su familia no esta de acuerdo con eso. Ella esperaba recibir compensación laboral, pero le dieron permiso por enfermedad, el cual paga solo una fracción del salario normal. Su permiso por enfermedad ya esta por terminársele y cuando eso suceda probablemente será despedida, al igual como les ha pasado a otros trabajadores que ella conoce. Continua inhabilitada, todavía con dolor, y con la necesidad de ganarse la vida para su propio sostenimiento.
          En 1997 por el DOL encontro que el 60 por ciento de las compañías avícolas encuestadas transgredieron el Acta de Trabajo de Medidas Justas(FLSA). Mas del 51 por ciento de las plantas no les pagaron a los trabajadores por el tiempo que utilizaron haciendo limpieza y otros quehaceres relacionados con el trabajo. Mas del 30 por ciento no les pagaron por pausas breves durante el día, como lo es el uso del baño; mas del 54 por ciento les descontaron dinero del cheque a los trabajadores por el costo del equipo protector, en circunstancias que es la compañía la que esta obligada a pagar por eso. Los empleados no tienen "voz" ni "opción" en las políticas empresariales. 
          Mientras Voces y Opciones-puesto en circulacíon el 15 de Niviembre del 2000- usa el estudio de 1997, el reporte del DOL muestra que 100 por ciento de las plantas procesadoras de avícola encuestadas en el 2000 estaban en violación del Acta de Trabajo de Medidas Justas.
          El estudio de Enero del 2001 del DOL dice que "investigaciones de cinquenta y un plantas procesadoras de avícola localizadas a través de los Estados Unidos resultaron en el descubrimiento que  la industria no cumple con las reglas bajo el FLSA."
          En el nuevo reporte, violaciones citadas por el DOL incluye:
"trabajadores no son compensados por todas las horas de trabajo,
incluyendo horas extras, debido al contarles menos de las horas
actualizadas; trabajadores no compensados lo actual debido a
descuentos no permitidos de su pago; horas extras se les debe a los
trabajadores a resultado de error en reportar su estado social: horas
extras no se les paga a miembros del equipo (atrapadores, cargadores, choferes); y violaciones en el mantenimiento de los registros del tiempo de los trabajadores." 
          El estudio del DOL también da detalles sobre la falta de compensar el trabajo  actual de trabajadores temporales o sub-contratados, trabajadores a quien casi nunca se les paga el mismo salario por hacer el mismo trabajo que los empleados, pero que tal vez representan un numero sustantivo de trabajadores en la planta. "La potencial de violaciones de salario mínimo que afecta a trabajadores empleados por medio de agencias temporales en plantas procesadoras es significante debido a que a estos trabajadores se les paga por lo general tan solo un poco mas del sueldo mínimo Federal. El salario pagado a estos trabajadores temporales deja poco lugar ante la practica de no pagar por las horas actualizadas de trabajo o de hacer descuentos del salario" ( por artículos requeridos que se les provea a los trabajadores como, tapones para los oídos, ropa y equipo).
          John Stephens es uno de los principales gerentes de una compañía avícola qué da el punto de vista de la industria. Mientras lucha con prioridades conflictas y decisiones difíciles, él tiene el poder de influir en la política empresarial y de hacer cambios. El debe velar por la rentabilidad de la operación para mantenerse a sí mismo y a otros en el trabajo. Es un mercado competitivo y hay muchos factores que considerar. Expresó enfáticamente que uno de los grandes problemas que él afronta es el constante cambio de personal. En cuanto la gente puede encontrar un nuevo trabajo, se va. Como en la mayoría de las plantas procesadoras, un gran numero de empleados son de grupos minoritarios. Cada vez mas depende de los emigrantes, y muchos de ellos poseen documentación cuestionable.
          De acuerdo con las encuestas realizadas por United Food and Commercial Workers International Union (UFCW), los obreros avícolas son en su mayoría Afroamericanos y mujeres, sin embargo, los Latinos son el sector de crecimiento más rápido de la fuerza trabajadora.
          El Señor Stephens agrega, "La industria avícola en los Estados Unidos no es la opción de empleo de preferencia para la gente. El trabajo es muy duro físicamente y repetitivo, y eso es parte del problema." Él tiene futuros empleados traídos en buses de otras partes, también supervisa un alojamiento de la compañía el cual hospedara a algunos de ellos y se pregunta como mantendrá la línea funcionando con la totalidad de empleados la próxima semana. Por lo tanto sabe que entrenar a los supervisores para tratar bien a los empleados y entrenar a los empleados para ir rotando en diferentes labores a fin de aliviar o prevenir las lesiones ocasionadas por movimientos repetitivos, son la clave para el futuro de la operación y el esta trabajando en la implementacion de tales mejoramientos. Enfatizo que, "Mientras más alta es la calidad de supervisión, mejor es el ambiente del trabajo. La calidad de supervisión es la clave para evitar el constante cambio de personal y el absentismo. Tenemos que mejorar la manera de tratar a la gente, y lo más importante es como satisfacer sus necesidades.
          El procesamiento es solamente una parte de la industria avícola. Los atrapadores de pollos son otro grupo que tienen un trabajo peligroso y repetitivo, con salarios bajos y que enfrentan irregularidades en su trabajo. Un estudio de "Delmarva" muestra que la compensación diaria normal para los atrapadores de pollos ha ido declinando desde 1985. Además, en 1997, el DOL encontró que mas del 60 por ciento de las plantas encuestadas no le pagaron al equipo de atrapadores el correspondiente tiempo extra por trabajo realizado en exceso de las cuarenta horas semanales.
          
            Los Criadores de Pollos Expresan Interrogantes Sobre Los Contratos
          
          Es difícil  ver a pollitos blancos mullidos como el  tema de justicia social, pero criar  pollos es otra realidad de la industria que trae controversia. Los que crían los pollos se encuentran frecuentemente en situaciones injustas. Los contratos que firman con la compañía avícola están escritos para dejar las mayores decisiones en manos de la compañía. El avicultor debe gastar grandes sumas de dinero para construir, y después modernizar las instalaciones donde criaran a los pollos. En el caso de péquenos avicultores, generalmente, inversiones requieren de una hipoteca sobre la finca familiar. La compañía avícola provee a los avicultores con los pollitos de cría, antibióticos, alimento, y otras provisiones. La compañía pesa el alimento y el peso final del pollo. La compañía también decide cuanto pagara al avicultor por libra, después de deducir los gastos por suministros. Pollitos enfermos, enfermedades en el gallinero, problemas por el clima, eliminación de desperdicios, y otros problemas son riesgos del avicultor, no de la compañía. Los contratos se limitan a la acción de arbitraje como la única manera de enfrentar los problemas, negando la posibilidad de demandas judiciales de clase que han sido exitosas para algunos criadores de aves en el pasado.
          Roy y Mary Stein son criadores de aves y cuentan con
dieciséis años de experiencia. Ellos expresaron que la
mayoría de las familias criadoras envían a uno de sus
miembros a trabajar a otro lugar para tener un ingreso adecuado para
la familia. Muchas veces la tasa de ingreso prometido por la
compañía esta por debajo de la realidad, especialmente
cuando la compañía exige cambios costosos o mejoras de
equipo como condición para continuar el contrato. Si el
contrato no es renovado, la granja de la familia puede perder el derecho de la hipoteca. El venderla sin la promesa de un contrato similar de parte de un comprador potencial, es casi imposible.
          "La única cosa sobre la cual uno tiene control es la firma del contrato. Ellos pueden darlo por terminado en el momento que quieran; usted no puede, pero ellos sí," dice Roy Stein. Mary anadio, " Este es un contrato laboral. Usted no es un socio. Un socio tiene algo que decir sobre su negocio." La pareja dice que los granjeros avicultores tienen miedo de hablar abiertamente porque "todo lo que ellos poseen esta hipotecado."
          De acuerdo a Security and Exchange Commission, las compañías avícolas ganan cerca del 16 por ciento sobre sus inversiones, mientras que las granjas criadoras ganan cerca del 4 por ciento. Granjas avicultoras Delmarva encuestadas en 1997 dieron a conocer las mismas preocupaciones de los Steins; el 43 por ciento dijeron que ellos no creen en el peso que les es entregado por parte de la compañía, 41 por ciento tampoco creen en las cifras que aparecen en sus estados de paga, y 57 por ciento creen que la compañía tomara represalias si los criadores de aves expresan se descontento.
          Voces y Opciones también acometa el aspecto de la industria avícola, anotando que la mayoría de personas en los Estados Unidos son descendentes de emigrantes, quienes también llegaron en busca de una vida mejor.
          Distintos en aspectos, costumbres, y lenguaje, los recién llegados frecuentemente son discriminados. Estas personas tienen cara y un futuro. Un hombre joven esta sentado tranquilamente con sus brazos fornidos cruzados sobre su pecho. Un amigo lo persuade para hacerlo hablar, prometiéndole que no se usara su verdadero nombre. Paulatinamente, Julio López se relaja, abre sus brazos y extiende su mano gentilmente. Su mano esta deformada, llena de cicatrices y su forma contrahecha. A través del traductor, habla renuentemente sobre la herida que sufrió procesando pollos, la cual requirió mas de setenta puntadas para cerrarla. Semanas después, aun no puede hacer uso de su mano herida. El personal medico que lo ha atendido le ha dicho que no hay nada mas que se puede hacer y que no tiene autorización para ver a un especialista. Tampoco ha sido compensado por la lesión. Su preocupación es de que el daño sea permanente, pero no se queja por miedo de perder su trabajo en la planta procesadora, ya que con este alimenta a su familia en su país. Esta desesperado por ayudarlos, tan desesperado que cruzo la frontera de este país ilegalmente. ¿Que pasara si él es enviado de regreso? Al igual que muchos otros que están indocumentados, el expreso que es mejor quedarse callado.
          ¿Mientras que las leyes concernientes a inmigración y a inmigrantes deben ser respetadas, que se puede hacer para ayudar y proteger a este grupo vulnerable y explotable? Muchos de ellos han huido debido a conflictos civiles en Latinoamérica, en los cuales han incluido a los Estados Unidos en un papel político. Su repugnancia de pedir ayuda de las autoridades del gobierno es comprensible, y pasa a ser otro factor en las circunstancias que mucha gente debe afrentar. 
          Aunque Voces y Opciones se mantiene de información estadística, la dificultad en obtener estadísticas se oscurece por las experiencias comunes que enfrentan los trabajadores de la industria. Ellos enfrentan muchos desafíos en común, entre ellos cuestiones de salario adecuado y otros derechos de los trabajadores, de dignidad humana, y de asuntos de inmigración. Las historias que los trabajadores cuentan son consistentes y casi devastadoras. Estos trabajadores parecen no tener voces ni opciones en su situación de trabajo.
          Voces y Opciones también incluye un largo
trato de raizes bíblicas sobre el prójimo. Habla sobre
mas de cien años de enseñanza social Católica
sobre principios como el da la vida y dignidad de la persona humana,
el organizarse de trabajadores, pago justo, condiciones apropiados en
el trabajo y solidaridad. El documento del obispo no toma una
opinión simplistica sobre las fuerzas económicas 
globales en el trabajo.  Aunque dice, complejidad no es excusa por falta darse cuenta o por no tomar acción. 
          La "integración vertical," aquella en que la misma compañía posee o controla cada paso de la producción desde los elementos más básicos, como lo es el gran o alimentación, hasta el producto final, como pechugas de pollo deshuesadas y sin piel en las estanterías del supermercado, ha llegado a ser una fuerza dominante en la economía. Las ramificaciones son demasiado numerosas para tratarlas aquí, pero de acuerdo a la Conferencia Nacional de Vida Rural Católica, la "granja-fabrica" impacta los precios, salarios, recursos naturales, y el futuro de las granjas familiares, dando un enorme poder a las altas autoridades de unas compañías. 
          Las fuerzas económicas que moldan el trabajo en la vida diaria de cada persona son complicadas y entrelazadas, extendiéndose en asuntos ambientales, uso de tecnología hormonal, ingeniería genética, política exterior, política monetaria mundial, desproporción internacional de recursos, deuda y riqueza.
          El cambio estructural y las protecciones legales son tareas esenciales para las entidades del gobierno y de las empresas. "Aun" averigua Voces y Opciones, " no podemos dejar nuestra preocupación y responsabilidad por tales asuntos en manos del grupo anónimo. El 'grupo' esta formado por individuos. El cambio estructural empieza por la conversión de cada corazón." Mientras la declaración del obispo para antes de sugerir acción especifica, dice firmemente que todas las voces en el trabajo necesitan ser escuchadas y las responsabilidades y los beneficios deben ser compartidos.
          Desde 1987 a 1997, el valor de la producción avícola
ha duplicado; las ganancias de operación de la industria de
asadores excedieron mas de un billón de dólares en
1996. El limite de la "línea de velocidad" en la procesadora avícola USDA aumento de setenta aves por minuto en 1979 a noventa y un aves por minuto en 1999.  Mientras que el ingreso promedio verdadero para trabajadores avícola bajo de 1987 a 1997. La  industria avícola es a la vez la que menos paga y la que mas trabajadores emplea en toda la industria de la carne.
          Teniendo una voz puede llevar a tener una opción sobre salarios, condiciones del trabajo, seguridad, cuidado medico y otros beneficios. A menudo es difícil para los trabajadores lograr este compartir de responsabilidad con los dueños y gerentes, y por eso la Iglesia, por décadas, ha apoyado el derecho de los individuos a asociarse en grupos organizados para lograr que las voces y las opciones lleguen a ser una realidad.
          Debido al constante cambio de personal, a la situación vulnerable y el aislamiento es difícil organizar a los trabajadores de la industria avícola.  Aun formadas hay mas obstáculos. 
          Una planta procesadora avícola ha tenido tal asociación desde 1996, y hoy, aun no existe contrato para proteger a los trabajadores. "Esta lucha ha continuado por largo tiempo," dijo el organizador Juan Sánchez. "La gente esta cansada, pero ellos quieren estar organizados. Esta es la única manera de obtener la atención de la compañía cuando ellos son maltratados por los supervisores o cuando se les da exceso de trabajo. Ellos quieren protegerse."
          Voces y Opciones termina con la siguiente
exhortación y las firmas de cuarenta y un obispos. "Amamos y
servimos" en nuestras vidas diarias a través de nuestros
encuentros con otros. ¿Cómo podríamos abogar por las
necesidades de nuestros hermanos y hermanas que no tienen voz ni
opción? ¿Cómo podríamos hablar por los que no
tienen voz?(Proverbios 3:18) Empecemos con nuestros propios corazones y con
nuestra consciencia mientras caminamos juntos por el nuevo
milenio. Busquemos la presencia Divina en cada persona, y respondamos
de acuerdo, "porque así como lo hiciste a uno de esos
pequeños...a mí lo hiciste..." (Mateo 25:40).
          
            Este escrito fue sacado y adaptado de Voces  y Opciones y redactado por Susan Stevenot Sullivan, miembra del equipo que desarrolló la declaración de los Obispos. Sullivan es escritora, editora y fotógrafa basada an el área de Atlanta. Voces y Opciones es disponible en forma escrita en St. Anthony Messenger Press (1-800-488-0488) o en la Pagina Red: www.americancatholic.org/News/PoultryPastoral/default.asp. Redactado por Blanca Rojas.
          
          
            ¿El DOL de Bush Cumplirá con las Leyes el
	       Sueldo y Hora?
            
              
                Sullivan, S.S. Sullivan
              
            
            Vol. 23, No. 1 p. 12, 2001
            Una declaración de concierne fue presentado a los
administradores del Departamento de Labor del los EEUU en seis
ubicaciones alrededor del país, inclusive Atlanta, el 24-25 de
May del 2001. La "carta abierta" organizada pr el Comité de
Interfaith para la Justicia de Trabajador, (NICWJ) por sus mezclas en
Ingles, pregunto a la nueva Secretaria de Trabajo, Elaine Chao, que
vigorosamente imponga las leyes que Sueldo y La Hora diseñaron
para proteger a 250,000 trabajadores de plantas avícolas y que
sostenga a la industria avícola responsable por infracciones
de la ley del trabajo.
            Chao se ha reunido con representantes de la industria
avícola y ha recibido una carta de dieciséis Senadores
de los EEUU, que supuestamente le piden reducir la coacción y
la contabilidad de la industria. El NICWJ fue incapaz de arreglar una
junta con la Secretaria.
            En Atlanta, diez representantes de grupos religiosos y del
trabajo, encabezados por la Alianza de Georgia para Justicia
Avícola, se reunieron con Alfered "Hap" Perry, Administrador
Regional del Sur este y Joe Villareal, Administrador Regional del Sur
Oeste de la División del Sueldo y Hora del DOL. El grupo le
presentó a Perry y a Villareal una copia de la carta del
NICWJ, firmada por 150 lideres de organizaciones religiosas y de la
justicia, además de copias de "Voces y Opciones" el documento
Pastoral de los Obispos del Sur.
            Perry cito un estudio del DOL 2000, que due puesto en
circulación en Enero del 2001, diciendo que las cincuentiuno
procesadoras avícolas que fueron investigadas estaban en
violación de las leyes del Sueldo Y Hora. Un estudo del DOL de
1997, mostró que solo 40 por ciento de las plantas cumplieron
con las leyes.
            "No pienso que la industria haya cambiado (entre la
investigación del 2000)," Perry dijo. "Pienso que hicimos un
trabajo mejor con el estudio del 2000. La industria ha estado
haciendo lo mismo por veinte anos. Una de esas "cosas" es requerir
que los trabajadores se "pongan y quitan" la ropa protectora sin
pagales por este tiempo, resultando en mas o menos una hora de
trabajo sin pago por cada turno.
            La respuesta por el DOL a estos estudios puede incluir "no hacer
nada: o demandar a las compañías y or multar las, dijo
Perry. Él prefiere la opción de educar, para que los
trabajadores y los patrones tengan conocimiento de las leyes del
trabajo.
            Perry dijo que su oficina esta preparando uno respuesta a la
posición de la industria avícola. "Tengo interés
personal en esto," él dijo.
            Él pidió a los presentadores de la declaración
del NICWJ, que ayudaran a unir al DOL con los trabajadores
avícola. Ofreció hacer disponibles semanalmente a
representantes del DOL para dar presentationes educativas a los
trabajadores de la industria avícola.
            S. Sullivan
          
        
        
          SRC Study Contributes to Georgia Election Reform
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 23, No. 1, 2001 pp. 13-14
          
          Following the 2000 election debacle in which the shortcomings of the Florida election system came under national negative scrutiny, the SRC conducted a study of 2000 election results in Georgia. The SRC study, based on data from the Georgia Secretary of State's office,  yielded fresh evidence of racial disparities in Georgia's voting systems. The findings of the SRC study and the Georgia Secretary of State Cathy Cox's report, entitled The 2000 Election: A Wake Up Call for Reform and Change led to the passage of a comprehensive election reform package (SB 213) that will mark a critical step to address the serious shortcomings of election systems in Georgia. The bill was signed into law by Governor Roy Barnes on April 18, 2001.
          The SRC study found substantial differences in the rates of effectiveness of voting machinery used in Georgia counties. The optical scanning technology, used in sixty-six counties, resulted in 2.72 percent of votes cast being discarded as uncounted votes. The lever system, used in seventy-four counties, was less reliable, with a 3.98 percent rate of uncounted votes. The punch card system, used in seventeen of Georgia's counties by 30.5 percent of Georgia voters, performed least effectively, with 4.67 percent of the ballots registering as uncounted votes. Georgia had a higher rate of uncounted votes than Florida. Statewide, the average rate of uncounted votes was 3.51 percent, worse than the rate for the state of Florida (2.9 percent) and much worse than the national undercount rate (1.9 percent).
          The SRC study found that the deficiencies of the punch card system had a disproportionate impact on Georgia's African-American voters who were almost two times more likely than white voters to live in counties using that most error-prone system. Almost half (46.23 percent)of Georgia's black voters live in punch card counties while less than one-quarter (24.73 percent) of Georgia's white voters live in punch card counties. Conversely, white voters in Georgia were 1.5 times more likely than black voters to use optical scanning equipment, which is least likely to yield uncounted votes. Fifty-seven percent of Georgia's white voters use optical scanning equipment compared to 36.5 percent of Georgia's black voters.
          In preparing the Secretary of State's report, The 2000 Election: A Wake-Up Call for Reform and Change, Cox's office studied data from the 2000 election, analyzed the state's statutes and procedures, and reviewed the criticisms and suggestions of hundreds of Georgian. The problems revealed by the Secretary of State's report included outdated voting equipment; difficulties in voting such as problems with ballots, lack of poll workers, lines, and locating the proper precinct; a lack of multi-lingual materials to serve the increasing number of language minorities; election violations like deceased people voting; low voter turnout; the speed with which the counties report their election results; and technological shortcomings like the state mainframe computer being slow and unreliable.
          In response to these reported problems in Georgia's election
system, Senator Jack Hill (D-Reidsville) introduced and Representative
Tom Shanahan (D-Calhoun) carried a bill on behalf of the Secretary of
State's office to implement a uniform system of voting equipment by
July 2004. The bill, which passed overwhelmingly, will:Create a statewide uniform electronic voting initiative;Implement a pilot project to test and evaluate voting equipment in four or five municipalities during the 2001 voting cycle;Create a seventeen-member 21st Century Voting Commission to evaluate equipment alternatives and make recommendations; Streamline the general election ballot by eliminating the non-partisan primary;Reduce voter confusion by including a short, descriptive title for all constitutional amendments;Reduce the chances for voter fraud by consolidating responsibility for removing deceased persons from the voter roll in the Secretary of State's office.
          For more information on election reform in Georgia, visit the
Secretary of State's website at: www.sos.state.ga.us/elections. For
more information on election reform in other states, visit the center
for Policy Alternatives's website at: www.cfpa.org.
        
        
          Could the Death Penalty Die in Virginia?Opportunities for Activism
          By Torian, Sarah E.Sarah E. Torian
          Vol. 23, No. 1, 2001 pp. 15-16
          
          Say the words "death penalty" these days and many people will automatically think of Texas. As then-Governor George W. Bush ran for President last year, the state's death penalty system and its record-setting 154 executions in the five years under Bush received a great deal of media attention. Many people would be surprised to learn, however, that, when state population is taken into consideration, the state of Virginia leads the nation in the rate of executions. Not only does Virginia, with eighty-two executions since it reinstated the death penalty in 1977, execute its citizens at a higher rate than any other state, but it also has the most limiting appeals process of any state. As Columbia law professor James Liebman explains, "When it comes to getting and keeping death sentences, the planets are just really aligned over Virginia."
          But, even in Virginia, growing public doubt of the infallibility and effectiveness of the death penalty system is beginning to show. The 2001 state legislative session marked a clear shift in the attitude of legislators regarding death penalty policies. "There was a dramatic difference this year," says Kent Willis, executive director of the Virginia ACLU which released a report on the injustices of the state's capital punishment system in April 2000. In the past five years there were proposals to add twenty-six additional capital offenses to the state law books--nine of which passed. The 2001 legislative session marked a significant change from that death penalty expansionism. In addition to a proposal to abolish the state's death penalty system completely, there were four proposals to place a moratorium on executions, and six proposals to ease the appeals and defense process for accused people--including a bill to cover DNA testing for anyone who has a life sentence. That bill was co-sponsored by ninety-six of one hundred delegates and thirty-six of forty senators. "For years, death penalty opponents have had to fight to prevent further expansion of the death penalty," explains Willis. "This year, the legislators moved from expansion to moratorium!" 
          
            Bipartisan Support for Alternatives to the Death Penalty
          
          This new attitude is apparent on both sides of the aisle. Delegate Frank Hargrove (Hanover County), the one legislator to propose abolition of the death penalty in Virginia, is a nine-term conservative Republican. Earlier in his career, he responded to the argument that the death penalty is a deterrence to murder by proposing a bill to have death sentences carried out on public gallows in downtown Richmond. Several other conservative Republicans--Harvey Morgan (Gloucester), Jeannemarie Devolites (Vienna), and Vincent Callahan, Jr. (McLean)--were among the thirteen legislators to co-sponsor moratorium legislation.
          The death penalty has always been a very partisan issue with only a small progressive faction of Democrats opposing it, so this growing Republican opposition is striking--if somewhat difficult to explain. "The cynical side of me would say these politicians who have come out against the death penalty this year, have done so for political reasons," speculates Willis, adding, "It was finally politically acceptable to oppose it." Henry Heller, executive director of Virginians for Alternatives to the Death Penalty (VADP), agrees, saying, "Republicans have less to lose from appearing 'soft on crime.' Democrats are stigmatized by public perceptions that they are 'too liberal.'"
          This fading public support for state-sanctioned murder is evident in polling data. On November 6, 2000, the Richmond Times-Dispatch released the results of a statewide poll, revealing that 58 percent of Virginians supported a moratorium on the death penalty. Many organizations are also joining the fight against the death penalty in Virginia. Eight newspapers, including Norfolk's Virginian Pilot and the Roanoke Times, have signed a petition calling for a moratorium. Thirty-eight religious groups, including the Alliance of Baptists and the Episcopal Diocese of Virginia have also signed. Fifteen legal and activist organizations, including the Virginia College of Criminal Defense Attorneys, the ACLU and NAACP of Virginia, have also endorsed the petition. "There has been an infinite change in attitude across the state recently. On the death penalty in Virginia, the public is ahead of the legislature," reports Bruce Williamson, President of VADP and expert witness to the Virginia General Assembly. Even Buddy Fowler, a supporter of the death penalty and assistant to Delegate Hargrove, has noted the number of conservative opponents to the death penalty. "Reactions [to Hargrove's abolition bill] have ranged from disappointment, to anger, to appreciation," he reports. "Actually, a lot of conservatives have called to say that they have thought this way for a long time."
          
            State's Death Penalty System Under Review
          
          The Assembly's Joint Legislative Audit and Review Commission (JLARC), chaired by Delegate Callahan, has commissioned a study of the state's death penalty system, concentrating on prosecutorial discretion--which cases involving capital crimes are tried as capital cases-and the appeals process. Completion of the study is expected in December 2001. Wayne Turnage, the study team leader, is currently constructing an index of factors by which to evaluate all cases involving capital crimes between 1995 and 1999. Included in that index will be the following :
	Was there any forensic evidence linking the accused to the crime?;Were there any eyewitnesses and, if so, were they culpable or connected to the victim or the accused?;What was the race of the accused and the victim?;What was the sex of the accused and the victim?;What was the age of the accused and the victim?;Was the victim culpable or involved in a crime?; andWhat was the financial status of the accused? (based on whether or not the accused was represented by a public defender).
          "I think people on both sides of this debate will be disappointed," suggests Turnage who claims to flip-flop in his personal opinions of the death penalty. "If this study were done fifteen to twenty years ago, I could predict that it would reveal many systematic flaws, but being conducted now, I think many people will be surprised." He cites race as one of the categories that will surprise many when the report is released since, due to the state's demographics, the majority of capital crimes involving African Americans are in the more urban areas of the state where the rate of capital prosecution is much lower than rural areas. (Currently there are sixteen African americans, fifteen whites, and one foreign citizen on Virginia's death row.)
           Even after meeting with Turnage and the other two researchers conducting the study, Williamson remains hopeful that the report will support alternatives to the death penalty. "They were very open and receptive to our input. The death penalty in Virginia has so many flaws and inequities that if they take a fair and objective study of it, the report will be great ammunition to pass moratorium or abolition legislation next year." 
          
            Innocent Man's Release Shows Fallibility
          
          In January 2001, Earl Washington, Jr. was released from Virginia's death row jail after spending nine and a half years on death row. Washington came within nine days of execution in 1993 before then-Governor Douglas Wilder commuted his sentence to life in prison based on the results of DNA tests that cast doubt on his guilt. With advances in technology since then, DNA evidence analyzed using new tests in 2000 proved that Washington, who is mentally retarded, could not be guilty of the 1982 rape and murder that nearly cost him his life.
          "In one word-DNA," says Delegate Callahan, a former advocate of the death penalty, when asked to explain his role in opposing the death penalty. "It has become obvious that people slip through the cracks. Innocent people can be executed. We don't have any proof that innocent people have been executed, but the risk is too great." Fowler explains that Delegate Hargrove, who served on a claims commission for the reimbursement of a person wrongly charged and convicted of murder, has similar reasons for opposing the death penalty, adding, "Now that Virginia has life without parole as a sentencing option, a person can be put away for the rest of their natural life. Hargrove believes that serves the public safety function that the death penalty previously addressed without risking the execution of an innocent person."
          
            The Struggle for Alternatives Continues...
          
          Ultimately, despite all of the increased negative attention and legislative action against the death penalty during the 2000 session, very little was accomplished. The abolition bill and all moratorium bills died in the Courts of Justice committees, the House and Senate committees that review all bills relating to laws and legal matters. HB 1366, which allows for the admission of biological/DNA evidence that will prove innocence by anyone convicted of life imprisonment or the death penalty at any time, was the only true success of the 2001 session-and it's success is limited at best. Under the HB 1366, any evidence other than biological-including the recantation of testimony by eyewitnesses or the confession of another person-continues to be inadmissible in the appeals process, insuring that innocent people will remain defenseless on death row. Of the eighty people exonerated from death row across the nation, only ten were exonerated based on DNA evidence.
          Nevertheless, this growing opposition to the death penalty, among legislators and the public, and the expected release of the JLARC report in December, opens the door for grassroots organizing in support of alternatives to the death penalty. "Virginians want an alternative to the death penalty," says Heller. "We are just trying to make the legislators realize that." Callahan feels that progress will come slowly, saying, "I remain hopeful that the laws in Virginia will be changed.  These things take time; sadly, the legislature often moves at a snails pace."
          For more information about how you can get involved in the fight for alternatives to the death penalty in Virginia or to add your group to the list calling for a moratorium, visit the VADP website at: www.vadp.org or call 804-263-8148.
          
            Sarah E. Torian is associate editor of Southern Changes and a communications coordinator at the Southern Regional Council.
          
        
        
          History and Memory: 2000 Lillian Smith Book Awards
          
            
              StaffStaff
            
          
          Vol. 23, No. 1, 2001 pp. 17-22
          
          Each year the Southern Regional Council hosts the Annual Lillian Smith Book Awards in honor of the most liberal and outspoken of white mid-twentieth century Southern writers. In works such as Strange Fruit and Killers of the Dream, Lillian Smith wrote boldly on issues of social and racial justice, calling persistently for an end to segregation. The Awards honor those authors who, through their writing, carry on Smith's legacy of illuminating the condition of racial and social inequity and proposing a vision of justice and human understanding. 
          The 2000 Smith Awards honored the work of three non-fiction writers: Michael Keith Honey for Black Workers Remember: An Oral History of Segregation, Unionism, and the Freedom Struggle (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999); Andrew Manis for A Fire You Can't Put Out: The Civil Rights Life of Birmingham's Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1999); and Lawrence Powell for Troubled Memory: Anne Levy, the Holocaust, and David Duke's Louisiana (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2000). 
          In addition to winning authors Manis and Powell,  Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth and Anne Levy were present and spoke. Following are excerpts from the Smith Awards speeches.
          
            Black Workers Remember
          
          Smith Awards juror Professor Mark Sanders, Chair of African-American Studies at Emory University, introduced Michael Honey's book.
          Black Workers Remember is an enormously important oral history of black workers and the on-going struggle for civil rights, for human rights, for recognition, and for dignity. Responding to the lingering silence over race in too much labor history and adding yet another crucial dimension to our understanding of the civil rights struggle, Black Workers Remember demands that we listen to the voices and stories of black laborers too often ignored or overlooked by our official accounts of progressive struggle. It is their stories of hardships, of resistance, of triumphs, and frustrating setbacks. It is their memory and courage to recall that shapes our understanding that, indeed, constitutes history. Michael Honey not only provides us with crucial information and compelling voices, he presents us with a cogent model for oral history. The understated grace and humility of his prose serve only to give context to these voices and stories. He then steps back and trusts those voices to do the work of which they are so capable.
          Michael Honey:
          Michael Honey's remarks were read by Sanders.
          Lillian Smith left a legacy of courage to resist evil, to stand up boldly and risk ostracism and criticism for one's views. Anyone concerned about giving true content to words such as human rights, freedom, and justice in the South and in the world today would be honored to receive an award in her name, and those of us receiving it this year certainly are. The award is not so much in recognition of what we as writers have done, however. It is a tribute to the courage of others who came before us.
          This award honors people like Clarence Coe. His ancestors were
slaves but after emancipation they gained some land, and passed down
the determination to never give in or give out. Mr. Coe saw the
results of a lynching, and he watched white men kick black men in the
pants just to keep them humiliated. He moved to the city to get away
from Jim Crow in the countryside during the deep, dark depression of
the 1930s. For the next forty years, he struggled day in and day out
in Memphis factories for his rights as a human being. He took up
collections for the NAACP, protested the Scottsboro rape frame-up of
the 1930s, and supported student sit-ins of the 1960s. He met with
other workers under the cover of darkness to organize unions, and had
his stomach slashed wide open by union opponents. Once he got a union,
he fought the discrimination which white workers and employers alike imposed upon blacks, keeping them confined to the hot, dirty, low-paying, least rewarding jobs. For advancing into skilled jobs formerly reserved for "whites only," he faced years of threatening phone calls and harassment. White workers nearly maimed him on the job several times, using every trick they could find to make him quit. But he didn't quit.
          The black men and women who fill the pages of Black Workers Remember tell profound stories of stubborn resistance to the dehumanizing ways of Jim Crow. Like George Holloway, Irene Branch, Alzada Clark, Leroy Boyd, Matthew Davis, Ida Leachman, and Edward Lindsey, Clarence Coe fought both the civil rights and the labor struggles of his era. He marched to support sanitation workers in 1968, and prepared himself for war when Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., was murdered. The war did not come, and meantime he helped elect the first black mayor in Memphis, and saw the desegregation of the city's public life. In retirement, however, he faced new tragedies, as he tried to take care of fellow unionists who lost their jobs when factories shut down during the reign of "free market" global capitalism from the 1980s to the present. The last time I saw him, shortly before he died, Mr. Coe told me that "all I wanted to do was live in a free country." He remembered how "America the Beautiful" thrilled him as a child, until he discovered with bitter disappointment that the song "just wasn't about me then, it just wasn't about me." He said his lifetime of struggle for an equal place in America left "scars" on his memory. But he never gave up on the dream of equality and the hope for justice. By the time he left the factory, he had helped to desegregate its every nook and cranny.
          The stories of these workers are every bit as much the story of the
Civil Rights Movement as is the story of Dr. King. Labor rights and
civil rights, Alzada Clark said, "go hand-in-hand." As a black woman
organizing other black women in low-wage industries in Mississippi
during the 1960s, she faced the Klan, the police, and racist
employers. Just like freedom movement organizers, she fought against
the forces of  "law and order" for a more democratic and just
society. Ms. Clark and Mr. Coe, like virtually every character who
tells their story in Black Workers Remember, could
recall someone in their family before them who taught them to resist
the indignities of racism and to fight back. They understood that they
came from a long line of people fighting for freedom, one that goes
all the way back to slavery. It is the memory of these and other
people such as Fred Shuttlesworth and Anne Levy, and our knowledge of
what they did to make this a better world for us all, that are honored by the Lillian Smith Book Award.
          
            A Fire You Can't Put Out
          
          Smith Awards juror Pegram Harrison presented the award to Andrew Manis.
          Some of you may have noticed that memory is not our most reliable
quality. The events of the 60s and 70s begin to fade and merge. And
while we shall never forget the horror and heroism of those times, the
chronologies become confused and the facts fall out of the network of
our memories. But, we are blessed that in our midst are a few, a very
few, remarkable men and women who have the training, imagination,
moral view, persistence, and talent required to preserve the history
of these turbulent times. One of these true scholars is Andrew Manis,
the author of A Fire You Can't Put Out: The Civil Rights Life
of Birmingham's Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth. Mr. Manis was
born in 1954, the year of the Brown v. the Board of Education decision. He grew up in Birmingham and remembers, as he says, dimly, some of the events that occurred during the 50s and 60s. He remembers the epic struggles, the violence, the hatred, the turmoil, and the coverage that focused the eyes of the world on Birmingham and arguably brought about the Civil Rights Act and the Voting Rights Act. 
          In  A Fire You Can't Put Out, Dr. Manis chronicles the civil rights life of one of the Movement's greatest heroes--the most significant one in the stronghold of Southern segregation--the Reverend Shuttlesworth. Dr. Manis's biography is marvelous. It is profoundly researched; it is crisply written; it contains elegant prose; it is passionate writing. It is just a splendid book. 
          
          Andrew Manis:
          Thank you so much for this wonderful honor and this beautiful occasion to share with all of you and to rejoice in a great deal of hard work--work that was a great joy to do along the way. It took me twelve years to write this book and many times Rev. Shuttlesworth was unsure whether I would ever  really be able to finish. But I am delighted at being honored with an award that bears the name of Lillian Smith. 
          Why would anyone spend twelve years, writing about a relatively unsung hero of the Civil Rights Movement, someone about whom only a small circle beyond the participants in the Movement and a few historians had ever heard? There are professional reasons why professors must write things in order to keep their profession. But there are also some personal ones. And, it is the personal ones that generally energize you and give you the stamina to complete the sort of massive task that this book turned out to be. The personal ones connect with what has been called the white Southern racial conversion narrative--a literary genre with which many Southern writers, including of course Lillian Smith, have been involved. When Lillian Smith later spoke of writing her book Killers of the Dream, she said that writing that book was an act of penance and a step toward redemption. Like other prophets to the South, Smith assumed that somewhere embedded in the white Southern psyche was a conscience that could somehow be shamed into seeing the light. Much of the Civil Rights Movement, at least the segment led by Dr. King and Rev. Shuttlesworth, was predicated on the strategy of appealing to the conscience of, not just our region, but also our entire nation. At times, Dr. King and Rev. Shuttlesworth I'm sure would have agreed with Thurgood Marshall who once commented, "You know, sometimes I just get awfully tired of trying to save the white man's soul." 
          In a real sense you can see signs of a racial conversion narrative in the preface of A Fire You Can't Put Out. I wrote about Birmingham's--my hometown's--central civil rights leader Fred Shuttlesworth because, as a white boy who grew up in Birmingham, I remember the times depicted in the book. I remember feeling that something out of the ordinary had happened one spring in 1963 when my mother called me in from a southside Birmingham playground with the grim warning that the "mavros" were causing trouble again. "Mavros" is Greek for blacks, but when it is pronounced with just the right inflection, it has the same effect as the "n" word. I also remember the morning I came out of Sunday School at the Greek Orthodox Church on 19th Street and learned that four little girls, just a couple of years my senior, had been killed at another church, not very far away in the city. I remember the ambivalence in my nine-year old heart, the fear that eventually I might have to go to school with the "mavros." That fear was balanced by the suspicion that the voices of Shuttlesworth and King were right, that those black girls and boys deserved to be in school where I was and that Shuttlesworth and King were right and the adults around me were wrong. 
          In his own racial conversion narrative, Reynolds Price, a former Lillian Smith Award Winner, acknowledges seeing newsreel footage that we all have seen of black and white together in the Civil Rights Movement and Reynolds Price confesses that, "I'm sorry that my face is missing. All these years later," he continues, "my silence offends me." 
          I was nine when that famous footage of the dogs and firehoses and Bull Connor's tanks were filmed in my hometown. Although there were some nine-year old Birminghamians with skin darker than mine who participated in the Movement, the Movement bypassed me. In a sense then, this book is partly a product of a racial conversion and a desire to put myself on the right side of history, to participate in a Movement that I missed. 
          But more importantly, I wrote about Fred Shuttlesworth because he became for many others and, especially for me in the writing of this book, an icon whose memory and story could transport me back to what historians of religion call "a sacred time of origins." "Sacred" because it was a time that shaped who I am as a white Birminghamian--and even more "sacred" because it reshaped all of America. To be associated with the name of Lillian Smith and with the others who have accepted this award before me is probably the greatest honor of my life. 
          To Fred Shuttlesworth, who was the President of the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights and certainly the most unsung hero of the entire Civil Rights Movement, who is currently the pastor of the Greater New Life Baptist Church in Cincinnati, Ohio. To Rev. Shuttlesworth, for allowing me to be a part of his life and to have the honor of telling that story. 
          
          Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth:
          I heard of the Southern Regional Council years back, when there were no voices of clarity being heard about whether or not blacks did have some rights that whites should respect. There was always a word that I could read from the Southern Regional Council and I always thank God for them, because they said segregation was wrong. Most white people that I knew that said anything about segregation tried to make it right. So, I want to congratulate you for just down-to-earth saying the truth.
          I came up under the dark days of segregation, the Klan, and the collective efforts of state and local officials to stop and block integration at any cost. But I must say that this is God's world and he moves, sometimes, in his own way. Every once in a while there is someone who by faith can feel as if God is with them and that God really owns them and they want to see God overcome some of the evil in this world. He moves in the hearts of people. And I've often said that when God has a contract for work to be done it has to be the men and women who have faith. We need more people who can hear the voice of God, and who can understand that God, if he is for anything at all, he is for justice first. 
          So allow me to congratulate Dr. Manis on his sacred award. I think he did a good job of trying to interpret a life that is dedicated and I believe God wants more people to be dedicated. Dr. King said that if a person hasn't found something that he is willing to die for, he really hasn't begun to live.
          At first when I read the book, I wanted to take offense at it. I don't take offense at things often. I take offense at segregation and he was writing about my fighting it, so I certainly didn't want to take offense at him. But he did mention the word confrontation a lot. As I looked at it and listened to what he was saying, I said, "My goodness. That is right. You ought to get mad about injustice."  Mine is a life of confrontation. And yours should be too. Light confronts darkness. Good is supposed to confront evil. Right is supposed to confront wrong. 
          I wasn't worried about dying. It shocks some people when I say that, because they don't believe that a purpose can be something that a person could give his life for. And yet that is the greatest thing; that is what salvation is based on. I was as determined to kill segregation as I have ever been anything in my life. 
          My friend and compatriot, Hosea Williams--he was courageous to the point of a spiritual and obsessive insanity for justice. I said to him one time, "Hosea you've been in two armies. You've been in the army of killing, of destruction--whether for freedom or not and you were trained to kill. Now you are in another army dealing on another type of battlefield." I asked, "Which one would you agree to being the best?" He thought that the battlefield of men's hearts, minds, and souls was the main one. And that was where he lived. 
          So, I close with this incident. See, the worst problem I ever had was not in Birmingham. It was in St. Augustine, Florida, when those Klansmen had even the policemen almost running. So we decided that if we were going to win, we couldn't let those segregationists go to bed every night and sleep well, that the business of getting freedom ought to be both night and day, so we decided to have night marches. As we could, the leaders would go down and get the people marching. 
          Hosea and I led the first night's demonstration and we had policemen with guns and mace and one of them even had a riot gun on his shoulder. In Florida, in the section where we were marching, there was a grove that came up on each side of the street and then we would be right out into the wide-open street, about eight lanes. The policemen were so nervous--they even admitted it to Hosea and me. Any Klansmen could be out there with a gun. So I said to the policemen, "You shouldn't be worried, you've got guns to match their guns, haven't you?"  I said, "We've got something stronger than guns." He didn't understand that. Hosea and I were at the front. When we got just about up to the grove--the police believed that the Klansmen were really out there, I guess--so they kind of slunk back. Hosea and I joined hands and we walked out. When we got right back to the edge of the street, Hosea threw his head back and yelled, "God will take care of you," and everybody started singing. And, do you know, that made the policemen happy? You can be happy too, you know. If you do God's will and work, God will take care of you.
          I could go on but let me just thank God for this organization, for what you have done, for what you will do, and what you mean to those behind us.
          
          
            Troubled Memory
          
          Tougaloo College English professor and Smith Awards juror Jerry Ward introduced award winner Lawrence Powell.
          Troubled Memory: Anne Levy, the Holocaust, and David Duke's Louisiana bids us to weigh the meaning of dramatic clashes involving our deepest human passions in the 20th Century--passions that assume new guises in the 21st Century in which we have a foot. The intriguing stories in this book cut to the chase regarding race and human rights, both in Poland and Europe during the Nazi years and in Louisiana and the United States during the aftermath of civil rights struggle. As do all books that merit the Lillian Smith Award, Troubled Memory gives us an antidote for the historical amnesia that is widespread in contemporary America. It grounds us again in the necessity for at least trying to obtain universal human understanding. As Powell explores the Jewish problem in the Nazi period and the mutual suspicion and recrimination that haunts the memories of survivors of that period, he makes a most clever connection between European anti-Semitism and the especially complicated manifestations of racism and anti-Semitism in the political thinking of David Duke and others in Louisiana. Dwelling on the troubled memory of Anne Levy and the power of memory to provoke courage, Powell inspires us to think deeply as do the works of Lillian Smith. His book compels us to think very seriously of the historical and moral issues that endlessly function in the body of American politics.
          Powell's closing words in Troubled Memory remind us that indeed there is no hiding place for any of us from the problems of the racial lines in human society and that moral action is less a matter of desire than of necessity in our time. He reminds us that Anne Levy's burden of preserving memory against those who would obscenely erase the past was not one that she carried alone. As Powell wrote, it is a collective responsibility, a civic duty. Erecting monuments and museums is one way to prevent forgetfulness, but in the final analysis, only a morally concerned citizenry has the full power to transmit the lessons of the past to a present increasingly anxious to get on with the future. For one brief shining moment, in a state not generally known for political ethics, a moral movement of people from across the spectrum said the past could not be brushed aside so easily.
          So, on behalf of the jurors for the Lillian Smith Awards and the Southern Regional Council, we salute Lawrence Powell for giving those of us who embrace a sense of moral action, a decidedly elegant articulation in Troubled Memory of why we must never forget, of why we must--to borrow from Toni Morrison--"re-memory" stories and transmit them as grounds for moral action in unknowable futures. Such is truly the function of history and memory. 
          Lawrence Powell:
          I must confess, this is not the book I started out to write. The book I started out to write was about the "stop David Duke movement." Because I was very anxious in that struggle, a literary agent asked me to write about my experiences and to share my insights with the reader. Anne Levy, who is a child survivor of the Lodz and Warsaw ghettos and who had confronted David Duke right after he was elected to the state legislature, was supposed to be just one chapter in the book. 
          Her confrontation with him--one of those confrontations between light and darkness and good and evil--came from the deepest wellsprings of historical memory and was very seering and traumatic. It happened very dramatically at a Simon Wiesenthal exhibit of the Holocaust in the Rotunda in the great Memorial Hall of the skyscraper state capitol that Huey Long built. She had gone up there with a busload of New Americans, as the tightly knit community of Holocaust survivors in New Orleans call themselves. She was just there to bear witness, to be there for the unveiling by the governor, until she looked out of the corner of her eye and saw leering at parade rest, David Duke. This is David Duke after he had undergone extensive plastic surgery with an Aryan makeover look at about six-foot-three with a body by Nautilus. Seeing him, something came over her. She got angry and, as happens when political commitments are forged, she found courage and approached him to ask why he was there since he had denied that the Holocaust ever happened and, in effect, had defamed her experience. She was off and running. I try to tell about that and I also try to explain why she did what she did. I thought it was a simple question. 
          I am not by training a European historian, nor a holocaust historian; I'm not Jewish. But life sometimes throws you strange curves and before I knew it, one chapter became two, became three and Anne Levy ended up taking over the entire book and turning it into a Jewish family saga set against the backdrop of a world historical tragedy.
          But I have to also say, I was profoundly moved and pulled into this story. If this is where the muse of history wanted to lead me, I said, well that's where I am going to go. The result is this book. The other result is this honor of which I am deeply, deeply proud.
          Anne Levy:
          I'll always want to acknowledge what Larry Powell has done for my family and myself. Having survived the Holocaust, we really--my children and my brother's and sister's children--never had a family, an extended family. By writing this book, Larry has given my family and my children their history. He has given me the opportunity to leave a legacy for my family and I thank him. This is such a great honor for Larry and he deserves it so much. Devoting eight years of his life to write this book. I am so grateful. He has become part of the family.	
        
        
          REVIEWS
          Reviewed by Wehner, PatPat Wehner
          Vol. 23, No. 1 2001 pp. 23-26
          
          Thomas Frank, One Market Under God: Extreme Capitalism, Market Populism, and the End of Economic Democracy, New York: Doubleday, 2000.
          I recently watched as a business school professor channeled the spirit of Henry Grady for a collection of visiting financiers, entrepreneurs, and vice presidents of marketing, important men who had braved rush hour traffic in hopes of having their warm tinglings about the "emerging markets of the global South" affirmed by a higher, or at least a tenured, authority. Like Grady, the American South's self-appointed ambassador of goodwill to the carpetbagging industrialists of the 1890s, the  professor promised that when everyone up North set aside their preconceptions and recognized the hard-working, brand merchandise-craving character of the folk, there would be no further talk about sweatshops and unions, no more agitating for labor laws, trade regulations, or environmental standards. Between sycophantic shout-outs to his visiting homeboys from Georgia Pacific and Equifax, the professor reassured us that according to figures helpfully supplied by the International Monetary Fund, standards of living were actually rising for the benighted people of Guatemala and Mexico, Thailand and Indonesia. Anyone who thought differently was out-of-touch, elitist, and quite probably racist in not permitting the world's diverse populations to exercise their universal, God-given right to be exploited. Furthermore, anyone foolish enough to hesitate now--say, to pause and wonder why all this breathless enthusing about the "new" economy sounds oddly like the squeakings of a helium abuser--was in for a shock. Corporate globalization was a done deal, a no-brainer, a slam-dunk. Gentlemen: I give you the future, with stock options.
          Though delivered with more than the usual helping of smug, there was nothing very original about this uplifting little sermon (or little sermon of uplift, any distinction being all but meaningless). One can easily find New York Times columnists riffing on the same themes any day of the week. It was somewhat more surprising to hear it spoken so confidently at a university, where critical thinking purportedly lives and thrives. And in fairness there were some stirrings of discomfort from the audience--the professor's cheering section of imported suits not withstanding. Yet the question that provoked the greatest response of the night, when everyone from the undergraduate beside me to the venture capitalists in the front row raised their hands unselfconsciously skyward, was when the professor asked, "How many people here have worked for minimum wage?"
          Among journalists, sociologists, and historians it has become
almost a cliché to note that nearly everyone in the United
States claims to belong to the middle class. The show of hands I
participated in demonstrates a related truth, that most everyone
believes they got that way through their own hard work and
sacrifice. So while the professor's whole presentation on global
economics amounted to little more than an attempt to legitimate the
policies of the executives down in front, the success of that effort
relied on a ludicrous parallel between the comfortable university
audience and factory employees working fourteen-hour
shifts in southeast Asia. Leaving aside the bar graphs and statistics,
the justification of those (far-off) workers' continued exploitation
depended, in the end, on our buying into some weird flattery of our
personal intelligence and initiative. You started out at the bottom of the ladder, look how far you've gotten...(and better for it, too).
          How variations on this appeal to our collective vanity have become an all-purpose defense for the ruthless policies of corporations--everything from downsizing and outsourcing in the U.S., to the repression of labor, environmental, and pro-democracy activists in countries like Nigeria and the Philippines--is the theme of Thomas Frank's new book, One Market Under God: Extreme Capitalism, Market Populism, and the End of Economic Democracy. As one of the founding editors of The Baffler, a scruffy, sarcastic, but consistently relevant journal of cultural criticism, Frank has specialized for years in attacks on "the Culture Trust," the media conglomerates and corporate marketers who have colonized every available public space to maintain their "brand presence" in our lives. In One Market Under God Frank brings his historically-informed skepticism to bear on the business mythologies of the 1990s, the decade when Land Rover-driving investment bankers reimagined themselves as revolutionary "change agents."
          Frank introduces the term "market populism" to describe a powerful ideological consensus that emerged in the 1990s, one that equates unregulated business with the highest ideals of democracy. Quoting advertising slogans, management guides, and press coverage of the "new" economy, he presents an exhaustive (and at times, exhausting) argument that this unlikely association has become a culturally pervasive "given." Today, it is not just the brokerage presidents and chief executives telling us that we should accept the impartial wisdom of that abstraction called the Market, but also the politicians, journalists, and university professors. Together they argue that if meddling bureaucrats would only stand aside, the Market would empower people to take control of their lives, multiplying their options and bringing prosperity to all who are deserving. As Frank describes the market populist reasoning, "By its very nature the market was democratic, perfectly expressing the popular will through the machinery of supply and demand, poll and focus group, superstore and Internet. In fact, the market was more democratic than any of the formal institutions of democracy--elections, legislatures, governments."
          Like the Populist politicians of the 1890s, the market populists of today claim to represent the interests of "The People" and declare "elites" to be their sworn enemy. But Frank rightly notes that the "elitism" being condemned in the Wall Street Journal, Fast Company, and Forbes has nothing to do with economic power. To judge from these publications, the most unforgivable conceit is to question the workings of the market and especially, to imply that workers and consumers might benefit from some kind of legislated protections. Should a tire manufacturer decide to break a strike by hiring replacement workers, thereby causing the reliability of their product to decline, no need for alarm; when the number of fatalities reaches high enough to attract media notice, the market will see the right people are punished. If the telecommunications cartel you work for tosses you out this morning and hires you back this afternoon as a "temporary" worker without health insurance-hey, now you've entered the exciting world of "free agency." Government regulations, unions, and labor laws only get in the way of the market working properly and insult our ability to choose what's best for ourselves. Indeed, writes Frank, "Since markets express the will of the people, virtually any criticism of business can be described as a despicable contempt for the common man."
          Given this market populist definition of "elitism," One
Market takes the curious form of an intellectual history of
anti-intellectuals. There is George Gilder, a professional apologist
for the Reagan Revolution who has remade himself as visionary of the "New Economy." For years, Gilder has been among the most tireless promoters of Silicon Valley as a kind of latter-day Ellis Island, where every social misfit, immigrant inventor, and poor huddled entrepreneur can find a high-tech startup to call their own. Credit for making digital capitalism cool also goes to Kevin Kelly and the editors of Wired magazine for helping to popularize the idea that the Internet was libertarian by its very nature, a technology that recognized no laws and made all forms of government obsolete. But for sheer insults to the intelligence, few can match Spencer Johnson, author of the management primer Who Moved My Cheese?, which was, frighteningly enough, listed as the online bookseller Amazon's best-selling business title for 2000 when I last checked. Masquerading as a children's story that teaches about the importance of accepting "change" (adults might want to substitute "downsizings," "lockouts," or "plant closures")  Who Moved My Cheese? counsels "littlepeople" to set aside their "arrogance," stop their complaining, and realize they should be grateful to those in charge of their particular rat maze. After all, these wise (if faceless) overseers have given the littlepeople a wonderful opportunity to discover what new "cheese" might be out there waiting for them. To avoid unpleasant associations with Big Government, there is naturally no mention made of whether a littleperson might expect this cheese to be USDA surplus.
          As a regular reader of the business press, Frank has an extensive collection of these outrages at his disposal. By suggesting how absurd the free-marketeers' propaganda can be, his gift for mockery creates frequent opportunities to laugh, however bitterly. Still, he insists that the self-aggrandizing slogans of the computer manufacturers and the adolescent fantasies of the e-traders should not distract us from a more serious truth. The goal of much of the market populists' rhetoric has been to shift popular perceptions, redefining class conflict so that it is no longer imagined in terms of labor versus management, or even the haves versus the have-nots, but rather, "righteous new money versus the snooty old." Now we are all expected to cheer for Bill Gates, who in surpassing the Rockefellers and the Carnegies and defying the loathsome bureaucrats at the Justice Department, has proven himself to be the People's Monopolist.
          But despite all the dot-commotion filling up the airwaves and newsstands, class and economics still count for something in this world. While television commercials depict truck drivers who have made a killing in stocks, Frank notes that even the conservative economist Lester Thurow was forced to admit a full 86 percent of the market gains between 1995 and 1999 went to the wealthiest 10 percent of the population. If the news media gave more time and inches to publicizing figures like these, more people might find themselves agreeing with Frank that there is precious little that is "new" about the present economy save for the ceaseless drone of the market ideologues.
          Still, whether our concerns are for the "global South" or the local neighborhood, activists and educators are already confronting the effects of this ideological consensus. Beyond its celebration of greed and legitimation of "let-them-eat-bootstraps" indifference, market populism poses a more subtle threat in attempting to make business and finance synonymous with grassroots movements. Anyone with a sense of history or perspective can recognize the obscenity of a television ad comparing the "liberation" of online trading to the struggle for African-American civil rights. But in the environment One Market describes, activists must now contend with more than the appropriation of their symbols and histories. Lately, every management guru describes him- or herself as "The People's" revolutionary, while every advertising campaign urges us to subvert the status quo. Frank notes that many marketers have embraced the ideas of advertising expert Jean-Marie Dru, who proposed the secret of business success was to align a brand with some "vision" of freedom, from Pepsi's teen rebellion to Benetton's high-gloss multiculturalism. Frank warns us that "From a longer perspective what Dru was proposing was the colonization by business of the notion of social justice itself." Defined in these terms, social activism might well amount to participation in a consumer taste test.
          Meanwhile, the landscapes of the American South continue to serve in a familiar role as locations where advertisers and brand marketers go prospecting for "authenticity," that elusive resource believed crucial to winning over today's skeptical consumer. But the cruel irony, Frank notes, is that when companies like Nike or Phillip Morris use rural crossroads, gritty industrial towns, and inner city neighborhoods as the backdrops to hock their products, the "authenticity" they are celebrating is the poverty, uncertainty, and diminished prospects that have been created by the flight of business capital. Market populism abounds with contradictions of this sort, for it is in essence an ideology that combines promises of freedom with the threat of the inevitable; questioning the effects of free markets and corporate globalization are after all, never listed among our "choices." 
          One Market Under God is not without flaws; at 358 pages, the book
would have benefited from a less indulgent editor. Frank's decision
not to explore how far his ideological consensus extends to the
population as a whole amounts to a more serious limitation, since
everyday experience is a constant reminder to many that the market is
an unfair place indeed. But clearly he is on to something. There is no
denying that deregulation and privatization, an upward redistribution
of wealth and the dismantling of the social safety net, the exploitation of workers, and the excesses of global marketing continue to be justified in market populist terms. Ultimately this is what makes One Market an important book, for it reveals how these injustices are perpetuated in our name.
          
            Pat Wehner is a postdoctoral fellow at Emory University's Center for Myth and Ritual in American Life, a Sloan Center for Working Families.
          
        
      
    
  
